NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/20

Adoption

of the agenda

14)

. , . . . . . .. . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1)
. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . .

StPV.2014

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symboi indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . +)are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2014TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday,
Rvsident:

28 June 1977, at 10.30 a.m.

Mr. William I-l. BARTON (Canada).

3. The PRESIDENT: Letters have also been received from
the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Gabon,
Guinea, Nigeria, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, in which they
request that they be invited to participate in the discussion
of the question on the agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in
conformity with the usual practice and with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

PIx?setzr: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
IJnitcd States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2014)
1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter
dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12350 and Add.1)
7%~ meeting

of the agenda

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. J. E. dos Santos (Angola), Mr. D. K. Kwelagobe (Botswana), Mr. G. Rawiri (Gabon), Mrs. Jeanne Martin CissC
(Guinea), Mr. 1. N, Garba (Nigeria), Mr. C, B. Djigo
(Senegal), Mr, M. Alluf (S’jrilln Arab Republic), Mr. B.
Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. S. G. Mwale
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

was called to order at IO.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

77~ ugemia was adopted.
Complaint
by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2350 and Add. 1)

5. The PKESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item included in the agenda in
response to the request by the Government of Mozambique
contained in annex I to the letter dated 22 June 1977 from
the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the
United Nations, addressed to the President of the Security
Council /S/12350 and Add. I].

1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter from the
representative
of Mozambique in which, under rule 37 of
the provisional
rules of procedure, he requests that a
delegation
lleaded by the Minister for Development and
Economic
Planning of Mozambique, His Excellency
Mr. Marcelino
dos Santos, be allowed to participate in the
C’nuncil’s
discussion.
I propose, in accordance with the
usual practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
tl~c representative
of Mozambique to participate in the
discussion,
without
the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional
rules of procedure.
2. I welcome
the Minister for Development and Econbmic
l>Ianning of Mozambique and his delegation.

6. I should also like to draw to the attention df the
Council the following documents: document S/l 2348,
containing the text of a telegram from the President of
Guinea to the President of the Council; document S/12351,
containing the text of a letter dated 25 June 1977 from the
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Council; and document
S/12352, containing the text of a telegram dated 2G June
1977 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon,
Chairman of the twenty-ninth
session of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, to the
President of the Council.

/it
the invitation
of the President, Mr. M. dos Santos
(hdozanlbiqtre)
took a place at the Council table.

7. The first speaker is the Minister for Development and
Economic Planning of Mozambique on whom I now call.
1

8. Mr. dos SANTOS (Mozambicjue):l Mr. President, diow
me to begin by saluting you for the prompt and rapid
manner in which you responded to the request by the
People’s Republic of Mozambique for the convening of the
Security Council for the purpose of discussing the situation
of insecurity prevailing in southern Africa, a situation
which has been aggravated by the intensification of the
aggressions on the part of the outlaw rigime of Ian Smith.
We are certain that, under your clear direction, we shall
reach a consensus concerning the measures to be taken to
deal with the problems to be discussed here.

Djibouti have just celebrated their independence following
their heroic resistance and stm-ggle against colonialism. The
last bastion of French colonialism in Africa thus has fallen
and, in its piace, the free voice of a people long suppressed
under exploitation, misery and humiliation has risen.
16. Ian Smith’s army has murdered 1,432 persons, 1,001
of whom were Zimbabwean refugees, since the People’s
Republic of Mozambique began strictly to apply the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council. The villages of
Mapai, Massangena, Mavonde and Chioco have been completely levelled. Only two weeks ago, the Espungabera
region was violently attacked. Dozens of Other localities
were left without hospitals, schools, stores, water reservoirs;
thousands of homes were burned and destroyed; factories
and bridges were demolished; thousands of head of cattle
were slaughtered. The tropospheric weather station in
Cldcualacuala, the only one in the country, was deliberately
destroyed. Locomotives, box cars, boats and trucks were
also destroyed.

9. Allow me also, in the name of the Government of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, to express appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the interest and attention he
has shown concerning our request. His involvement in this
matter is not surprising, since we are aware of the efforts he
has always dedicated to the resolution of serious problems
in southern Africa, specifically as regards the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, since the period of the armed
stru&le for national liberation.
10. We should also like to salute the various representatives in the Council for their dedication and attention.
They are well acquainted with the problems of the
international community and we once again express our
confidence that they will reach a solution embodying the
principles that guide this world Organization.

17. From making small incursions lasting a few hours and
never involving more than 50 men, the army of the illegaf
Salisbury regime has gone on to launch massive, large-scale
attacks against well-defined objectives. Besides the SYStematic murder of the civilian population, the invader’s
objectives have come to include vital points of our
economic and social infrastructure.

11. We want to address a special greeting to the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, ,which gave
Their Excellencies the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Algeria, Gabon, Lesotho, Nigeria, Tanzania and Tunisia the
mandate to convey to the Security Council the determination of Africa definitively to eliminate colonialism and
racism from our continent. The presence of our dear
brothers brings home to us even more vividly and forcefully
the warmth and solidarity of the peoples of our continent.

18. The massacre at Nyazonia was the first of those
large-scale attacks. We should note that it was the largest
one comrnittcd against a refugee camp in Africa under the
administration of the United Nations. It was with the
attack on Nyazorlia that the escalation of aggression against
the People’s Republic of Mozambique began lo be intensified.
19. Hence, in the month of September, the localities of
Gento and Nura in the Province of Tete were attacked;
those of Chicualacuala, Mapai, Chitanga and Machaila in the
Province of Gaza, as well as the city of Manica, which is the
second largest population centre in Manica Province, were
also targets of Rhodesian attacks. Four people’s stores, five
water tanks, IO trucks and two wagons were completely
destroyed. Fifty-nine civilians died during those criminal
actions.

12. We salute also the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Guinea, whose presence constitutes a new demonstration of
the militant engagement of Guinea’s Democratic Party, its
Government and its leader, His Excellency President
Ahmed S6kou TourB.
13. The presence among us of distinguished representatives of the front-line countries, Their Excellencies the
First Vice-Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of
Angola and the Ministers of the Republic of Botswana, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, is also very
meaningful to us. It reflects the active engagement of those
countries in the struggle against colonialism and racism
which is being carried on on a large scale in the confrontation zone between liberty and Fascist oppression.

20. In October, more than 71 civilians-38 in Tete, 2 in
Manica and 31 in Gaza-were Inurdered during attacks.
21. The following month, the villages of Cuchumane,
Luia, Mucumbura, Massangena and, again, Chicualacuala,
Gento and the city of Manica were the targets of new raids.
Forty-two
Mozambican civilians and four refugees from
Zimbabwe lost their lives. Two commercial warehouses, the
tropospheric weather station at Chicualacuala, a water tar&
and 63 homes were destroyed or seriously damaged.

14. Finally, we wish to salute the Members of the
Organization for their exemplary condemnation of the
racist regime of Ian Smith and for the active manner in
which they have followed this problem, treating it as a
problem for all mankind.

22. The beginning of December was marked by the first
joint aggression against the provinces of Tete, Manica arid
Gaza. During that raid, the army of the outlaw rdgimc of
Ian Smith used more than 1,000 men, dozens of assnul t
vehicles, and aircraft including fighter-bombers. Forty-nine
civilians and 28 refugees lost their lives. The village of

15. We should like to take advantage of this occasion to
salute the birth of a new African nation, The people of
1 Mr.

dos Santos spoke

in Portuguese.

The

statement was supplied by the delegation.

Englishversion of his
2

Chicualacuala was attacked six times in the course of 15
ddYS.

bique is being attacked because it is fully implementing the
sanctions imposed by the Council. The People’s Republic of
Mozambique is being attacked because it is an independent
and free country, whose independence and liberty gave the
United Nations the real capacity to realize the aspirations
of mankind by endorsing the re-establishment of peace and
security in southern Africa.

23. During the first month of this year, Jeque, Nura,
Mucumbura, Mago, Chioco, and Coquize in the Province of
Tete, Curo and Machipanda in Manica, and Chicualacuala in
Gaza were targets hit by the Rhodesian racists in large-scale
attacks, causing the death of 94 civilians and nine refugees.

32. Smith’s objectives in carrying out this escalated
aggression are clear. On the one hand, he intends to
intimidate the Mozambican people into abandoning ils
support for the people of Zimbabwe and halting its
implementation of resolutions adopted by the international
community; on the other, he seeks to make the colonial
conflict, in which he is opposed by the people of
Zimbabwe, an international issue, thus sidetracking the
attention of world public opinion from the central question
which is that of independence for the British colony.

24. During the first five months of this year, 200
Mozambicans were killed and 40 wounded.
25. At the end of May and the beginning of this month, a
new invasion was launched against the People’s Republic of
Mozambique. On that occasion, the illegal racist army used
SOO-kilogramme fragmentation bombs, besides the usual
napalm bombs. The use of’Mirage jets was detected for the
first time.
26. In the latest attack on the Espungabera region, the
bridge over the Buzi river was completely destroyed. That
loss created serious problems in supplying essential goods to
the population in the district of Mossurize.

33. The intensification of the aggression, the unprece.
dented scope of the attacks and the use of sophisticated
equipment of war, including armoured vehicles, tanks,
heavy artillery, helicopters, reconnaissance aircraft and
Mirages, reveal to us an issue which should merit special
attention from the international community, We can be
certain from this evolution that the rebel regime of Ian
Smith is not alone in its aggression. It dares invade the
People’s Republic of Mozambique because it is supported
militarily by certain countries, which thus become active
accomplices in this aggression and flagrantly violate the
decisions taken by the international community.

27. If we look at the pattern of aggression, we see that,
during the period of the application of sanctions, the
People’s Republic of Mozambique has suffered an average
of more than one attack every three days. An average of
three civilians per day were murdered during this same
period.
28. The actions of the enemy have not resulted in a
greater number of victims among the civilian population
thanks to the people’s forces which, in co-operation with
the people’s militias, have fought decidedly and energetically against those violations of our sovereignty. Further,
the activity of the Mozambique People’s Liberation Forces
is oriented first and foremost towards organizing the
defknce of the population.

34. The constant aggression against the People’s Republic
of Mozambique which we have just analysed, and which is
connected with the aggression against the Republic of
Zatnbir and the Republic of Botswana, is transforming
southern Africa into a hotbed of tension seriously endangering world peace and security. The increasinggravity of
the situation of insecurity in that area, which has been
worsened by the latest assaultsagainst the People’sRepublic of Mozambique, ,demandsan adequateresponsefrom
the international community. It is for this reasonthat the
People’sRepublic of Mozambique consideredit necessary
to requestthe conveningof the Security Council.

29. This escalation of aggression is, above all, a challenge
to the international community. It is an affront to the
authority and prestige of the United Nations, the highest
international body. One of the most noble missions of the
Organization is effectively to create the mechanisms for the
liquidation of colonialism throughout the world, with the
aim of establishing peace. The actions of the IJnited
Nations have, at present, particular relevance in southern
Africa.

35. This is not the first titne that our Government has
requestedthe attention of the Council. In March 1976 this
body met to consider measuresto be taken asa result of
our decision fully to apply the sanctionscalled for against
the British colony of Southern Rhodesia On that occasion,
resolution 386 (1976) wasadopted unanimously,calling on
all Member States and specialized agencies to supply
financial, technical and material aid to my country. That
aid is aimed at permitting the People’s Republic of
Mozambique to implement its economic development
programme and fully to maintain the application of the
sanctions.

30. The existing colonial situation in Rlzodcsia has already
been denounced. The rCgime of Ian Smith has already been
condemned by the United Nations. However, that illegal
regime consolidated itself through its close lies to Portuguese colonialism.
31. Mozambique is now a liberated zone, a zone of peace
and of progress, The aggression by Smith against our
country is therefore the result of our refusal to compromise
with his rkgime, to compromise with racism. The People’s
Republic of Mozambique is being attacked because the
Mozambican people have assumed the commitment of
supporting without reservation the struggle for liberation of
the peop!e of Zimbabwe, The People’s Republic of Mozam-

36. We emphasizedat that time that our primary objective
was the restructuring of our economy, aware‘as we were
that only in that way could we become a solid, active and
safe base for the liberation struggle of the peoples of
southern Africa and, in particular, of Zimbabwe.
3

rubble and ruin, suffering pain and desolation-the ashes of
the sweat and work of our people. They arc the vivid and
repugnant symbol of Fascist, racist violence. That is the
reply of Smith, who punctuates his disdain for the
international community with brute force.

37. The special Mission sent to the People’s Republic of
Mozambique by the Secretary-General calculated the needs
of dur country at $210 million for the first 12 months and
$175 million for the following year. The international
community understood the economic situation obtaining in
our country, which had just been liberated from colonialism, and responded favourably to the request. Although the
aid provided has been significantly less than what is
necessary, particularly in the list of the setbacks suffered by
the Mozambican economy, it none the less represents
sacrifices on the part of those peoples which wanted to help
us through their respective Governments and democratic
organizations.

43. In order to confront this aggression, the People’s
Republic of Mozambique is obliged to mobilize what little
material resources it has for the defence of its sovereignty
and territorial integrity-resources
which should be channelled into the more pressing tasks of national reconstruction. We wish to recall that those resources are also
necessary to cover the losses incurred by our country as a
consequence of the full implementation-out
of respect for
the demand of the international community-of
the sanctions decreed against the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia.

38. We are also witnessing the development of AngloAmerican initiatives towards finding a solution for the
so-called Rhodesian question. The first phase of those
initiatives, which culminated in the Geneva conference at
the end of last year, showed the unfeasibility of any
solution that included Ian Smith in an active role as a
mediator. The second phase now under way must not
attempt to legalize colonialism and oppression in Zimbabwe; it must not attempt to fmd a common platform or
alliance between the black puppets and the white racists, or
attempt to institution&e
the privileges which prevail
today based on the colour of the skin, to the detriment of
the vast majority of the people of Zimbabwe. We are certain
that-should that be the case those diplomatic attempts will
be flatly voted down and lead to nothing but the
deterioration of the situation of permanent tension gripping
southern Africa.

44. It therefore becomes imperative that the international
community contribute to the reinforcement of the defensive military capability of the People’s Republic of Mozambique by supplying the equipment necessary for effectively
defending our 1,200 kilometres of common frontier with
Southern Rhodesia, Our people needs arms to defend and
consolidate the peace and to be able to rebuild upon the
ruins of colonialism. Our people needs arms in order
effectively to implement the decisions taken by international bodies. Our people and our soldiers are mobilized
and .determined to defend the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country. They need only equipment in
order effectively to face the aggression of the enemy, whose
offensive capability is constantly reinforced.

39. There is no conciliation possible between a regime
maintaining itself by terror of arms and a people struggling
to free itself from the violence and exploitation imposed
upon it.

45. The military rndriel we need is to defend our
territory, our liberty and our revolution. We will not be the
ones to overthrow, by force of arms, the hated re’gime of
Ian Smith. The experience of our struggle and the traditions
of resistance of our people have taught us to respect the
dignity and uniqueness of other peoples. Liberty is not a
gift; nor is it a paternalistic concession. It is a conquest
built with the sacrifice and blood of peoples in their
struggle against oppression. It will be the people of
Zimbabwe itself that will win its independence with the
dignity that characterizes men who fight for freedom.

40. The People’s Republic of Mozambique believes that
the United Kingdom, which has already assumed its
responsibilities in the Rhodesian colonial conflict, should
negotiate with the patriotic forces on the means for
transferral of power. That is the only road that can lead to
the independence of Zimbabwe, to the elimination of the
focal point of permanent tension and to the restoration of
peace in that area of Africa.

46. We should like to stress in this forum the need for the
international community to intensify its support for the
liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, including,
most emphatically, the necessary complete isolation of the
Ian Smith regime and the full application of sanctions
against that British colony.

41. That was, in fact, the precise direction taken at the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May
of this year, where the international community unanimously reaffirmed its support for the armed liberation
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe and recommended that
the process of transfer of power should be carried out by
stages in the briefest possible period of time, towards the
goal of independence for Zimbabwe.

47. Finally, we appeal to the international community to
pursue its efforts to make available the financial, material
and technical aid called for in Security Council resolution
386 (1976). We also appeal for the granting of special
assistance for the purpose of reconstructing areas devastated by the aggression, which has caused direct material
losses estimated at over $13 million.

42. How has the Salisbury regime been reacting towards
the efforts of the international community? By aggression
and the massacre of men, women, children and old people
recently liberated from hundreds and hundreds of years of
Portuguese colonial domination and enthusiastically and
vigorously involved in the reconstruction of their homeland. Today, schools, people’s stores, homes, nurseries and
day-care centres in dozens of localities and villages are in

48. Our people wants to reconstruct its homeland in
peace. Our people is determined to persist in fulfilling its
international duties. Our people is ready to defend its
country, its revolutionary victories and its sovereignty. Our
4

people is determined and ready to comply with its
obligations to the international community.

Council. Let history record that it <as under your
presidency that the CounciI rallied solidly behind the
oppressedpeople of Africa and, convincingly and positively, acted to facilitate the march and shorten the road to
be travelled towards the cherishedobjectivesof liberty and
independence,

49. It is to the community of nations, to the democratic
forces in the world and to all peace-loving people that we
address ourselves-indeed, to world public opinion-calling
on them to fulfil their obligations and reinforce their
solidarity.

56. Like someof my colleaguespresenthere, I have had to
interrupt my participation in the meeting of the Organization of African Unity currently in progressat Libreville,
Gabon. I have not come merely to give support to
Mozambique which has brought the grave question of the
activities of the racist minority r&me in Southern Rhodesia before the Security Council. My President, His
Excellency Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, has repeatedly declared that any attack by the racist minority regimesof
southern Africa on Mozambique or any other front-line
African State is an attack on Zambia, That is no mere
rhetoric; we mean it. I am therefore here today becausethe
peoplesof Mozambique and Zambia are one and the same.
Together we shall triumph; together we shall perish, if we
must.

50. In the name of the Government of the People’s
Republic,of Mozambique, I repeat our appreciation for the
positive manner in which the international community has
shown its solidarity with our people. It is encouraging to
know that we are not alone and that we can count on the
greater part of mankind, represented here, firmly to pursue
the tasks the hour demands.
51. We affirm in this forum, where so many important
measures have been taken to assure the respect and dignity
of men, that our people, our Party and Government will
remain firm in combat posts, persevering in the fulfilment
of their tasks of national reconstruction, in the defence of
their revolutionary achievements and national sovereignty,
and in compliance with their internationalist duty concerning the people of Zimbabwe. We also wish to affirm before
the international community that we are determined to put
an end to this aggression, under whatever circumstances.
The struggle continues.

57. This is the second time in lessthan one year that the
Security Council has been presentedwith a caseof naked
aggressionand hostile acts committed by the illegal r&me
in Southern Rhodesia againstthe security’and well-beingof
one of the independent States borderingthat country. The
Council will recall the casesubmitted ‘by the Republic of
Botswana on 12 January 1977[S/12275] which resulted in
the adoption of resolution 403 (1977). Shortly before that
my own country had appearedbefore the Council with a
similar case of aggression[S/1214?/ committed by the
apartheid rkgime of South Africa, which continues to
occupy illegally the international Territory of Namibiaand
to use it as a base from which to launch armed attacks
against the Republic of Zambia and the People’sRepublic
of Angola. In that respect, the Council’sattention is once
againdrawn to its resolution 393 (1976).

52. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the next speaker, I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
just received letters from the representatives of Egypt and
Lesotho in which they request invitations to participate in
the discussion of the question on the agenda. Accordingly, I
propose, in conformity with the usual practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
53. I therefore invite the representatives of Egypt and
Lesotho to take the seats reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. C. D. Molapo (Lesotho) took the
places resewed *for them at the sideof the Councilchamber.
54. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the Minister for
ForeignAffairs of Zambia.I welcomehim andinvi’te him to
takea place at the Council table and to makehis statement.
55. Mr, MWALE (Zambia): On behalf of my delegation,I
congratulateyou, Sir, on your assumptionof the presidencyof the Security Council for the month of June. The
issuebefore the Council is crucial. Thesemeetingscould
very well constitute the severesttest ever for the Council
regardingthe situation in southern Africa. The oppressed
peoplesof Zimbabwe,Namibiaand South Africa are on the
march to freedom. I hope and trust that, given your
outstandingpersonalqualitiesand your vast experienceasa
diplomat, you will prove equal to the task before the
5

58. In these two casesand, indeed,.in this particular case
brought by Mozambique, the front-line Statessovictimized
have chosen to bring those grave acts of aggressionto the
attention of the Council. Thosecountries, which have the
right to defend themselves from such arrogant racist
rigimes, could have chosenotherwise.They choseto bring
those caseshere becauseof the faith that they have in the
United Nations as the only vanguard and sanctuary of
peace.
59. Comrade Marcelino dos Santos,the eminent leader of
the Mozambique delegation, has already, eloquently and
indeed in a sobering manner,cataloguedthe numerousmad
acts of aggressionand genocidecommitted by the clique of
rebels in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia. Can
anybody who is not of their kind doubt the seriousness
of
the situation causedby Smith andhis cohorts?
60. Is it not outrageous and indeedintriguing that Smith’s
most vicious act of aggressionagainst Mozambique was
committed as soon as the representativesof the universally
acclaimed Maputo Conference on Zimbabwe and Namibia
had left? Let it be rememberedthat that act of aggression
was also committed shortly after the visit to Salisbury by

assist them, the Western countries, for which they are
supposed to exist, will be motivated to interyene on their
side.

United Kingdom and United States envoys in search of a

J negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe. During the Maputo

Conference itself, Smith committed aggression against
Botswana. Add to all that the fact that, as the representatives were assembling at Maputo, Smith issued a threat to
invade Zambia-ironically,
through the “good offices” of
the United Kingdom which, oblivious of its responsibilities
as the colonial authority in Southern Rhodesia, faithfully
conveyed the message to us.

65. Smith and his clique are thus playing a very dangerous
game. It is no exaggeration to say that the situation in
southern Africa contains the seeds of a polarized global
conflict. And let me remind the Council that we in Zambia
have repeatedly warned that the existence of white racist
minority regimes in southein Africa constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security. We have said this
so many times that to some it must sound monotonous.
But we do not apologizefor saying it again, for we know
that we are not wrong.

61. One is led to ask: What is the basis of Smith’s arrogant
and provocative behaviour? He got away with his rebellion
against the British Crown 12 years ago, on 11 November
1965. The international community then professed outrage.
For 12 years within and outside the United Nations there
have been efforts to quell the rebellion and to advance the
cause of the people of Zimbabwe for self-determination and
independence, The Security Council imposed mandatory
economic sanctions against the Smith r6gime which remain
in force to this day. There have also been fruitless attempts
at negotiation. We all recall the negotiations on the ships
lIger and Fearless, at Victoria Falls, at Geneva and other
places. Yet Smith proves elusive. But, like Vorster at
Pretoria, he continues to boast that he is the defender of
“Western civilization” and “Western interests” in southern
Africa.
.

66. The oppressedpeoplecannot abandonthe strugglefor
their rights just in order to avert a crisis of international
proportions. They will continue to fight. Africa and the
front-line countries, in particular, have a duty to support
them, for their causeis just. Weshall not betray them. We
have a duty also to defendourselvesagainstaggression.
We
shall not allow Smith and his clique to kill and maim our
people, wantonly destroy our property and violate our
territorial integrity with impunity. In order that there may
be no doubt about this, allow me to repeat the following
words spoken by PresidentKaunda at the recent CornmonwealthConferencein London:

62. We in Zambia have concluded that Smith is an illusion.
Alone, he is weak; his strength lies elsewhere. It lies in
South Africa and in certain Western Governments and
multinational corporatipns, including oil companies. They
have given him succour and solace for the 12 years that he
has defied the authority of the United Nations. They are
therefore accomplices in his oppression and repression of
the people of Zimbabwe and his acts of aggression against
neighbouring independent African States.

“Let Smith know and let the administering Power,
Britain, through whomSmith senthis last threat of attack
against Zambia, also know that the so-calledpolicy of
‘hot pursuit’ is a policy of nakedaggression.If Rhodesian
forcescome into Zambia,we reservenot only the right to
defendour territory with every meansat our disposal,but
alsothe right to follow the enemy into the rebel colony.
Ethasnever beenour intention to do this, but we cannot
allow Smith the monopoly of ‘hot pursuit’ for a wrong
cause.We cannot. Wehave in fact the right to defend the
dignity of man, to pursueto victory the struggleagainst
forces which dehumanizeman. If a general war breaks
out, we shouldnot be blamedfor the consequences.”

43. All efforts to seek a peaceful settlement of the
question of Southern Rhodesia having failed, the people of
Zimbabwe have, understandably and justifiably, resorted to
an intensified armed struggle, Today, they are scoring
impressive victories over the enemy. Smith and his
henchmen have been thrown into a state of despair and
panic. As desperate and panic-stricken men, they are
committing genocide, rape and other savage brutalities
against the people of Zimbabwe. They have also had to
devise new stratagems which they hope will buy them time.

67. So it is really up to those who do not want a wider
conflict in southern Africa to stop the mad and desperate
acts of Ian Smith. We are convinced that Smith has no
intention of negotiatinga settlementin Zimbabwe. Otherwise, his languageand activities would be thoseof a man
willing to negotiate. His troops would not be on the
rampage of savageatrocities against the people of Zimbabwe. He would not beintensifying his acts of aggression
againstindependentAfrican countries.

64. It is not a mere coincidence that Smith and his
henchmen in Southern Rhodesia have, in recent months,
sharpened their arrogance and intensified their acts of
aggression against neighbouring independent African States.
It has dawned on them that they cannot and will not win
the war for Zimbabwe now raging with all intensity inside
Zimbabwe itself. But, because of their greed for power,
they are not willing to surrender; they are determined to
cling to power for as long as possible. Because of their
obsession with the notion of white racist supremacy in
southern Africa, they are seeking to externalize the conflict
in Zimbabwe by directly involving South Africa and the
front-line African countries, which they are deliberately
provoking. In the final analysis, they are seeking to
intemationalize the conflict, relying on the belief that if the
front-line African countries should invite their friends to

68. Smith’s acts of aggressionagainst Mozambique are
particularly disturbing. They cannot and must not be
allowed to continue. They are savageand barbaric. They
violate every norm of international law and civilized
behaviour. Here we have the case of a rebel and an
international outlaw wantonly aiming at and destroying
civilian targets jn a sovereignand independent country,
indeeda Member of the United Nations. Smith is not only
murdering innocent civilians in Mozambique; he is also
bombing schools,hospitals,bridgesand other vital necessities in that young and newly independent African
country. What an outrage! Will the international com6

munity stand by with arms folded and watch Smith get
away with all this’?

calls upon the international community representedhere to
apply full economic sanctions,in particular concerningthe
supply of oil, againstthe illega1regimeof Rhodesia.

69. Let us remember that Mozambique is bearing the
brunt for its support of a just cause-indeed a United
Nations cause. Mozambique is making tremendous sacrifices
in defence of United Nations principles. FRELIMO and the
Government and people of Mozambique deserve the unreserved commendation of the international community for
showing the courage of their convictions. More important,
we should all be inspired to help that young country in
concrete material and economic terms. We should seek to
strengthen it so that it will be better able to play its role as
an indispensable rear guard to the Zimbabwe liberation
movement.

74. There can be no compromise with the rebels in
southern Africa. There must be majority rule and genuine
independence.Any attempt to install a puppet regimein
Zimbabwe would be tantamount to creating conditions for
a civil war. Weshall strenuously opposeany such attempts.
In this regard let me once again quote from President
Kaunda’s statement at the London Commonwealth Conference. He said:

70. Even without these acts of aggression committed
against it by the rebels in Southern Rhodesia, Mozambique,
born out of a protracted war against the Portuguese Fascists
barely two years ago, would need concrete international
support in its efforts at national reconstruction, Its situation has been aggravatedby the activities of the Smith
regime. The closure of its border with Southern Rhodesia
compoundedthe situation it inherited from the Portuguese
Fascists.The war now beingwagedagainstMozambique by
the Smith regimehas further worsenedthe situation. There
is therefore even greater need for the international community to assistMozambique.
71. In our considered opinion, Mozambique has made
reasonable demands on the Council. They merit the
unanimous support of all its members. The Western
countries, particularly the United Kingdom and the United
States, are currently engagedin an initiative to resolve the
question of Southern Rhodesia.Wedo not havemuch faith
in that initiative, In any case,let them know that their
behaviour during this debate will have a direct bearing on
the fate of their initiative. Any negative attitude on their
part in this debatewould be inconsistentwith genuineand
seriousefforts to resolvethe questionof Southern Rhodesia
and would make it very difficult to achieve a negotiated
settlement.
72. To sumup, it is now quite clear to us that the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesiahas taken advantageof the
weaknessand powerlessness
of successiveGovernmentsof
the United Kingdom, the administeringPower in Southern
Rhodesia.The United Kingdom, 1 am afraid, has lamentably failed to apply the full force of its own sanctionsin
order to bring down the racist regimeof Ian Smith. It is our
conviction that if British and Western oil companieshad
applied sanctionsimmediately after the unilateral declaratipn of independenceby rebelleader Ian Smith in 1965, the
illegalregimein Southern Rhodesiawould have ground to a.
halt, as waspredicted by former Prime Minister Sir Harold
Wilson,

“The southern African crisisis not a subject of political
juggling. Here, there are no gamesto play. There are no
diplomatic victories to score and no time to buy for yet
new gimmicksor clever stratagems.There is only room
and opportunity for savinghuman life-life which evenas
1speakis beinglost at the hand of the oppressor.
“Those who engagein playing games,those who seek
loopholes for play-acting and double-dealingdiplomacy
will be overtaken by events. We are confident about the
certainty of the historic triumph of the forces for
liberation. As in the case of former PortugueseTerritories, the tide of history will sweepto the shoresof time
and expose the confidence of tricksters. For time is the
greatestfriend of truth and justice’shandmaid.”
I can think of no better note on which to end my
statement.
75. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania. I
welcomehim and invite him to take a Placeat the Council
table and to makea statement.
76. Mr. MKAPA (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr, President, first of all, permit me to expressthe satisfaction of
my delegation at seeingyou presiding over the Security
Council for the month of June. 1 am happy to note that
Canada and Tanzania have always enjoyed very good
relations and shared similar views on a large number of
international issues.May 1 also take this opportunity to
expressour appreciation to you and, through you, to the
membersof the Security CounciI for having inviting us to
participate in this important debate.
77. It is not really necessary for me to explain the
presenceof our delegation at this meeting of the Council.
The ties that bind the people of Mozambique and the
people of Tanzania are age-old, deep and profound. They
are sealedby the unbreakable solidarity and blood brotherhood nurtured through the long years of Mozambique’s
armedstrugglefor independence.As a result, any aggression
againstMozambique is regardedby our people asaggression
againstTanzania.

The role of the apartheid regime of South Africa in
sustainingthe Smith racist regimein Rhodesiais too well
known to the Council to require any detailed analysishere.
Suffice it to mention that oil and armsembargoeson the
Vorster apartheid regime in Pretoria and, indeed, on the
Salisburyregime,would have minimized the conspiracy and
the effectivenessof their unholy alliance. My delegation
73.

78. On this occasion,however, I speak not just on behalf
of Tanzania. My country is honoured to be one of the
African States specifically mandated by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, currently
meeting at Libreville, Gabon, to come before the Council
and state Africa’s indignation at the continued and per7

sistent acts of aggression of the rebel regimeagainst a sister 83, It is imperative that, as the Council considersthese
againstMozambique, it should do
country, the People’s Republic of Mozambique. The Ora latest acts of aggression
so
taking
into
account
the
causeand effect of the problem,
ganization of African Unity considersit to be an aggression
For
we
must
not
lose
sight
of
the fact that the sourceof the
againstthe African peoples.
problem is the continued existence of the illegal regime.
79. My brother and colleague Comrade Marcelino dos That is the causeof the conflict in the area.The aggression
againstMozambique,like similar aggressionagainstZambia
Santos, member of the PermanentPolitical Committeeof
FRELIMO and Minister for Development and Economic and Botswana,is but a manifestation of the consequences
of the continued existence of the illegal regime and its
Planning of the People’sRepublic of Mozambique, clearly
and succinctly set forth the facts on the systematicand desperatemanoeuvres to cling to power. If the Security
Councilseriously wants to remove the sourceof aggression,
calculated acts of aggression
of the illegalregimeagainstthe
then it is necessaryto bring down the illegal regime,The
Mozambican people. He has given an extensive account of
the lossesincurred in terms of both material resourcesand mere presence of the Smith regime in Rhodesia is an
aggression
in itself and constitutes a threat to peacein the
human lives. I shall therefore refrain from repeating the
regionand to international security.
detailsof the enormouslossesand sufferingsinflicted upon
the people of Mozambique by the racist regime.
84. The systematic and repeated acts of aggressioncom80. Mozambique is a young country that hasjust emerged mitted by the illegal rebel regime againstthe neighbouring
as an independent nation after 500 years of Fascistand African States, and most recently against Mozambique,
demandimmediate and concrete action by the Council as
colonial rule and more than 10 years of bitter war of
the body responsiblefor international peaceand security.
liberation. Mozambique today needsto concentrate all jts
energy and resourceson the reconstruction and economic The measuresit takes should encompassthe following
different but related areas.We envisageand expect action
development of the country. Yet even under thesedifficult
conditions, Mozambique has remained faithful to the
againstthe racist regime and its collaborators, action in
support of Mozambique and concrete assistanceto the
resolutionsand decisionsof the General Assemblyand the
Security Council. Because of its adherence to those liberation movementin Zimbabwe.
resolutions and decisions in support of the liberation
85. It was about one month ago that the International
movements and the application of sanctionsagainst the
‘tilegalracist regimeof Southern Rhodesia,Mozambiquehas Conferencein Support of the Peoplesof Zimbabwe and
become the target of aggression.Thus Mozambique is Namibia adopted, by consensus,the Maputo Declaration
paying a very high price for being faithful to the principles and the Programme of Action for the Liberation of
Zimbabwe and Namibia [see Sfl2344/Rev.l of‘ 22 July)
of the Charter and for scrupulously implementing the
19771. The Conferencerecognized that sanctionsagainst
decisionsof the United Nations.
the illegal regime should be intensified and widened to
81. When Mozambique decided to close its border with
include measures
under Article 41 of the Charter. Sanctions
Rhodesiait was not without greatsacrifices,for that action have not been fully applied by all Member States and in
was in fact detrimental to its own economy. Yet it was certain casesthey are beingmassivelyevaded.The repeated
prepared to sacrifice its own economic interests in the
condemnationsof the illegal regimeare not alwaysmatched
service of justice and in consistencywith its loyalty to the
with actions. Nothing would be more timely and approdecisions of the Security Council. We now have the
priate at the moment than for the Council to respond
outrageous situation in which a faithful Member of the
positively to the call madeat Maputo for the widening of
Orgariization, the People’s Republic of Mozambique, is sanctions to include all the measuresenvisagedunder
being subjected to enormous and increasingdestruction, Article 41 of the Charter, And in the same spirit all
both human and material, for no reasonother than its being assistancemust be given to the liberation movement to
loyal to the decisionsof the Organization. And yet the
intensify the struggleto topple the Smith regime.
illegal rBgime continues to escapethe real and effective
measures the Council is capable of imposing. Taking
86. The international community has an obligation to
advantageof this inaction of the Council, the Smith regime assistthe liberation movementsto free their country. AS
has continued its defiance of the international community
long as Zimbabwe is not free, the neighbouringStates will
and escalatedits repressionin Zimbabwe andits aggression continue to bear a heavy burden in the struggle. The
againstneighbouringindependentAfrican States.
geographicalposition of those countries makesit necessary
for them to carry the burden on behalf of the international
82. In the last year, Mozambique has becomea particular community. The international community, therefore, hasa
target. Over 140 acts of aggressionhave been committed
duty to support those countries that suffer constant
against it, The recent invasion of Mapai resulted in the
harassmentand repeatedaggressionfrom the racist regime.
wanton killing of innocent civilians and the deliberate
destruction of livestock, schools,hospitals,communication 87. In consideringthe acts of aggressionagainstMozamcentres and other property, It is both alarming and
bique, the Council must recognize the fact that that
revealing to note that the Smith rCgimeis now better
country has been forced to be in a constant state of war.
equipped militarily than ever before. The rebel troops now
Under such circumstances,Mozambique needsto strengthuse heavy artillery, tanks, troop transporters and even en its defence capacity, To do so would naturally drain its
Mirage fighter planeswhoseorigin leavesus in doubt asto
resourcesmuch more than would be required for normal
the sincerity of those who claim to be opposed to the
defenceneeds.In that respect, the Organization of African
Smith regime.
Unity hasrightly called upon all Statesto provide Mozam8

bique with all practical assistance to enable it to defend its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. In the name of OAU
and on behalf of the Tanzanian delegation, let me express
our confidence that the Council will respond positively to
this clarion call of OAU. But it is not only in the field of
defence that Mozambique requires urgent assistance, Its
economy is constantly disrupted and this situation cries for
immediate assistance also.
88, South Africa has continued to give sustenance to the
illegal regime in defiance of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and decisions by giving it both
military and economic support. At their recent meeting
earlier this month in London, the Commonwealth Heads of
Government condemned South Africa for the military and
economic support which it continues to give to the illegal
r&me. In particular, they deplored and condemned the
provision of military equipment and the supply of petroleum and petroleum products which buttress the illegal
rCgime. The Council can do no less. But there is one more
element which requires its particular scrutiny. I have
already referred to the fact that some of the equipment
currently being used by the Smith r&me in its wars of
aggression against neighbouring independent African States
is not of South African origin. The question that the
Council must ponder is: how is it possible for that rBgime
to receive such military hardware from some of the very
countries that proclaim verbal outrage against the illegal
rC&me? Equally important is the question: what will the
Council do to put an end to such a scandalous practice’?
89. The end to the repeated aggression from Rhodesia
against neighbouring independent African countries lies in
the removal of the Smith r6gime and the transfer of
effective power to the majority of the people of Zimbabwe.
Unlike the paranoid Smith rkgime, a government of the
majority in Zimbabwe would have nothing to fear from its
neighbours and would live in peace with them.
90. Two kinds of pressure are being brought to bear on
Smith to effect his rkgime’s collapse. The first is the
pressure of the armed struggle waged by Zimbabwe patriots
inside Rhodesia. That pressure will continue and intensify,
for the people of Zimbabwe will not put down their arms
until majority rule has been achieved and secured, and the
Organization of African Unity is resolved to step up its
assistance to the armed struggle. The second are pressures
emanating from the United Nations resolutions providing
for the isolation of and sanctions against the illegal
rebellious rCgime. Along with them are political pressures
being applied in the course of the current negotiations for a
settlement of the Rbodesian problem. We believe that both
the economic and the political pressures should not only be
maintained but also stepped up directly or indirectly. Every
conceivable kind of pressure must be applied to bring down
the Smith r&gime at the earliest date, and we call upon the
Council to say so loudly and clearly.
91. The argument may be advanced that the negotiations
would be jeopardized if such pressures were intensified. But
our view ‘is that the opposite would be the effect. If we
slacken those pressures, indeed if we merely mark time with
regard to those currently being applied, Smith would be
encouraged to continue buying time and receiving more

armaments far more acts of aggression. In fact, over the last
12 years of Smith’s rebellion, it has become clear that it is
when Smith has experienced simultaneous maximum pressure-military,
economic and political-that he has made
attempts to negotiate.
92. As immediate neighbours of Mozambique, the Tanzanians know
the enormous sacrifices and the price in
human life that the Mozambican people are paying to
safeguard the independence of independent African States,
to affirm the dignity and human worth of the African
people in southern Africa and to defend our continent’s
honour. Those sacrifices make my country’s independence
more secure. I want to take this opportunity not only to
support Mozambique’s case before the Council but also
whole-heartedly to thank FRELIMO and the Government
and people of Mozambique for those sacrifices. The people
of Mozambique, under their Party FRELIMO, are a
committed, courageous, persevering and industrious people.
They have asked for more understanding, more sympathy
and more assistance from the international community to
continue to carry the burden imposed upon them by the
struggle for the liberation of Zimbabwe. I am confident
that the Council will heed this call and rally the international community to their support.
93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the First
Vice-Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of Angola. I
welcome him and invite him to take a Place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
94. Mr. dos SANTOS (Angola) (interpretation from
French): The attention of the international community is
today focused once again on New York, where the Security
Council has had to convene urgently to examine the
situation which has been created on the frontier of
Mozambique and to take decisions on the new acts of
aggression committed against a State Member of the United
Nations, the People’s Republic of Mozambique, by the
illegal racist rdgime of Ian Smith.
95. Economic sanctions, decisions and resolutions have
been adopted by the General Assembly condemning the
racist and Fascist policy of apartheid, the illegal occupation
of the Territory of Namibia by South Africa and the
usurpation of power in Zimbabwe by a white racist and
coloniaIist minority with the condonation of the United
Kingdom. Measures to safeguard the inalienable right of the
peoples of those Territories to self-determination and
independence have also been submitted and adopted.
96. However, the situation today shows that, despite the
heroic efforts of the liberation movements in southern
Africa and the active and militant solidarity of countries
and organizations which love peace, freedom and progress
in order once and for all to eliminate oppression, racism
and colonialism, the minority and racist Ggimes of South
Africa and Rhodesia are surviving thanks to the military
and financial support of some Western countries Members
of the United Nations.
97. Consequently, those countries are together collectively
responsible for the frequent acts of aggression against the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, which amounted, in

103. At this time we are observing an intensification of
the aggressiveness of the Pretoria and Salisbury regimes
against the countries that border on Zimbabwe and
Namibia. The simultaneous or consecutive armed attacks by
the racists against Mozambique, Zambia, Angola and
Botswana obviously form part of an overall plan for the
destabilization of the military and political situation in
those countries in order to facilitate the improper interference of imperialism in their internal affairs and to drag
the African continent into a war that will have grave and
unforeseeable consequences for the maintenance of international peace and security.

1976 alone, to 41 separate attacks and raids inside
Mozambique, resulting in the death of 913 civilians and the
wounding of 203. In August 1976 alone, Rhodesia acknowledged that its forces has killed 350 persons; the victims
were in a United Nations refugee camp which, according to
the illegal Salisbury regime, was a guerrilla base. This year,
the Salisbury regime is determined to repeat these exploits
and, in fact, break its own record of attacks and violence.
In the first four months of 1977, the illegal Smith regime
launched 78 attacks. On jl May, armed troops from
Rhodesian territory with massive air support attacked
Mozambique and occupied the town of Mapai. The attack
on Mapai will be considered a war crime, because that town
has now been completely destroyed.

104. While it is true that that desperate action on the part
of the imperialist Powers reveals that the regimes which are
defending their economic and strategic interests in our
continent are in their death throes, it is also true that the
peoples of Africa are coming to see more and more clearly
that the so-called struggle against socialist or communist
influence in southern Africa is nothing more than a pretext
for the continuation of aggression against them in order to
perpetuate the hunger, poverty, disease and the cruel
capitalist exploitation of African workers.

98. In the course of the latest series of Rhodesian attacks
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mozambique, the illegal Smith r&.$rre attempted another invasion,
with the support of heavy artillery, armour and aircraft. Just
to give a brief description of the damage caused by Smith’s
attack in the province of Manica, in the villages of
Catandica, Nyazonia, Chiaran and Mavonde, 1,066 persons
were killed and 329 wounded. In the Province of Gaza, in
the villages of Pafuri, Chicualacuala, Chitanga, Machaila and
Mapai, 141 persons were killed and 148 wounded.

105. The peoples of Africa and the Organization of
African Unity have proclaimed the racist and Fascist
regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia as their enemies. The
fighters of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa, guided by
their legitimate representatives-the
Patriotic Front,
SWAP0 and ANC, respectively-are
intensifying their
armed struggle because no satisfactory political solution can
be brought about without dialogue between the colonial
Powers and the legitimate representatives of the peoples of
those Territories. Therefore, any diplomatic action which
fails to take into account this fundamental aspect of the
problem or which ignores the genuine aspirations of those
Peoples to total independence, freedom and social progress
is doomed to failure.

99. General Walls described the large-scale invasion carried
out on 31 May as a mere “defensive exercise” which, in the
view of that racist Rhodesian general, contained no
“element of aggression”. Imperialism and its allies have a
vast repertory of euphemisms when it comes to the loss of
African life or when African sovereignty is at stake.
100. The statement made in the Council by His Excellency the Minister for Development and Economic Planning
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique makes abundantly
clear the inhuman, retrograde and Machiavellian nature of
the Ian Smith regime and shows us how he is using the
economic assistance, mercenaries, modern weapons and
money which the imperialists of the United States, the
1 United Kingdom, France, the Federal Republic of Germany
and others have given him to attack sovereign and independent States, thus endangering peace and security in the
southern part of the African continent.

106. The People’s Republic of Angola vigorously condemns this latest act of barbarism on the part of the illegal,
racist regime of Ian Smith and gives its unreserved support
to the heroic Government and people of Mozambique in
their struggle to repel the invaders. We also reiterate here
our commitment to the liberation movements fighting for
independence in the area, both at the negotiating table and
on the battlefield.

101. The debate on the aggression committed by South
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola is still fresh
in the memory of the members of the Council. At that
time, the degree of violence employed, the loss of human
life and the material damage sustained by the economy of
our young country, which was assessed at millions of
dollars, caused the Council to adopt resolution 387 (1976)
of 31 March 1976 calling for appropriate compensation.
That compensation has not so far been paid by the racist
regime.

107. The People’s Republic of Angola repcats its support
for the statement made in the Council by the Government
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, and wishes to pay
that country a militant tribute by declaring once again its
encouragement of the economic sanctions being applied
against the racists of Rhodesia in accordance with the OAU
and United Nations resolutions.
108. We are certain that this expression of solidarity with
the oppressed peoples victimized by aggression will have a
favourable influence on the outcome of the proceedings of
the Council.

102. However, the South African and Rhodesian imperialists and racists are at the present time forming a common
diplomatic and military front and, acting directly or
through their lackeys, are trying to intimidate or mislead
the front-line countries, which are ready to carry out their
historic mission by providing diplomatic support and
concrete material assistance to the freedom fighters of
southern Africa.

109. We do feel, however, that we must face all the
problems engendered by the aggression of the Rbodesian
racists against the People’s Republic of Mozambique with10

out subterfuge or compromise which may hinder the
attainment of the aspirations of the people of Mozambique
in its struggle for national reconstruction and for the
defence of its territorial integrity. The struggle continues;
victory is certain.

day after the unilateral declaration of independence by Ian
Smith, the Security Council met at the request of, among
others, the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. On that occasion, the then British Minister declared
that his Government considered the declaration of independence to be null and void because only the British
Parliament had the necessary authority, and that the only
legal government of Southern Rhodesia was the United
Kingdom Government, which was clearly responsible for
enforcing the law in Southern Rhodesia so that, in due
time, that country might accede to independence and
freedom. It was on that basis that the Council adopted
resolutions 216 (1965) and 217 (1965), which called upon
the Government of the United Kingdom and the international community to adopt the necessarymeasuresto put
an end to the Smith rCgime so that General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) might be implemented.The resultsof
those United Nations initiatives aresufficiently well known
to you for me not to dwell on them.

110. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Senegal, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the African Group for the month
of June. I invite him to taki a place at the Council table
and to make his statement6
11 I. Mr. DJIGO (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Sir, allow me, first of all, on behalf of my delegation, to
convey to you our congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council. Our participation in
this debate under your leadership is a source of genuine
satisfaction to us, given the strong bonds of solidarity,
friendship and co-operation which unite Senegal and
Canada. We are convinced that your personal qualities make
you eminently qualified to preside over this debate.

117. The history of colonization teachesus, however, that
the United Kingdom knows, when it wishes,how to resort
to means other than negotiation. We need only recall
Kenya, Cyprus, India and Anguilla to be convinced that, in
the case of Southern Rhodesia, the United Kingdom
refused to fulfil its obligation to restore peace and to
prepare the country for independence.

112. I should like to be allowed also, through you, to
thank the fnembers of the Council for having authorized me
to speak during this debate in my capacity as Chairman of
the Group of African States.
113. In opening the Inteinational Conference in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia at Maputo on 16
May last, President Samora Machel said the following:

118. The membersof NATO which lend military, political
and economic support to Vorster’s rdgime-and thus indirectly to Smith’s rkgime-also have their shareof responsibility and we cannot but denounceit. Through the regimes
which they help to maintain and through the weaponsthey
deliver to those rigimes, they have contributed to turning
southern Africa into a veritable powder keg.

“Your presence on this frontier of freedom is strong
encouragement to the tens of millions of people who, a
few kilometres from the city of Maputo, are living under
the most brutal oppression. Your words are being
broadcast to them and they eagerly and attentively await
your message of solidarity. They are waiting for you to
affirm that roll mankind is resolutely participating in the
struggle for human dignity. Furthermore, they hope that
your words will be translated into acts of support and
that your words will be turned into specific action leading
to the elimination of oppression.”

119. Mr. President, the Government of Mozambique has
brought before the Council a complaint concerning the
violations of its territorial integrity by the illegal regimeof
Ian Smith. Rhodesiansoldierswith air support and with a
large contingent of tanks and artillery units made a new
incursion into Mozambican territory on 11 June. Thus,
after the aggression
of 24 May in the region of CaboraBassa
and that of 29 May, Ian Smith further escalated the
conflict. The pertinent declaration by Mr. Marcelino dos
Santos, Minister for Development and Economic Planning
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, makesit unnecessaryfor me to list the facts.

That was the message which the international community
wished to convey to the peoples still languishing under
colonialism.
114.’ The climate of war which reigns in southern Africa,
needless to say, is a result of the tragic, illegal situation
afflicting the peoples of that region.

120. Mozambique’s crime in fact is that of vigorously
supporting the Zimbabweliberation struggle,in conformity
with United Nations resolutions. But the aggressionof
which Mozambique has been the victim, far from being an
isolated incident, is part of a well-conceivedplan aimed at
maintaining the domination of the white minorities in
southern Africa, These days, there has been the caseof
Zambia; last January, it was Botswana, and now Mozambique.

115. In Zimbabwe, Vorster’s disciples have for years been
engaged in the application of the degrading and Fascist
policy of apartheid The de facto situation established in
Rhodesia in 1965 by the illegal Salisbury rBgime has been
condemned by the international community. Despite
United Nations condemnations, despite the imposition of
sanctions and despite certain allegations, the rebel regime of
Ian Smith has not worked towards the establishment of
majority rule or the creation of a society where basic
human rights would be enjoyed by all people.

121. Given the situation which continuesto deteriorate, it
is obvious that the African Stateswill not opt for passivity.
Indeed, an act of aggressionby a racist minority r&me
against any independent African State is an act of aggression againstall of Africa.

116. The responsibility for that situation falls undoubtedly on tlie administering Power, the United Kingdom. The
1

122. The resolution adopted on 26 June by the OAU
Council of Ministers, which met at Librevillc [see S/
12352/, is the consequence of that determination of
independent Africa, which no longer fosters illusions about
the chances of a successful negotiated solution in southern
Africa. I can assure the Council that Africa will not play the
idle spectator. We are determined henceforth to lend all our
aid to what are known as the front-line States to safeguard
African dignity.
123. It is not by coming here to deliver virulent speeches
against Smith and his master Vorster that we show our
solidarity with Mozambique, We will guarantee our brothers
the support and backing required to safeguard their
independence. It was for that reason that the OAU Council
of Ministers decided to call for an urgent meeting of the
Defence Commission of our organization to consider
military aid to our brothers in Mozambique.
124. Representatives will therefore understand that we
have not come to the Council to ask for its compassion and
understanding. We have come, rather, to draw the attention
of the international community to the serious responsibility
that is borne by those who assist the ignoble rCgimes of a
Smith and of a Vorster, as well as by the administering
Power, the Government of the United Kingdom, and to ask
the international community to act steadfastly and without
further delay to put an end to Smith’s rebellion which
endangers the security of our continent.
125. In this connexion,
lowing at Maputo:

Mr. Ted Rowlands

said the fol-

“The Government of the United Kingdom accepts a
special responsibility towards Rhodesia. The British Government has never denied nor will it ever deny the
onerous responsibility
of seeking justice, freedom and
independence for Zimbabwe. We are not Pontius Pilates
seeking to wash our hands of the problems of southern
Africa and rejecting our responsibility in Zimbabwe. It is,
as Jim Callaghan said, a debt of honour to put an end to
Smith’s illegal r&ime, to establish true independence in
Zimbabwe based on the fundamental principle of majority rule, a Zimbabwe in which the entire population
without distinction of race may work together to build a
new future for their country.”
126. When Mr. Rowlands made that statement, he raised
great hopes. But those hopes quickly vanished when, after
the aggression against Mozambique, we heard Mr. David
Owen state, on 20 June, during a press luncheon:
“The territorial integrity of Mozambique has been
challenged by Rhodesia, but the fact that Rhodesians
deny having made new incursions into that country
represents a certain improvement in the situation.”
We do not wish to believe that those words reflect a cynical
attitude.
127. Mozambique does not seek the understanding of the
“Western democracies” any more than the rest of Africa.
The problem which concerns us today shows, in a harsh

light, the question of the credibility of the United Nations
and, in this case, of its supreme organ, the Security Council.
If the Organization has unequivocally proclaimed its opposition to the illegal racist minority r&ime, if the Organization has declared its firm support for the legitimate
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, if the Organization has
continually asked all States to give all possible assistance to
the people of Zimbabwe fighting for the freedom and
dignity of man, if the Security Council, in its resolution
217 (1965), determined that a continuance of the Smith
rigime constituted “a threat to international peace and
security”, if Mozambique is to be faithful to the principles
that we have set forth, it would only be fair for us-the
peoples of the United Nations--to
share in the consequences of its commitment.
128. Comrade dos Santos mentioned in detail the assistance that his country needs. I believe that we are in duty
bound to provide it. Indeed, the emergency national
defence measures that Mozambique must now adopt will,
no doubt, compel it to sacrifice some of its development
projects, and the economic situation obtaining in the
country is sufficiently well known to the international
community since the visit there of the United Nations
mission to justify our urgent heeding of the appeal
addressed to us.
129. We are convinced that the Council will be in a
position to adopt decisions taking into account the seriousness of the situation in the area and lend to Mozambique the necessary assistance to help it better to pursue its
independent and peaceful policy. Need I stress that the
trust placed in the Council underlines its primary and noble
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security? The struggle conti&es.
130. The PRESIDENT:
1 call on the representative of
Mauritius on a point of order.
13 1. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): We are seeking to have a
speedy and effective conclusion of the debate on the issue
before us. Some African members have drafted a working
paper, but we still need to hold consuItations with other
Africans, especially with the presence of the African
Ministers who have been mandated by the Organization of
African Unity, We were hoping to meet this morning after
this meeting, but since time is running out I understand it
would be more appropriate for the Africans to meet this
afternoon. I would suggest, therefore, that, if members of
the Council would agree, we could fix the Council’s
meeting for this afternoon at 4 o’clock to allow the
Africans to meet this afternoon. I suggest that that would
be in the Council’s best interest, because these behind-thescene negotiations assist it in its work. One hour spent
behind the scenes could save the Council several hours. We
have no intention of imposing a draft on the Council. We
want to consult amongst ourselves so as to be ready to
distribute our working paper to other members of the
Council, start negotiations and receive their comments. If
members do not object to this, I beg you, Mr. President, to fix the time for the meeting this afternoon at 4 o’clock
rather than 3 o’clock.

132. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
heard the proposal of the representative of Mauritius. I
would make only one observation. There is a rather long list
of speakers for this afternoon’s meeting. Even if the
meeting starts promptly at 4-and my experience this
morning, when we were unable to start on time even after I
had appealed to members to be here at 10.30 sharp, does
not give me much confidence on this score-, we shall not
be able to end the meeting until 7.30 or 8 p.m. Is that the
wish of the Council?

135. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I appreciate your sug
gestion, Mr. President, but I believe that it would accelerate
the Council’s work if the African members could discuss
this working paper immediately. Obtaining the agreement
of the African Ministers who are here would epable us to
transmit the paper as soon as possible to other members of
the Council for their comments. As I said yesterday, if the
negotiations go well, ‘1 am hoping to submit a draft
resolution to the Council on Wednesday morning. We are
fighting against time, and I am suggesting a procedure that I
believe will help the Council.

133. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): 1 would note that, in the
case of Cyprus, the Council met at midnight.

136. The PRESIDENT: With the consent of the Council, I
am prepared to agree to the proposal made by the
representative of Mauritius. I would urge that our meeting
this afternoon start at 4 o’clock sharp.

134. The PRESIDENT: I would put this question to the
representative of Mauritius: Could we have our meeting at
3 p.m. and listen to all the representatives whose names are
on the list of speakers and could the African members then
have their meeting?

The meetingrose at 12.55 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

yes publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairiea
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

IIOJIY’INTb

H3AAHHH

OPFAHHBAqWA

R~~tuwi
OpraHH3aqHH
O6’be~aHeHHblX
LWXBX H &rewrcmax
BO mex pafimmx
BaLUeM

KHWXHOM

HauaR,

CeKuns no npOAaxe

MEUYL3”He

COMO

CONSEGUIB

HI,,,

nHmWTe

nsAaHnA,

PUBLICACIONES

OG-bE&HHEHHhIX

HAI(HFi

HannA MO~KHO ~ynnrb
a KHWKH~~X M&I-&uwpa. Haaorurre
cnpaaaw 06 usnanwax
a
II0

aApeCy:

Ham-Hopa
DE LAS

OpmmaqHR

o@,,eAHHeHHbIX

mm Xeaeaa.
NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las’ publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: W.S.

I;00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

77-70001--April1978-2,200
