S/PV.7289

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7289th meeting

Tuesday, 28 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval/Mr. Oyarzábal .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Stott Despoja
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Jones

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Displaced women and girls: leaders and survivors
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2014/693)
Letter dated 10 October 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/731)

14-59204 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1459204*

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Displaced women and girls: leaders and survivors
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2014/693)
Letter dated 10 October 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/731)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women; Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special Rapporteur on the human
rights of internally displaced persons; and Ms. Suaad
Allami, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; Ms. Marriët Schuurman, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of NATO for
Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Miroslava Beham,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

2/90

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

28/10/2014

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/693, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/731, which contains a letter dated
10 October 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: The Secretary-General is
regrettably not in a position to join us today. He has
asked me to deliver the following message on his behalf.
“I thank the Security Council, under the
presidency of Argentina, for convening this
important debate. The Council’s consistent focus
on women and peace and security has enabled the
international community to move beyond viewing
women as only victims of conflict to seeing them
as agents of peace and progress. The Security
Council is now increasingly addressing the
particular concerns of women and involving them
in mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
“The immense human and financial cost
of conflict is starkly evident in the situation of
refugees, asylum-seekers and internally displaced
persons. Unprecedented levels of displacement are
testing global commitments to addressing the needs
of women and girls, ensuring their protection and
engaging their participation in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding.
“The confluence of crises we face, rather than
distracting from the imperative of gender equality,
should drive us to do even more to live up to the
principles in the Charter of the United Nations and
global norms. Squandering the potential dividends
of gender equality for peace and development
has never been so costly. We must urgently stand
against abuses. I am outraged by targeted attacks
and human rights violations committed against
women and girls, as well as those who defend their
rights. I call for immediate action to end impunity
in such cases.
“I am also concerned by continued
discrimination against women and girls. I call

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

for greater investment in measures to address
this problem. Resolution 1325 (2000) set out a
bold agenda for achieving gender equality as a
prerequisite for peaceful and inclusive societies.
Led by UN-Women, the United Nations is striving
to realize this vision. Next year’s convergence of
major global policy events will offer an opportunity
to advance this. The United Nations counts on the
active participation of all countries in the upcoming
strategic high-level reviews on issues ranging from
sanctions to peace operations, peacebuilding and
gender equality.
“I also count on broad participation in my
upcoming global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, which will include targeted
recommendations to accelerate results. I also
commend the lead author of the study, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, who is well known to the Council for her
energey and excellence. Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Advisory Group and the study’s secretariat will
be undertaking broad-based consultations with
Governments, academia, civil society and, most
importantly, women who have experienced the
direct impact of conflict. I encourage all Member
States to support that effort. This wide spectrum of
challenges provides an undeniable spur to action. I
urge the Council to join in responding with urgency
and resolve.”
I shall now continue with my own remarks.
It is an honour to address the Security Council,
and to present the Secretary-General’s report on
women and peace and security (S/2014/693). I thank the
presidency of Argentina for hosting this debate and for
highlighting the challenges faced by displaced women.
This is especially timely as we are witnessing the worst
levels of displacement since the end of the Second
World War.
In my first year as Executive Director of
UN-Women, I have travelled to displacement camps
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, and
to the Syrian refugee camps in Jordan. Without fail, at
every stop I was inspired — albeit in sadness — by
women peacebuilders working so hard in dangerous
conditions. Ms. Suaad Allami, a leading women’s
rights advocate from Iraq, will speak on their behalf

S/PV.7289

today and on behalf of displaced and refugee women
everywhere.
As we look around at a world in crisis, there
is a sense that we are experiencing not simply an
increase in violence and insecurity, but a shift in the
nature of conflict itself. In more and more parts of
the world — Iraq, northern Nigeria, Syria, Somalia
and Mali, to name just a few — violent extremists are
taking control of territory, and directly threatening
and targeting women, girls, and their communities.
This is the terror that contributes to the high levels
of displacement we are discussing today. Women and
girls are forced to marry their abductors and rapists or
sold as slaves. Human rights defenders are threatened
and killed for speaking out against abuse. Courageous
journalists are silenced by violence and death. Teachers,
students and front-line service providers are targeted.
And key decisions are still being made behind closed
doors, deaf to the voices of those directly affected. Last
week, we greeted with cautious hope reports of possible
progress regarding the abducted Chibok girls. This
week, our hopes were devastated by news that they are
not yet to be released. This again highlights the fact
that, even after this horrendous event, more women and
girls have been abducted.
We must not forget the reasons why they are
abducted. We must not forget the horrifying nightmare
they face and that so many others continue to endure.
During and after conflict, more women die during
childbirth, and more girls are forcibly married. Fewer
women work and participate in the economy, and fewer
girls go to school. Of primary school-age children that
are out of school, half live in conflict areas. Only 35 per
cent of girls are enrolled in secondary education in
these settings. This prompts me to say that, if we did
not have so much conflict, we would have made a lot of
progress in gender equality. That puts the whole world
in danger.
The report of the Secretary-General, which I
have the privilege to present to the Council today on
his behalf, recognizes advancements made at the
normative level over the past year. The Council adopted
new resolutions to strengthen women’s protection from
sexual violence. It reaffirmed the critical importance
of women’s empowerment and gender equality to
international peace and security. Through regional or
national action plans, over 80 countries have committed
to the women and peace and security agenda. Regional

14-592043/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

organizations are increasingly appointing highlevel envoys dedicated to this issue. In this respect, I
particularly want to welcome the appointment of longtime champion for women Bineta Diop as the African
Union’s first Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security.
The report shows that women’s participation
and representation in conflict resolution and peace
processes have improved. Of the 11 active negotiations
co-led by the United Nations last year, eight included at
least one senior woman among negotiating delegates.
The percentage of peace agreements that commit to
advancing the security and status of women and girls
has more than doubled since 2011. In the ongoing
Colombian peace talks, more than one third of the
negotiators are women, and a committee dedicated to
gender has been established. Today, an unprecedented
six women Ambassadors sit here in the Security
Council. All of this indicates progress.
The gains are remarkable. However, we all have to
agree that it still leaves us with nearly half of all peace
agreements that say nothing about women’s rights or
needs, and a majority of peace processes where women’s
minimal presence is an afterthought.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights new
initiatives to protect women’s rights, new measures to
increase women’s representation in military and police
forces and the milestone appointment of the first female
Force Commander of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. But 97 per cent of military peacekeepers are
still men.
There is now broad understanding of the importance
of women’s economic empowerment in post-conflict
settings, but peacebuilding and recovery funding still
largely ignore women’s economic role and underinvests in their livelihoods.
The report also features a recently launched
Secretary-General’s guidance note on reparations for
survivors of sexual violence. That has been a neglected
area in our agenda. Reparations are not just about justice,
they are about empowerment. Empowered women and
girls are the best hope for sustainable development
following conflict. They are the best drivers of growth,
the best hope for reconciliation and the best buffer
against the radicalization of youth and the repetition
of cycles of violence. We see that clearly, and with
appreciation, in the honour bestowed on Malala as this

4/90

28/10/2014

year’s recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize: it is important
to affirm girls’ role in peacemaking.
The year 2015 marks the twentieth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
which laid the foundations for the women and peace
and security agenda; the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); and the beginning
of the new sustainable development agenda. That
combination of events is an unmissable opportunity
to integrate the women and peace and security agenda
into broader development efforts. Next October, the
Security Council will conduct a high-level review of
the women and peace and security agenda, which will
be informed by the Secretary-General’s global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). UNWomen is proud to be its secretariat. In fact, I am pleased
to recognize the study’s distinguished lead author,
Radhika Coomaraswamy. She is here with us today,
as as are several members of the high-level advisory
group, who are here for the week. We are grateful for
their time and dedication.They will together examine
progress and challenges in implementing resolution
1325 (2000).
Today’s debate provides an opportunity for the
members of the Security Council and others to share
their assessment, which I am sure the advisory group
will listen to attentively. It is also a chance to renew
our commitments to the women and peace and security
agenda as the global security context shifts, and to
adapt accordingly. Before I conclude, let me touch
again on today’s topic.
Crises in Afghanistan, Syria and Somalia created
more than half of the 10.7 million persons newly
displaced by conflict or persecution in 2013. The total
displaced population now exceeds 51 million people.
During the height of the violence in Gaza earlier this
year, almost one third of the population was internally
displaced. Nearly 2 million people have been displaced
by ongoing crises in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. New displacements have been caused by
protracted conflicts, such as the one in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, and by new ones, such as the one
in Ukraine.
The rights, needs, protection and participation of
displaced women and girls have been a Security Council
matter since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In
subsequent resolutions and in international and regional
human rights and humanitarian law it is stated over and

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

over again: the meaningful participation of women in
decisions that affect their lives is essential to creating
resilient communities. As Nobel Peace Laureate and
Liberian peace activist Leymah Gbowee said during
the General Assembly’s high-level week last month,
“If we exclude women from peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction, we will build unbalanced
structures, and they will fall.”
Yet efforts to empower women with leadership,
training and education and access to land and other
productive assets are still marginal. Displaced
women are often excluded from justice systems, and
investments to fix this are still insufficient. Time and
time again, women refugees and internally displaced
persons suffer disproportionately from gender-based
violence, including sexual violence, forced marriages
and trafficking.
In resolution 2122 (2013), the Council notes that
unequal citizenship rights and asylum processes and
a lack of access to identification increase women’s
risk of statelessness. They suffer exclusion from
decision-making and unequal access to education,
health, housing, land and property rights. It is time to
dramatically improve the situation of women refugees
and displaced persons around the world. It is time to
renew our commitments and see them through. As we
review policies and strategies over the coming months,
we should be clear about what sustainable peace and
development require in these changed circumstances.
The Security Council faces extraordinary challenges,
from the Ebola outbreak — which also has a gender
dimension — to the rise of violent extremism and the
unprecedented levels of displacement that come with
it. We will not overcome those challenges without
putting gender equality front and centre in our efforts
to maintain peace and security. That is this Council’s
obligation. It is also our collective test for 2015.
On behalf of UN-Women, I welcome today’s debate
and look forward to keeping our promises to all women
and girls threatened by conflict and violence all over
the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet: I am very pleased to brief the Security
Council today, as the topic of this debate is central to
our work on peace. We remain determined to protect

S/PV.7289

women and girls and to promote their role in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations.
Women always bear the brunt of any protracted
conflict, especially in displacement. Displaced
women are frequently subject to heinous human rights
violations, including sexual violence. These criminal
acts destroy community identity and tear apart
traditional ways of life, leaving women alone to face
the challenge of providing for their families. During
displacement women and girls are most at risk to sexual
and gender-based violence, especially in overcrowded
sites with little privacy and security. Uprooted from
their environments, they struggle to access support
networks and health services.
We know that the most effective and appropriate
ways of preventing violence towards internally
displaced women and girls is to intensify protection
mechanisms, while at the same time increasing support
for women’s participation in political processes and
in governance. Peacekeeping missions advocate for
the political participation of women. The mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
emphasizes consultation with women on issues related
to political participation in that country. Recently,
the Mission organized a high-level women’s advisory
group meeting with Mission leadership to discuss the
inclusion of women’s voices in political dialogue and
national reconciliation processes. In South Sudan,
advocacy by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has resulted in an increase in representation
and election of women as traditional leaders in Eastern
and Equatorial States.
Structural obstacles continue to exacerbate the
risks for women in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). In the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, we have attempted to promote the voices
of women in order to identify what structural obstacles
are in place and to reduce the direct threats to women’s
security. In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti has increased its strong uniformed
presence in IDP camps and high-crime areas where
women and girls are most at risk of sexual violence. In
South Sudan, the rapid increase of women and girls who
sought shelter in United Nations bases created a strain
on camp logistics, leading to increased vulnerability
of women and girls. UNMISS therefore advocated
with the camp management committees for a gendered
approach to camp logistics and protection, resulting in

14-592045/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

the establishment of separate facilities for women and
men and the appointment of women as camp managers.
Likewise, in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, a women’s protection network was
established for residents of IDP camps around Zalingei
to discuss with women strategies to better protect and
promote their participation in the peace process.
We must recognize that the best way to protect and
support women IDPs is to help women help themselves
by giving them a voice in decision-making and the
socioeconomic resources to empower them. We need to
do more to support States in developing gender-sensitive
policies, particularly in the justice and security sectors,
that both protect and encourage women’s participation
in all peace and reconciliation efforts. It is critical
for the international community to sustain all efforts
to address and remove critical obstacles that impede
women’s full participation in peace and security. By
doing so, we will make sure that women are leading
actors and champions of peace.
We have a responsibility to better protect
women, but protection cannot exist without genuine
understanding of women’s rights and acceptance of
their full participation, as demanded by resolution 1325
(2000) and all subsequent Security Council mandates
on women and peace and security. The protection
of women, be they settled or displaced, is possible
only when women can themselves define, shape and
influence the course of their lives and ultimately the
course of peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mulet
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beyani.
Mr. Beyani: I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Argentina and the other members of the
Security Council for holding this open debate on
the critical issue of displaced women and girls in
the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. The intersection of peace and security, human
rights and development is critical to dealing with the
issue of internal displacement. We must not lose sight
of the important role that internally displaced women
can play in negotiating peace, ensuring their human
rights and bringing about development in post-conflict
situations.
As part of my mandate, I enter into dialogue with
Governments and the international community alike to

6/90

28/10/2014

advise on and advocate for the best possible protection
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), and in all my
field missions I pay specific attention to the protection
of internally displaced women and girls. This year
alone, I have carried out missions to Kenya, Azerbaijan,
Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti and Ukraine. Such field missions
are significant in that they provide an early warning
system for the international community through the
Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and, in
this instance, the Security Council itself on the actual
causes, conditions and situations of displacement.
My mandate receives specific support from
United Nations agencies and entities, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and I am
grateful for their support and great collaboration. My
work could not be possible without the outstanding
support extended by Member States, both those
working to cope with and to protect IDPs and those
supporting action to improve the lives of internally
displaced persons internationally. I am grateful for
the ever-growing cooperation extended by States to
my mandate. I would also like to highlight the Arria
Formula meeting in May on the protection of IDPs,
co-chaired by Chile and Argentina, which I had the
privilege to address and during which the issue of
internal displacement and threats to international peace
and security were tackled.
We started 2014 with an unprecedented peak in the
number of persons forcibly displaced within their own
countries due to armed conflict, generalized violence
or human rights violations ‑ 33.3 million internally
displaced persons, the highest figure ever recorded.
In many countries, IDPs are also displaced by natural
disasters, further compounding existing vulnerabilities.
Women and girls account for some half of the world’s
IDP population.
Since the 1990s, greater attention has been paid to
the rights and needs of women and girls in emergency
and post-conflict situations and to promoting gendersensitive approaches in humanitarian, development
and early recovery response. A wide range of
resolutions — for instance, the landmark resolution
1325 (2000) — but also policies, gender-mainstreaming
efforts and targeted programmes have been adopted in
this regard, and they have increasingly encompassed
internally displaced women and girls.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

The 1998 Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, which detail the specific rights of
internally displaced women and girls, have been
recognized by the General Assembly and in Security
Council resolutions. The Guiding Principles have
informed the inclusion of concrete and progressive
provisions on internally displaced women in subsequent
instruments, such as the 2006 Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region
and the 2009 African Union Kampala Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa. In 2013, I dedicated my thematic
report to the Human Rights Council to the situation
of internally displaced women, and during this debate
I would like to draw to the attention of the Security
Council to that report.
Despite such positive developments, responses to
internal displacement still do not adequately address
the specific concerns and roles of women and girls.
During situations of conflict and violence, women and
girls flee to escape arbitrary killings, rape, torture,
inhumane or degrading treatment or starvation.
They may have been the victims of such violations
themselves or seen their loved ones attacked and
abused. The experience of my mandate is that women
and girls are targeted as a means of armed conflict ‑ to
destroy and humiliate communities, to manipulate the
demographic composition of communities, for sexual
slavery including enforced concubinage, and at times
enforced sterilization. As IDPs, women experience the
various human rights challenges that are characteristic
to displacement situations and that often place IDPs
at greater risk than other affected populations. Such
challenges include the loss of livelihoods and key
documentation, as well as the lack of effective access
to a number of important rights and services.
In addition, internally displaced women often
face double discrimination, based on being both
an IDP and a woman, and experience human rights
challenges due to the intersection of gender with other
factors such as age, group affiliation such as minority
status, disability and civil or socioeconomic situations.
Displaced women often have to assume new gender
roles that further expose them to gender-based violence,
including physical violence and trafficking. Those
roles include being the only breadwinners and taking
on the increased burden of care for extended families.
Internally displaced women risk their lives, safety
and physical integrity to protect their husbands and
families. They have told me, “If we let their husbands

S/PV.7289

and male children fetch firewood, food or water, they
will be killed, whereas we may be raped but spared
death”.
Other specific protection concerns for internally
displaced women include inequitable access to
assistance and psychosocial support, education,
training and livelihoods; poor reproductive health care;
and exclusion from decision-making processes. The
fact that more IDPs tend to live in urban rather than
camp or rural settings also raises additional challenges
that have detrimental impacts on women and girls. I
first visited Côte d’Ivoire a year after the end of the
post-electoral violence. Many IDPs had found refuge in
urban areas, including girls who had been impregnated
during displacement and could not go back to their
communities as a result. However, the inability of
IDPs to continue renting their shelters in those urban
centres, once the cash grant they received to enable
them to stay in urban areas ran out. pushed the most
vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to
the outskirts of the city. Many displaced women and
girls, particularly those belonging to minorities, are at
risk of statelessness.
Pre-existing patterns of discrimination in many
of those contexts are exacerbated during conflict and
contribute to violations of women’s rights to housing,
land and property. For instance, during my visit to Sri
Lanka, I was struck by the fact that many IDP women
either lacked proper documentation to their land or had
documents in the name of their deceased husbands or
fathers, preventing them from accessing their land.
To respond to those intricate problems with farreaching consequences, we need to look at long-term
solutions. Displacement is not just a humanitarian issue,
but also an issue of building peace, and constitutes a longterm development challenge with profound political,
economic, environmental and security implications.
If left unaddressed, protracted displacement generates
further marginalization, inequality, fragility and
vulnerability and erodes women’s resilience.
Displacement can overwhelm the institutional
capacities of affected States, which are already dealing
with major conflicts or disasters. Many States have
neither policy frameworks or coordination systems in
place to respond to internal displacement, nor a set of
procedures to bring quick assistance to populations
made extremely vulnerable from one day to another as
they have lost livelihoods, social protection and have
gone through traumatic experiences. States also lack

14-592047/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

comprehensive IDP registration systems by age and
gender.
More needs to be done if we are to respond adequately
to the specific protection concerns of IDP women. Data
collection disaggregated by sex, age, location and other
key indicators is critical for effective advocacy and the
development of programmes to respond to the specific
needs of IDP women at all stages of displacement,
irrespective of the cause of displacement. National and
international efforts to collect, update, analyse and
disseminate both quantitative and qualitative data on
IDPs, including those outside of camps, displacementaffected communities and communities at risk of
displacement should be strengthened.
A more preventive approach to sexual and genderbased violence in the context of internal displacement
is also essential. In that regard, gender-sensitive
training should be provided more systematically to
police and military forces, judiciary personnel and
social workers. A stronger focus on prevention is also
required within the households and communities of
the internally displaced, including engaging men and
boys in those prevention and protection efforts. States
should take all measures to combat impunity for sexual
and gender-based violence, including by investigating
and holding perpetrators accountable. Efforts to reduce
exposure to sexual violence also entails ensuring that
survivors have access to appropriate support, including
reproductive health care and psychosocial services.
Ensuring access to justice and accountability
mechanisms is key when addressing internal
displacement with a gender lens. In addition to
promoting access to criminal and civil justice systems
for IDP women, it is also essential to consider how their
concerns can be addressed through transitional justice
measures such as truth and reconciliation commissions
and reparations. Donor accountability for genderequality programming for IDPs is essential and entails
more effective integration of gender issues into donor
practices.
I was heartened by the resilience of IDP women
I met in Ukraine. Many of them were volunteering to
help other displaced persons. Meaningful participation
by IDP women and girls in the development,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of laws,
policies, programmes and activities that affect their
lives at all stages of displacement is key in the response
to internal displacement. IDP women, as individuals,
have the right to make free and informed decisions
8/90

28/10/2014

concerning the resolution of their displacement on the
basis of adequate and appropriately communicated
information, participate fully in building peace and
in planning and management of their return, local
integration or resettlement elsewhere. The participation
and leadership of IDP women in finding durable
solutions that address their very specific concerns is
critical.
I would like to thank again Argentina for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Beyani for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Allami.
Ms. Allami: I am here for my friends and colleagues
Samira Salih Al-Nuaimi and Umaima Al-Jebara, who
were recently killed defending women’s rights in Iraq;
Razan Zaitouneh, who was abducted for documenting
human rights violations in Syria; and all activists who
risk their lives daily to make women and peace and
security not just a resolution, but a reality.Concrete
steps are needed to implement the entire women and
peace and security agenda in all settings. I speak on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, and in my capacity as Founder and
Director of the Women for Progress Centre in Iraq.
Displacement is a cause and consequence of
conflict. In my daily work I see how displaced women
and girls are affected when they are forced to flee.
Many are traumatized by the violence. Imagine fleeing
because your daughter is at risk of being kidnapped,
forced to marry a militant fighter or trafficked into
sexual slavery. Today must be about women and girls
and responding to their rights and needs, promoting
their rights, leadership and voice.
We in civil society echo their voices in reporting to
the Security Council that we have seen no significant
change in the areas that would have the biggest impact.
That includes in the efforts of the United Nations and
Member States to end gender inequality, stop supplying
arms that exacerbate the damage caused in wars, insist
on women’s inclusion in negotiations, consult with
women and support and invest in women’s human
rights and civil society.
I want to address three key interconnected ways
to overcome this inaction: first, the importance of
women’s leadership and participation; secondly, the
need for gender-sensitive and multisectoral responses

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

to protection efforts and humanitarian assistance;
and, thirdly, women’s role in conflict prevention and
in combating State and non-State violence, including
violent extremism and terrorism.
First, women must fully participate and be
consulted systematically in decision-making across all
displacement settings, in humanitarian programming
and, of course, in the broader political, security and
peace processes. Supporting women’s civil society
and human rights defenders is key, both politically
and financially. National Governments, international
actors and donors must invest in community-led longterm solutions and provide assistance and training to a
diverse range of grassroots civil society organizations.
Secondly, it is vital that protection efforts and
humanitarian assistance be gender-sensitive and
multisectoral, in accordance with international law.
Women and girls, including those displaced, must have
access to livelihood opportunities, the full range of
health-care services, including sexual and reproductive
health, and education to give them greater control
over their lives. Much attention is being focused on
providing immediate humanitarian assistance to
internally displaced people in Iraq. However, there are
gaps in addressing the long-term impact on them.
Recently, two young Yazidi women were rescued
when they were bought from Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria fighters. They had been passed from one group
of fighters to another across the country and repeatedly
raped. They were returned to their community, where
they have no access to health or psychosocial services.
Local religious leaders assured them they would not
be further harmed, but no emphasis is being placed on
addressing their long-term trauma or stigma.
Using a survivor-centred approach, we must also
build the capacity of law enforcement agencies to
respond to sexual and gender-based violence, including
in displaced settings. Women must be recruited to
senior policing roles. All perpetrators, including in
South Sudan and Somalia, where sexual violence by all
sides of the conflict is at horrific levels, must be held to
account under national and international human rights
and humanitarian law.
Thirdly, conflict prevention lies at the core of
the women and peace and security agenda and all
solutions must address the root causes of conflict
and
displacement.
That
includes
addressing
disarmament and demilitarization, gender inequalities

S/PV.7289

and investing in women’s human rights, equality,
economic empowerment and education and womenled civil society. Militarization and arms proliferation
fuel conflict by directly and indirectly killing and
impacting civilians. We condemn the use of violence
against women, girls and all civilians, including in
Gaza, Syria and Iraq. The number and conditions of
women internally displaced persons and refugees has
been exacerbated by both State and non-State actors. In
Iraq and the region, violent extremists are deliberately
displacing communities. Women must be supported
in their efforts to connect formal and informal justice
systems and to engage moderate tribal and religious
leaders on women’s rights.
Iraq’s national security strategy, currently being
developed, must fully incorporate the role of women
within it and reflect the commitments in its national
action plan pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000). Efforts to
combat extremism must address the pre-existing threats
to women and girls embedded in laws and social norms.
The Iraqi Government must uphold its duty to ensure
that the legal framework protects women and girls
and ensures their full participation. The Government
must abolish every form of discrimination, in line with
international obligations, including passing domestic
violence legislation and abolishing and criminalizing
child marriage and marriages outside of the court. Iraq
must guarantee the independence of its institutions,
in particular its National Human Rights Commission,
and ensure that they can operate free from political
influence. Legal aid for marginalized and vulnerable
groups must be funded and institutionalized.
All the aforementioned requires international
pressure and domestic political will. We call on the
Security Council and all Member States to use a
gender lens to address the challenges faced by women
who have been forcibly displaced, as well as across
all peace and security efforts, and to recommit to
working towards the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. Next year marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). Let us make 2015 the year for progressive
action, for senior political leadership, for strengthened
women’s participation and leadership opportunities
and, once and for all, for the consistent implementation
of all women and peace and security commitments. In
conclusion, all human beings have the right to be safe
and to live a life in dignity.

14-592049/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Allami for her testimonial and statement.
Members of the Council have before them the text
of a draft presidential statement on the topic of today’s
meeting. I thank the Council members for their valuable
contributions to the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/21.
It is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important debate
today and for your personal commitment to this issue. I
also warmly thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Mr. Mulet and
Mr. Beyani for their compelling and sobering briefings.
I would particularly like to welcome Ms. Suaad Allami
from Iraq and to thank her for sharing her experiences
with the Council today. I also thank everyone who has
come to this meeting to demonstrate their interest and
commitment. Their presence here is an encouragement
to all of us to do more.
Today, one year on from the adoption of resolution
2122 (2013) and one year before the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we consider the
strides that we have made and what remains to be done
to make our commitments real on this vital agenda. I
welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693),
which demonstrates that attention to women and peace
and security is increasing across the board. Over a third
of those included in Colombia’s peace talks are women,
as we have heard. That figure rises to 75 per cent in the
Philippines.
We welcome the dedicated consideration of
gender issues in such processes since last year. There
are more trained investigators of sexual and genderbased violence deployed than ever before. This year,
an unprecedented 40 per cent of ambassadors at the
Security Council are women. However, that progress
is incremental. Sadly, those are exceptions to the rule.
The fact that we still have to fight to include sufficient
gender expertise in our peacekeeping operations, most
recently in the Central African Republic and Mali, that
we still have to battle to have just one women included

10/90

28/10/2014

in most peace processes, and that Governments and
armed groups continue to violate and to abuse women’s
rights, including by perpetrating sexual and genderbased vilence, makes clear that a real commitment
to women and peace and security is still piecemeal.
The peacekeeping review and the global study are
two opportunities to galvanize action on those issues
but change must start now. The report of the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict will also be
published shortly. We encourage all actors to implement
its recommendations.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21, which
we have adopted today, has four key elements. First,
it reiterates core principles of resolution 2122 (2013)
with regard to women’s leadership and gender equality
and the working methods of the Council. Secondly,
it calls on Member States to enhance protection and
services for displaced women and girls and for sex
and age-disaggregated data to inform policy and
programming. Thirdly, it highlights the tremendous
impact of violent extremism on women and urges States
to protect and to engage with them in addressing that
trend. Finally, it calls for all actors to review and to
reinvigorate their commitments ahead of the 2015 highlevel review.
We are living through a period of unusual
instability. According to the Institute for Economics
and Peace, only 11 countries in the world are not
linked to conflict in some way. For the first time
since the Second World War, the number of refugees,
asylum seekers and internally displaced persons has
exceeded 50 million. If displaced people had their own
country, it would be the twenty-fourth most populous
in the world. That is a staggering statistic. The
United Kingdom recognizes the particular hardships
faced by refugees and internally displaced persons,
including the additional burden and vulnerability of
women and girls. We have provided the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with
over $180 million in the period 2011-2014. We have
committed over $1 billion to helping people affected by
conflict in Syria, while in Iraq we provide $40 million
in humanitarian aid, $30 million of which supports
international non-governmental organizations, United
Nations agencies and the International Committee of
the Red Cross. That includes supporting programmes to
prevent and respond to sexual violence — for example,
by establishing women-and-children centres to provide
group counselling, as well as providing safe spaces for
children.
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

In crises like those in Syria and Iraq, many of the
most vulnerable households are headed by women,
who often lack access to basic necessities to meet
their needs and those of their children. The United
Kingdom has provided cash assistance to help female
refugees in Jordan pay their rent and receive livelihood
support. Pregnant women are particularly at risk. We
are providing essential equipment to new mothers
and pregnant women in Iraq and reproductive health
services for women in Jordan. We also provide financial
support for vulnerable Syrian women who are thought
to be at risk of coerced marriage.
Gender-sensitive programming must be increased
alongside access to international protection, health and
education services and livelihood activities in conflictaffected States. We must do that for all displaced
persons, particularly women and girls. The international
community must also step up its efforts to address the
root causes of conflict. That requires concerted longterm effort and financing. The benefits of that are clear.
Finally, we must put women and girls at the
forefront of our approach to tackling violent extremism
and defeating the extremist ideology that underpins the
barbaric acts of groups such as Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We must not allow
the crackdown on women’s rights — from prohibiting
girls’ education to enslaving women’s bodies — to go
unheeded. Women must be part of the solution.
We have a formidable task before us. I am confident,
however, that through our shared purpose and with
effective follow-up, we can convert the expertise and
goodwill in the Chamber to greater protection for some
of the most vulnerable people around the world and
create space for women to be full and equal partners
in all endeavours to strengthen peace and security. We
must redouble all our efforts in the important year that
lies ahead.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate.
I would also like to warmly thank for their briefings
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet; the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, Mr. Chaloka Beyani; and Ms. Suaad
Allami, a defender of human rights in Iraq. Their
commitment is a source of inspiration and has won
admiration from us all.

S/PV.7289

The topic of women in conflict is a high priority
for France, as demonstrated by the presence among us
of a large delegation of French senators. I would like to
welcome and to thank them for their active commitment
to this issue.
In addressing the challenges posed by today’s
topic, we must be demanding and ambitious. The
high-level review of sanctions, which is drawing to a
close, the high-level review of peacekeeping missions,
which is beginning, and the high-level review for
resolution 1325 (2000), which has been announced,
are all opportunities to advance the women and peace
and security agenda. It is a cross-cutting priority that
concerns nearly 80 per cent of Council resolutions, and
therefore deserves the same attention as other topics
related to peace and security. Women — and we cannot
overstress this — are key players in the maintenance
of peace and security, not just for the Council but also
through peace negotiations or within peacekeeping
operations. We will continue to emphasize that to the
United Nations mediators, especially with respect to
Syria. In that context, I wish to welcome the adoption
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support of the gender strategy for
2014-2018, as well as the activities of UN-Women in
that regard. I also welcome the adoption of an ambitious
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21), thanks to the
efforts of the United Kingdom.
The attention paid by the United Nations to women’s
issues should also be felt on the ground, including in
countries in conflict. We too often hear that, in times of
crisis or emergencies, security issues take precedence
over those for women. However, there can be no
security and peace without the security and protection
of women, in particular the most vulnerable — those
who are forcibly displaced. Violence and human rights
violations committed against women refugees or
displaced women cannot be considered inevitable as
collateral damage to conflict. That is unacceptable.
Those violations are too numerous, frequent and
intolerable to be minimized or to take a back seat in the
Council’s concerns.
The upheavals of the global security environment
with the rise of violent extremism and terrorism and
the implosion of States or health challenges, like Ebola,
have contributed to an unprecedented level of forced
displacement — unprecedented since the Second
World War. Around 32,000 persons were internally
displaced every day in 2013. Three quarters of them

14-5920411/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

were women and children. In Syria and Iraq, the year
2013 was characterized by a dramatic increase in
violations — rapes, forced early marriages, prostitution
and forced labour were daily occurrences in the lives of
women and girls in regions controlled by Daesh. The
actions of human rights advocates, such as those of
Ms. Suaad Allami in Iraq, become even more critical.
In Syria, the persecution of women by the regime,
the bombing of civilian areas by the Syrian army
and the multiple restrictions placed on the most basic
economic and social rights endanger the survival of
whole families and cause 2.5 million refugees to take
to the road, over three quarters of whom are women
and children. Women who have fled are all the more
vulnerable to various forms of exploitation, sex
trafficking, domestic violence and poverty. Access
to gynaecological and health care becomes very
difficult. To try to meet the needs of women in the
region, since 2013 France has been supporting local
non-governmental organization projects to provide aid
to Syrian women who are displaced within Syria or
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries, including
psychological or medical support for victims of sexual
violence. We regret, once again, that the French draft
resolution that would have referred those crimes to the
International Criminal Court was not adopted.
In the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan,
massive displacements of populations have led to the
increased vulnerability of women and girls to sexual
violence and all forms of violence committed by
armed forces and groups. Deploying a gender adviser
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) represents a step forward in the fight
against sexual violence. France, which has mobilized
along those lines for MINUSCA, requests that all
resolutions establishing or extending peacekeeping
operations include relevant provisions for the protection
and participation of women. We must also ensure that
missions report on violations in their reports, as we
recall the case of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in the Sudan.
The armed forces and groups in countries in conflict
are a daily threat to women and girls who are refugees
or have been displaced. In that context, the entry into
force in December of the Arms Trade Treaty is a crucial
step. France calls for the full implementation of the
Arms Trade Treaty, including the provision on gender,

12/90

28/10/2014

so as to better take into account the risk of the use of
arms against women and children.
It is essential that the rights of refugee and
displaced women be guaranteed in all phases of their
displacement, whether in camps or outside them.
Unfortunately, various services remain unattainable
for refugees and displaced women and children.
Furthermore, severe insecurity in some camps, for
example in South Sudan, prevents women from
accessing basic services such as water and food, while
other services remain inaccessible.
In terms of access to education, too often the
path to school is too dangerous for girls, who are
therefore fewer than boys in attending school in times
of conflict. As for access to health services, few
displaced or refugee women have the right to sexual
and reproductive health services. In that context, we
welcome the work of the United Nations Population
Fund in providing reproductive health services to more
than 67,000 people in Syria. Finally, it is crucial that
refugee and displaced women have access to justice,
which, as we know, remains the lynchpin of any postconflict stabilization effort.
National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for prosecuting and punishing
perpetrators of sexual violence. However, when States
fail in that responsibility the International Criminal
Court (ICC) must play its role. The Court has been
seized of cases in Darfur, the Central African Republic,
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During
the open debate of 23 October that was organized by the
Argentine presidency (see S/PV.7285) the importance
of effective follow-up to the Court’s decisions was
underscored.
France welcomes the regular exchanges between the
Court and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We encourage
deeper exchanges and urge the reports of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to take fully
into account judicial developments.
France will continue to mobilize to combat
impunity in cases of perpetrators of violence against
women through the ICC and national tribunals and
through the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda as a cross-cutting priority of the
Council. That is our joint responsibility. The Council
can count on France to remain on the front line of that
fight.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and for
conveying the message of the Secretary-General. I also
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and of Ms. Suaad Allami, whose briefings
inspire us to redouble the Council’s efforts.
I commend the Argentine presidency of the Security
Council for its choice of topic for this open debate, at
a time when the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) worldwide has reached a
level not seen since the Second World War. I thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for facilitating the
negotiations on presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21,
just adopted by the Council. Luxembourg fully aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
Today’s open debate marks the beginning of a period
that it is hoped will be decisive in the advancement of
women worldwide. The year 2015 will indeed mark the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and allow us to take stock of the situation of
women with respect to peace and security. The review
of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, on the occasion of its twentieth
anniversary, will allow us to examine the progress
made and the challenges to the full promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of women. Finally, the
post-2015 development agenda and the sustainable
development goals should guarantee that women, as
agents of change, will play their deserved role in human
development.
Conflicts do not create new situations of
discrimination. They merely highlight and accentuate
those existing in peacetime. In that context, there is
no better illustration than the situation of refugee and
internally displaced women. Day after day, the news
coming from Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia and South
Sudan — the latter two visited by the Security Council
in August — illustrates the sad state of affairs. For
my part, I cannot forget the poignant testimony of
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
who went for the first time to South Sudan early this
month and last week provided an account to the Council

S/PV.7289

of the tragic situation of internally displaced women in
the Вentiu camp (see S/PV.7282).
Refugee and internally displaced women are among
the most vulnerable populations; their rights to security,
sexual and reproductive health and education are
systematically trampled. Sexual violence in and around
IDP camps is endemic. Responsible for providing
for their families, women must often brave several
checkpoints in search of water and food. Left to their
own fate, they lack any means to defend themselves
against attackers. Fear of sexual violence can also
promote early marriage, as is the case for example in
Somalia. Those arrangements are supposed to protect
young girls, but have harmful consequences in terms of
health and access to education.
Refugee and displaced women face not only
sexual violence; access to education, justice and health
services represents some of the challenges contained
in the concept note of the Argentine presidency
(S/2014/731, annex). There can be no simple answer to
this complex situation; a holistic approach is needed.
The joint commitment of Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society is required.
I will address four areas that I consider priority. We
must put an end to impunity for perpetrators of violence
against women and girls. Without credible judicial and
security systems, the perpetrators of those crimes will
pursue their malfeasance. The international community
must support the capacity-building of Member States
in the short and long term. Innovative initiatives exist
and must be supported. I am thinking primarily of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Justice Rapid Response
initiative. Luxembourg actively supports those two
initiatives. I also reaffirm my country’s full support for
the International Criminal Court — an institution that
strengthens the fight against impunity and plays a very
important role.
Condemning the perpetrators of crimes is only one
aspect of justice; ensuring that victims receive genuine
compensation for the harm they have suffered is equally
essential. In that context, we welcome the Guidance
Note of the Secretary-General on Reparations for
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence that was published
in June by UN-Women and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Thirdly, women’s participation in all discussions
related to their specific rights and needs must be

14-5920413/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

guaranteed in the decision-making structures of refugee
and IDP camps, in the development of humanitarian
programmes and in peace negotiations. Women’s
participation is a necessary condition to guarantee the
success of any measure taken. To that end, we must
strengthen and support the role of civil society and of
women defenders of human rights.
My fourth point is to recall the role that the Security
Council must continue to play in this area, including
during its field visits. Our recent visit to South Sudan
and Somalia allowed the Council to meet with women’s
civil society organizations. During its visit to the Great
Lakes region in October 2013, the Security Council also
met with internally displaced women in the Mugunga
III camp, near the city of Goma. That practice should
be maintained.
As I said earlier, the year 2015 will be an important
one for women throughout the world. We eagerly await
the results of the global review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) that the Security Council
requested in resolution 2122 (2013) and that Luxembourg
supports through an important programme implemented
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We sincerely hope that we can collectively live
up to the expectations to which promised to respond
almost 15 years ago. Let us ensure that this fifteenth
anniversary does not become an opportunity for
complacency, but that it encourages us to redouble
our efforts to end discrimination against women in
conflict and to thereby guarantee more lasting peace
and security.
Ms. Jones (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Mr. Edmond Mulet, Mr. Chaloka
Beyani and Ms. Suaad Allami for their briefings, their
dedication to the peace and security of women around
the world, and their courage. We also welcome the
adoption today of the presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2014/21.
The issue of women and peace and security has
captured our attention anew as violent extremist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
conduct targeted attacks against women and girls daily
in Iraq and Syria. That terrorist group brazenly takes
credit for the abduction, enslavement, rape, forced
marriage and sale of several thousand Yazidi and other
minority women and girls, rationalizing that abhorrent

14/90

28/10/2014

treatment by claiming falsely and outrageously that such
acts are sanctioned by religion. ISIL tortured and then
publicly executed Iraqi human rights defender Samira
Salih al-Nuaimi for bravely speaking out against the
group, even in the face of repeated threats to her life.
Just last week, another Syrian woman was stoned to
death. We strongly condemn the treatment of women
and children as spoils of war and their subjection to
horrific physical and sexual violence, intimidation and
deprivation of liberty.
For the United States, focusing on the issue of
women and peace and security through the lens of
forced displacement is particularly appropriate. Forced
displacement has reached an unprecedented level.
Some 51.2 million people, 80 per cent of them women
and children, were displaced by the end of 2013. This
crisis cannot be solved without holistically addressing
and integrating the four women and peace and security
pillars — protection, participation, conflict prevention
and relief and recovery — into the work of the Council
as we seek to fulfil our mandate to foster peace and
security.
I should like to focus on three elements:
participation, access to health and education, and
economic opportunity and the rule of law.
Participation means more than just voting or going
to school. We need more women leaders at the national
and local levels represented throughout various sectors
of society — women like Claudia Paz y Paz, the first
woman Attorney General of Guatemala, or women like
those in the Second Peshmerga Battalion, an all-female
battalion fighting on the front lines against ISIL. Major
General Kristin Lund was the first woman appointed
to command a United Nations peacekeeping force,
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,
bringing the United Nations closer to its goal this year
of including more women in peacekeeping missions
and leadership positions.
The participation of women as political leaders is
vital, yet the percentage of female parliament members
globally remains static at below 22 per cent. There are
some bright spots. Nearly 3,000 women candidates ran
in Iraqi elections this year — the greatest number ever
to do so there. But as the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/693) points out, election-related violence
against women remains a serious concern, as does
women’s freedom of political participation. There was
a horrifying string of sexual assaults on women during
Egypt’s inaugural celebrations for its new president,
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

including a mass attack on a 19-year-old student, who
was stripped in Cairo’s Tahrir Square. In the Horn of
Africa, deadly attacks on parliamentarians in Somalia,
including women, must stop.
We have seen that the meaningful participation
of women and girls in decision-making, programme
design and implementation, and leadership is critical
in humanitarian crises. Just as important is the sense
of empowerment that women experience because they
are given a role in decision-making on issues that
affect lives. In Nepal, local women’s organizations
built responsive programmes by consulting Bhutanese
refugee women with disabilities on effective genderbased violence programmes. That led to the creation of
vocational training classes that better suited their needs
and significantly improved their lives.
But to participate and show leadership, women need
to be healthy and educated. As noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, maternal mortality rates in conflict
and post-conflict countries are 60 per cent higher than
the global rates. Access to health and education services
is even more essential for displaced communities. That
includes women such as those in the Yarmouk refugee
camp in Syria, who face desperate conditions and
limited access to food, safe water and medical supplies.
Less than two weeks ago, the International Committee
of the Red Cross was able to deliver medical aid to
Yarmouk for the first time in a year. The hospital there
is no longer able to provide the emergency medical
treatment required for women and newborns. There has
been an increase in miscarriages due to food shortages
and poor nutrition for pregnant women and due to the
collapse of prenatal care under the siege.
Education can mitigate the effects of conflict and
provide the basis for long-term economic growth and
stability. Education services for women and girls in
conflict-affected settings are essential. The United
States is working to increase equal access to education
in crisis and conflict environments for 15 million
learners by 2015. For example, in the Darfuri refugee
camps in Chad, we are ensuring that secondary
education programmes are accessible to boys and girls
alike.
At the same time, we need to continue to strive
to break multigenerational cycles of poverty and we
must therefore focus on equipping young girls with the
tools necessary to escape need. The United States is
taking action. On 9 October, we announced an initial
funding of $29 million for the SPRING Initiative, a

S/PV.7289

partnership with the United Kingdom Government
and the Nike Foundation aimed at accelerating the
economic empowerment of girls. The Initiative will
help businesses bring to market products that enable
girls to learn, earn, invest and save, thereby improving
the lives of up to 200,000 girls over the next five years
and, we hope, millions more by 2030.
If women are to play their rightful role in every
society and culture, equal protection under the
law through institutional and structural reforms is
essential. That means making sure that women know
their rights and have real and practical access to justice
and that those who target women are held to account in
credible and transparent processes. That is true not just
with respect to violence and abuse. In some societies,
women often become family breadwinners but lack the
same rights and freedoms as male heads of household.
At a time when the world is becoming increasingly
aware of radicalized young people joining violent
extremist groups, that imbalance must be addressed.
Young people who have grown up with strong female
role models and outside of poverty are less likely to
embrace extremism.
One way to address such challenges is to bolster
funding for projects that support women’s empowerment.
Such investments can support crisis recovery and
stability by enabling women to contribute economically
to their families and their communities. We urge Member
States to invest seriously in those efforts, particularly
in programmes that support female-led households in
displacement and post-conflict settings. In a similar
vein, unequal citizenship laws make women and their
children more vulnerable. While many Member States,
in line with resolution 2122 (2013), are reforming laws
that discriminate against women in nationality matters,
at least 25 countries maintain laws that do not allow
women to confer nationality on their children.
To conclude, we have done a lot, since the Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) 14 years ago, to advance
the role of women in peace and security. I mentioned
some of the areas in which we still need to make
progress to protect women and girls and to empower
them to reach their full potential. This is a vital and
cross-cutting issue in all of the Council’s work. Against
that backdrop, the United States welcomes the 2015
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
opportunity to assess current programming, identify
implementation gaps and address emerging problems.
Considering that the review will run concurrently with

14-5920415/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

our own national action plan review in 2015, we hope
that the processes will complement and support each
other, reminding us how far we have come and of how
much remains to be done.
As Secretary Kerry said at a summit on the
Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative in London in
June, no society will know peace if it leaves half its
population behind. Women’s voices are a critical part
of coming to terms with the past by investing in a
shared future that rejects conflict and promotes dignity.
Countless women have been subjected to rape and
sexual violence as tactics of war. Now we must enlist
all women and empower them as agents of peace.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to express my
gratitude to all the briefers for their detailed statements
on this important topic.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted 15 years ago
and has lost none of its relevance. It provides guidance
on increasing the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict, in post-conflict
reconstruction and even in the protection of women
during conflict.
We read carefully the Secretary-General’s report
prepared for this meeting (S/2014/693). We share the
concern regarding new trends of growing numbers of
acts of violence against women and violations of their
rights, including those related to terrorism, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime. Women
are usually victims of violence during armed conflict.
The killing and wounding of women and children,
including through indiscriminate or excessive use of
force against civilians, is a serious concern. Today that
also happens in Europe. It is inadmissible to ignore such
crimes or justify them as inevitable collateral damage.
One guarantee of the effectiveness of Council
action on resolution 1325 (2000) is its work in the
context of specific mandates and its consideration of
women’s issues in the context of the maintenance of
peace and security and with respect to those situations
included on the Council’s agenda. The issue of violence
against women comes under the authority not only of
the Security Council but also of the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women.
The efforts of those various bodies will obtain the best
results insofar as they respond to the principle of the

16/90

28/10/2014

division of labour and the non-duplication of authority.
We therefore continue to doubt the advisability of
including in the report appraisals of situations of women
that are not directly linked to issues of international
peace and security.
Regarding the idea of drafting national plans of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
we think such plans should be prepared on a voluntary
basis, first of all by those States that are in a situation
of armed conflict or in post-conflict peacebuilding. We
call for an approach to that issue that takes into account
the specificities of the situation in each particular
country.
The rise in the numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women
and children, means there is a need to take effective
measures to protect those individuals. we express our
satisfaction that the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2014/21) pays due attention to that very
issue. We are convinced that there is a strong advantage
offered by the participation of women, refugees and
internally displaced persons in various aspects of
resolving armed conflict and post-conflict rebuilding.
Their active participation is a means of preventing and
overcoming violence against women and girls.
A year ago, the Russian Federation was faced with
the task of providing massive assistance to refugees
from south-eastern Ukraine. Currently, approximately
830,000 Ukrainian citizens are hosted on Russian
territory, 450,000 of whom have requested official
status, which would allow their extended stay in Russia
and grant them the status of refugees or temporary
refugees. The overwhelming majority of them are
women and children. Given the continuing shelling of
residential areas in south-east Ukraine, the numbers
that I have cited could increase.
Refugees are hosted in 66 Russian regions.
Specialized emergency-service personnel work with
them and provide medical and psychological aid. Free
meals are organized, and one-time allowances are
paid. Employment specialists help newcomers to find
jobs. Spaces are made for children in kindergartens,
schools and institutions of higher learning. Necessary
medical assistance is provided to children and pregnant
women, among others. There are 24-hour hotlines.
According to representatives in Russia of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Refugees, the Russian
Government is fulfilling 100 per cent of the refugees’

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

needs. Volunteers and non-governmental organization
are lending a hand as well.

who are unaccompanied, pregnant, disabled or aged
face particular challenges.

It is encouraging that preparations for next year’s
celebration of the fifteenth anniversary of the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) have
now started to take shape. We hope that the Council’s
request in resolution 2122 (2013) for a global high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
will galvanize States’ efforts to fill gaps and identify
priorities for further action in ensuring the equitable
and full participation of women in the prevention and
settlement of armed conflicts. For that process to be
effective, all States must participate actively. Taking
into account the position of all States, and not just of
Security Council members, can ensure that further
measures regarding women and peace and security
are genuinely effective. We call for a transparent and
open process of preparation for the review, in close
cooperation and consultation with States. We await with
interest the results of the review, which the SecretaryGeneral is to present during his yearly thematic report
to the Council.

Responding effectively to the problems faced
by refugee and displaced women requires a holistic
approach that combines preventive strategies, responses
and solutions. It is also essential that gender perspectives
be integrated into policies across all sectors related to
refugees and displaced persons in accordance with
the relevant international law, including international
refugee law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In order to be effective,
such policies must address all four pillars of the women
abd peace and security agenda, namely, participation,
conflict prevention, protection and relief and recovery.
They must also ensure that refugee and displaced
women are involved in all protection, prevention,
participation and relief and recovery efforts.

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Argentina for convening this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2014/731, annex) provided
to guide our discussions. I also thank our briefers for
their informative briefings. It is befitting that your
delegation, Madam, should preside at a debate on the
subject of women and peace and security, considering
the fact that Argentina was a non-permanent member
of the Security Council when landmark resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, in October 2000.

In October 2009, the African Union adopted
the Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, also known as
the Kampala Convention. That landmark instrument,
which entered into force on 6 December 2012, marks a
significant step towards strengthening the national and
regional normative and legal frameworks for offering
protection and assistance to displaced persons in Africa.

The presidential statement we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2014/21) underscores the determination of
the Council to take forward the women and peace and
security agenda, with a welcome focus on the situation
of displaced women. It builds on the gains of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1889 (2009) and reaffirms
the leadership role of the Council in addressing issues
pertaining to the welfare of women in situations of
distress.

Nigeria embraces the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, which stands as an important
international framework for the protection of
internally displaced persons. Nigeria has ratified key
international and regional instruments on refugee
protection, including the 1951 Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, as
well as the Organization of African Unity’s 1969
Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa. We have passed into law the key
international and African refugee conventions through
an act of parliament establishing a national commission
for refugees and providing a legal and administrative
framework for refugee management in Nigeria. It also
sets guidelines for determining the status of refugees
in the country.

According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), women and
girls comprise about half of any refugee, internally
displaced or stateless population. UNHCR has also
determined that in many societies women and girls face
specific risks related to their gender and that those risks
can be exacerbated in situations of displacement. The
UNHCR further notes that displaced women and girls

In line with its commitment to protecting and
assisting displaced persons, our Federal Government
has accelerated the process of adopting a national
policy that will define a framework for its actions in
that regard, part of its efforts to fulfil its obligations
under the Kampala Convention. It also signifies our
commitment to respecting, protecting and promoting
the human rights of displaced persons in Nigeria.

14-5920417/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

Finally, Nigeria supports the global study on women
and peace and security that the Secretary-General has
commissioned. It should tell us what we have achieved
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
what remains to be done. We look forward to the highlevel review in 2015, and we take this opportunity to
re-state our commitment to the agenda for women and
peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes Argentina’s initiative in
convening today’s open debate. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mulet for their briefings. China also listened
carefully to the statements by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
and the representatives of civil society.
Next year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. Thanks to the joint efforts of
United Nations Member States, agencies and regional
and subregional organizations, positive progress has
been made in its implementation. The international
community has achieved significant results in its
efforts to provide comprehensive protection for the
security, rights and interests of women, and to enhance
the unique role that women play in the area of peace
and security.
Meanwhile, the current international situation
is becoming increasingly complex and challenging,
as various regional conflicts have arisen one after
the other. In many areas, civilians, and women in
particular, are being displaced by war and conflict.
They have to deal with various kinds of violence and
violations by themselves, without any assistance, and
therefore urgently need the international community’s
support. We must therefore work together and in close
coordination in order to strengthen the comprehensive
protection of women in conflict.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
following three points. First, the protection of women
in conflict should be addressed so as to deal both with
its symptoms and its underlying causes, and it calls for a
holistic approach. The international community should
take effective measures to provide a comprehensive
guarantee of security to women and ensure that they
receive humanitarian relief. At the same time, we

18/90

28/10/2014

should also vigorously enhance the political process,
promote national reconciliation and settle differences
through dialogue and consultation, aimed at creating
a safe and stable external environment conducive to
protecting women’s rights and interests. At every stage
of the peace process, women’s full right to participation
and decision-making should be ensured so that a system
of guarantees can be established to protect their rights
and interests.
Secondly, the United Nations agencies should
strengthen their coordination and cooperation in
support of national efforts to protect women in conflict.
The countries involved bear the primary responsibility
for protecting women in conflict, and the international
community should fully respect that leading role, while
providing constructive support based on the needs of
the countries concerned. The Security Council should
coordinate more closely with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council and UN-Women, based on their respective
mandates, so that they can carry out their various
functions synergistically. Regional and subregional
organizations should also play a full role.
Thirdly, comprehensive economic and social
development and the eradication of the root causes of
conflicts are prerequisites for guaranteeing the rights
and interests of women. They can also advance women’s
empowerment and improve their positive contribution
to international peace and security, in order to help the
countries concerned get to work as soon as possible on
post-conflict reconstruction and the development of
women. The international community should increase
its development assistance and technical support to
developing countries, with priority being given to the
countries concerned in the area of national capacitybuilding, as well as to ensuring an adequate focus on
the complementary role played by women’s groups and
civil society as a whole.
The international community is currently
experiencing a new resurgence of terrorism in some
countries and regions; terrorism and extremism are
becoming rampant and causing enormous harm to
civilians in general and women in particular. This is
now one of the major causes of the displacement of
women, and the international community should ensure
that it pays adequate attention to the issue and makes
resolution 1325 (2000) an integral part of its response to
terrorism, taking effective measures to protect women
from the effects of terrorism and extremism, and to

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

ensure women’s participation in international efforts to
counter terrorism.
Next year the United Nations will conduct a
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), studying the lessons learned
based on Member States’ experience and practices,
and will explore effective ways to protect the rights,
interests and security of women in conflict. China
welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to initiate that
global study and will actively support and participate in
the relevant activities. We will join with all Member
States in helping to advance United Nations activities
in the area of women and peace and security to a higher
level.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): We welcome the
Argentine presidency’s convening of this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/693) and its recommendations. We also
commend the work and dedication of Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
and her team, and thank all the briefers today for their
valuable contributions.
More than 50 million people are currently displaced
around the globe, the worst levels we have seen since
the Second World War. Afghanistan, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Sudan and South Sudan — and
that list is not exhaustive — have all seen massive
numbers of people flee for their lives. Syria, with its
more than 6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs),
is the worst humanitarian crisis of this century. And in
the middle of Europe, forced displacements have also
peaked owing to Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
Accounting for half of those displaced, women
bear the physical and psychological brunt of conflict.
For many of them, as they provide subsistence for their
families, procure firewood and water and take care of
basic sanitary needs, every step outside the displacement
camps — and often even within the camps — is fraught
with very real physical dangers, including sexual
violence and rape and a heightened risk of sexually
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. Early and
forced marriages stunt the lives of many Syrian girls
living in refugee camps. The horrendous practices of
forced impregnation, human trafficking and sexual
slavery are shattering lives in areas under the control of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

S/PV.7289

We are yet to see the release of the Nigerian
schoolgirls kidnapped by Boko Haram. The illicit flow
of arms through porous borders and in defiance of arms
embargoes fuels violence and criminality and increases
the vulnerability of refugees and IDPs, even in refugee
camps and settlements. Women and children are the
primary victims of such illicit flows, as recalled earlier
today by Ms. Allami.
A number of important documents provide the
basis for addressing the problem of displacement. The
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement provide
an overarching normative framework that applies
international human rights and humanitarian law to
IDPs. The Kampala Convention, the first of its kind
in the world, binds Governments to provide legal
protection for the rights and well-being of those forced
to flee inside their home countries due to conflict,
violence, other human rights abuses or due to natural
disasters. Then there is the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), whose fifteenth anniversary will be marked next
year, and its follow-up resolutions, including resolution
2122 (2013), which includes important references to
forced displacement and its effects on women and girls.
However, as our British colleague has reminded all
of us, gaps still exist, and we need to work to close those
gaps between existing legislation and the reality on the
ground. We must continue working to improve gender
mainstreaming by providing gender-awareness training
to peacekeepers, field staff and humanitarian actors,
appointing gender advisors and developing concrete
indicators to assess the implementation of gendermainstreaming policies. Gender-disaggregated data is
key to better decision making in terms of addressing
the needs and concerns of displaced women, as Special
Rapporteur Beyani said earlier today.
Even basic improvements, such as supporting
on-camp provision of cooking fuel or water and
integrating women in the design, implementation and
review of distribution systems, can literally make a
difference between life and death, by reducing their
exposure to attacks. Developing leadership skills and
the capacity of displaced women is essential to enabling
their meaningful participation in decision-making
processes at the community level, within camps, in
non-camp and urban displacement settings, as well as in
the broader political, security, peace and reconciliation
processes. As the UN-Women Executive Director noted
earlier today, in part women and girls are the best
hope for sustainable development following conflict.

14-5920419/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

Existing good practices must be collected and made
readily available, including on engaging displaced
women in transitional justice processes.
Sexual violence in the context of displacement
affects those already most vulnerable. Last week
we heard a shocking account from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, of her
recent visit to South Sudan. Such crimes will continue
unabated as long as those who commit them know they
will walk free, no matter how many victims they leave
behind.
The importance of bringing the perpetrators of
sexual crimes against displaced women and girls
to account under national and international law is
paramount. The systematic collection of accurate,
reliable and objective information by commissions of
inquiry, fact-finding and human rights missions on the
crimes committed against displaced women and girls is
key to pursuing justice.
We note the significant advancement in
international law made by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which includes
sexual violence in the definition of crimes, in particular
as a crime against humanity. The ICC continues to be
an important mechanism in combating sexual violence
in conflict and should be used vigorously to pursue
accountability.
Greater interactions between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Sanctions
Committees, as well as the regular inclusion of violence
against displaced women and girls, including sexual
violence, as a sanctions-designation criterion would
facilitate tackling impunity for such crimes.
Systematic and delicate work needs to be done
on the ground to address the social stigma associated
with such crimes and to create an environment in
which victims of sexual violence will feel safe to
speak out. Providing gender-sensitive training to local
police, military forces and judiciary personnel, as well
as health care personnel and social workers, in the
particular context of displacement, is thus essential.
The recruitment and training of female law and order
officials and judges, and providing the necessary social
and psychological support mechanisms for displaced
women and girls should be further advanced.
On the peacekeeping and field staff side,
preventative measures must be part and parcel of
20/90

28/10/2014

predeployment training. A zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual violence and abuse must be firmly
implemented. It is unthinkable that women and girls
could suffer sexual abuse from those who are there to
protect them. The recent allegations against personnel
of the African Union Mission in Somalia are deeply
troubling and must be properly investigated. We
welcome the fact that the African Union has established
a panel to this effect.
Finally, while discussing the situation of displaced
women, we should also bear in mind non-conflict
related displacement caused by natural disasters and
climate change. We need to closely examine the gender
dimensions of such displacement in order to identify
specific vulnerabilities and good practices in gendersensitive protection, assistance, adaptation, mitigation,
relocation and reconstruction processes.
Ms. Stott Despoja (Australia): Australia thanks
Argentina for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security, and for drawing the Council’s
attention to the specific risks and challenges
faced by some of the most vulnerable members of
society — displaced women and girls. We also thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their commitment to
implementing the Council’s women and peace and
security agenda. We also thank the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons and
Ms. Suaad Allami for sharing with us the extraordinarily
harsh realities facing refugee and internally displaced
women and girls in conflict.
We commend the Council’s adoption today of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21) focused on
these issues.
The world is facing more simultaneous major crises
than at any time since the Second World War. Civilians
are direct targets in military strategies that aim to wipe
out entire populations and to terrorize civilians. Critical
civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, is
being deliberately targeted. More people are displaced
and more humanitarian workers are being targeted than
ever before.
Against this terrifying backdrop, it is women and
girls who are being disproportionately affected and
harmed. As we have heard, of the more than 51 million
displaced people around the world, the majority are
women and girls. As they flee, many face the risk of

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

violence, human rights violations and abuses, as well as
deprivation and discrimination. They face increasing
risks of preventable disease as basic services fail under
the strain of displacement and crisis. And women’s
existing vulnerabilities are exacerbated: child, early
and forced marriages increase; economic opportunities
are undermined, which increases women and girls’
exposure to sex or labour trafficking; and girls’
education is disrupted at a higher rate than that of boys,
affecting their opportunities over their lifetimes.
We must ensure that our responses address women’s
and girls’ specific vulnerabilities to sexual and genderbased violence. We must focus on improving prevention
and response efforts, while supporting the efforts
of civil society and other human rights defenders,
strengthening accountability and access to justice and
ensuring access to a full range of services — medical,
legal psychosocial and health services, including sexual
and reproductive health.
Australia recognizes this is a significant issue,
and more practical support on the ground is needed.
Since 2013 Australia has provided $3 million to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to support delivery of the Action against
Sexual and Gender-based Violence Strategy. The
Strategy coordinates actors operating on the ground
and supports civil society to implement prevention and
response strategies. We have also provided $4 million
to strengthening the International Committee of the
Red Cross response to sexual violence.
Increased exposure to sexual violence also exposes
women and girls to dire health risks. Services that enable
the safe termination of pregnancies from conflictrelated rape, and access to HIV-testing and counselling
services are fundamental to helping survivors of sexual
violence restore their lives.
In 2007, Australia supported the establishment
of the Sexual and Reproductive Health Programme
in Crisis and Post Crisis Settings — known as the
“SPRINT” initiative — and has since provided
$10.2 million to fund the initiative. Only last month,
Australia provided $2 million to the United Nations
Population Fund to support hundreds of thousands
of women and girls affected by the ongoing violence
in Iraq. We have also provided emergency obstetric
supplies for 780,000 women in Syria, as well as 57,000
dignity kits and reproductive health services.

S/PV.7289

Displaced women and girls are not merely victims.
Their leadership and participation in preventing and
resolving conflict, as well as in reconstructing postconflict societies, must be harnessed. That includes
in refugee camps and displacement settings, where
women must play a central role in the design and
delivery of gender-sensitive programmes. Over the
2012-2016 period, Australia will provide $12 million to
the United Nations peacekeeping fund. There need to
be more projects focusing on women in peacebuilding,
particularly women’s participation in political processes
and post-conflict planning.
We are still a long way from achieving the target of
spending 15 per cent of overall funds on gender equality.
More must also be done to ensure that displaced
women and girls have legal protections, and that they
can remove themselves legally from situations of
vulnerability. Citizenship rights must enable nationality
to pass from a mother to her children, and women and
girls must be provided access to identity documents.
To help relocate women and girls from danger, the
Australian Government provides specific resettlement
avenues through the Woman at Risk programme. Since
1989, Australia has resettled more than 14,500 refugee
women through that programme.
The lack of data on displacement, including sexand age-disaggregated data, affects our prevention and
response efforts. As Australia suggested during the
Council’s Arria Formula meeting on the protection of
internally displaced persons, which Australia convened
with Chile in May, peacekeeping and other United
Nations missions should be required to monitor and
report on displacement-related developments.
In conclusion, next year, as we commemorate the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), Australia looks forward to the 2015 Highlevel Review, which will enable us all to reflect on
the progress made, as well as the ongoing challenges
in implementing the Council’s women and peace and
security agenda. We welcome the appointment of
Radhika Coomaraswamy, the author of the global
study entitled “Women, Peace and Security”, and look
forward to working with her and the high-level advisory
team, as well as to further embedding the women and
peace and security agenda in the Council’s work.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I join others, Madam
President, in thanking you for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security — Displaced
women and girls: leaders and survivors, on the occasion

14-5920421/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

of the fourteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
The choice of that specific topic is a demonstration
of your continued commitment to the protection
and promotion of women and girls in conflicts and
post-conflict situations. I also thank Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Chaloka Beyani,
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, and Ms Suaad Allami of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for
their insightful remarks.
The importance that Rwanda attaches to this
debate derives from our own experience, as many
Rwandans were deprived of the right to live in their
country for around 35 years, owing to exclusion and bad
governance. Rwandans lived for many years in refugee
camps in neighbouring countries, and many witnessed
how women and girls were particularly vulnerable.
Fortunately, our efforts to restore the country after the
1994 genocide against the Tutsis has paid off, and from
1994 to 2013 over 3.4 million Rwandan refugees, a
majority of whom were women and girls, returned home
and were successfully reintegrated into the society. On
30 June 2013, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) invoked the cessation clause
for Rwandan refugees. Following that decision,
Rwanda continued to mobilize and facilitate the return
of the remaining 100,000 refugees, as per UNHCR
statistics. In that respect, we have continued to work
with UNHCR to accelerate the full implementation of
the cessation clause, so that all Rwandans can enjoy the
right to their country.
At the same time, we are concerned at the fate
of women, men and children that are still being held
as hostages and used as human shields by the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) for
the past 20 years. We hope that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will ensure that they return home, as more than 10,000
already have done since 2001, in accordance with
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014).
As the concept note (S/2014/731, annex) that you
have prepared for this debate recalls, Madam President,
the current numbers of refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have never been
higher since the Second World War — more than

22/90

28/10/2014

50 million by the end of 2013, many more since 2014,
with 32,000 forcibly displaced people daily, half of
them women and girls. It is clear, as the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg reminded us, that
the situation of forced displacement exacerbates the
existing vulnerability of women and girls, since they,
more than anyone else, are exposed to sexual and
gender-based violence, to trafficking and enslavement,
to exclusion based on historical and cultural traditions,
and they have specific health needs. Furthermore, many
women who have lost their husbands in conflicts face
social and economic challenges, as a number of them
are uneducated and they must take responsibility for
their households.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2000, however, there has been notable progress
in the advancement of the agenda of women and peace
and security, which has become one of the priorities of
the Council, as demonstrated by country-specific and
thematic resolutions that we have been adopting since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Member States,
including my own, are also at the forefront of that issue,
as many of them have adopted national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), and have endorsed
a declaration of commitment to end sexual violence in
conflict.
As for the African Union, our continental
organization, as recalled by the representative of
Nigeria, it adopted a landmark document in 2009,
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa,
known as the Kampala Convention, which Rwanda
has ratified. The Convention imposes a number of
obligations on States parties related to general and
specific protection of women and girls, including
protection against sexual and gender-based violence,
and to reproductive and sexual health. Given that
background, we can say that the world is equipped with
a comprehensive legal and normative framework for the
effective protection of women and girls, including in
the case of forced displacement.
Despite local, national, regional and global
efforts to protect women refugees and IDPs, there is
still a gap between the framework and its effective
implementation. The theme you proposed for this
debate, Madam President, invites us to discuss the issue
of “Displaced women and girls: leaders and survivors”.
Those two notions — leaders and survivors — are
complementary, as both protection and promotion are

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

indispensable for an effective implementation of our
policies. Indeed, the protection of women and girls,
in case of forced displacement, requires our resolve,
as we must effectively protect them from sexual and
gender-based violence in refugee and IDP camps, and
ensure that those who are sexually-abused benefit from
medical services, including health and psychological
care.
One of the practical steps to achieve that goal includes
the increased deployment of women peacekeepers. That
will, of course, be possible with the increased training
and recruitment of women into national armies and
police. It will also require a greater commitment on the
part of Member States to appoint women peacekeepers,
including in leadership positions, as well as women
protection advisors. Another practical measure for the
protection of women, as suggested by Mr. Beyani, is to
prevent women from venturing outside refugee and IDP
camps to collect firewood for cooking. In that regard,
Rwandan peacekeepers in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur brought improved
energy-saving cooking stoves to Darfur, which were
introduced in Rwanda in 2000 in order to preserve
trees. We believe that those cooking stoves are critical,
not only to protect the environment, but also to protect
women refugees and IDPs. However, no protection
measures will be effective if they are not accompanied
by our collective resolve to hold the perpetrators of
sexual violence and other mass atrocities accountable.
Furthermore, the protection of women refugees
and IDPs must go hand in hand with the promotion
of their empowerment. That requires our collective
efforts to promote the education of girls, and I take
this opportunity, as Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka did earlier, to
pay tribute to Malala Yousafzai, who was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize this month.
Women’s empowerment should also be reflected
not only in the Council but also in other leading
positions, such as the Government and Parliament.
Indeed, that measure would not only reflect the actual
representativity of women in our societies but also
enable them to ensure the mainstreaming of gender
issues in our laws, including those related to economic,
human rights and humanitarian issues.
As the representative of the United Kingdom
said — and I thank him for introducing presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21, just adopted — the best
protection of women internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees is to ensure that they do not

S/PV.7289

become refugees and IDPs in the first place. As Rwanda
has always said, the Security Council needs to shift its
attention from the day-to-day management of conflicts
and their consequences to their prevention, including by
addressing their root causes.
Let me conclude by noting that 2015 will be the
year of a triple review: the peacekeeping review, the
peacebuilding review and the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that all those reviews
will be complementary and lead to a better protection
and promotion of women’s rights, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Our country is ready to
share its experience and to further contribute to a world
where women and girls are not only protected but also
empowered to become the leaders that they deserve to
be.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Fourteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), Chile thanks the presidency of Argentina for
having convened this debate on this topic, in particular,
the situation of internally displaced women and girls.
We thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of internally displaced persons and,
especially, Ms. Suaad Allami, whose words encourage
us to continue implementing the resolution. Chile will
continue to contribute to such implementation through
its second national action plan, which we hope to launch
soon. My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
The idea that the empowerment of women and
girls and gender equality are central to the task
to maintaining international peace and security is
increasingly gaining support. National action plans,
the emerging development of indicators and the
developments in legislation, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty and Recommendation No.30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
are evidence of that. The appointments of Bineta Diop
as first Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security
of the African Union, and of Major General Kristin
Lund as first Force Commander in the history of the
United Nations, urge us to continue to advocate for a
larger number of women in positions of responsibility.
However, aspirations still do not reflect the reality
and there is still a large gap between legislation and
implementation. In fact, discrimination and violence,

14-5920423/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

in addition to the lack of access for women to
decision-making bodies, mean that they continue to be
underrepresented in peace processes and State-building.
The continuing sexual and gender-based violence and
targeted attacks on women and girls, including students
and human rights defenders, are alarming. We recall
with regret those who have been murdered for defending
their rights, as is the case of those living in the Middle
East and North Africa.
It is therefore urgent to develop and implement
mechanisms to ensure the prevention and protection
of women, as well as their full participation on an
equal footing with men, in ceasefire agreements,
peacebuilding processes, the establishment of the rule
of law and justice and security sector reform. That is a
necessary requirement for achieving peaceful, just and
inclusive societies. Peacekeeping missions, sanctions
committees and other subsidiary organs of the Council,
commissions of inquiry, the Peacebuilding Commission
and other related mechanisms must consider a gender
approach in their work and train and include advisers
in that area.
Obstacles to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions will be overcome
only through an effective commitment to empowerment,
women’s participation and human rights, a resolute
leadership, gender and age-disaggregated data and
consistent and adequately funded multisectoral
measures. Such efforts must go hand in hand with
accountability and the fight against impunity.
The International Criminal Court is an important
complementary tool.
Talking about her visit to South Sudan, Special
Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura reported
with dismay the insecurity and unimaginable living
conditions that displaced women face in Bentiu.
Together with Australia and with the support of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Chile organized an Arria Formula meeting on the
protection of the internally displaced on 30 May, where
we noted the increase of that phenomenon and its
devastating impact on women and girls. That is why the
situation of the internally displaced and refugees, who
are particularly vulnerable to forced marriages, sexual
slavery and other forms of sexual violence, often used
as a tactic to induce displacement, must be at the core
of the Council’s decisions.
We must prevent, protect against and alleviate
such situations, ensuring adequate access for
24/90

28/10/2014

women to health-care services and justice, as well as
accountability. Displaced women must be protagonists
in early warning, mediation and prevention initiatives
and their participation must be ensured in efforts
to address the root causes of conflict. The system
must also continue its support to countries that host
refugees. We highlight the importance of deepening
information exchange among all actors in the field,
strengthening the training of peacekeeping personnel
and providing innovative multisectoral responses that
include the special needs of displaced women and girls.
Encouraging and promoting the role of civil society in
that area is vital. Women must be provided with the
necessary tools and the training to be able to lead such
resiliance.
The year 2015 will be crucial for that agenda. We
hope that the development of the post-2015 development
agenda, in which gender equality and the empowerment
of women must be a separate goal, the twentiethanniversary review of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, and the strategic reviews of United
Nations sanctions and peacekeeping in 2015 ensure that
they include commitments and priorities in the context
of resolution 1325 (2000). The commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary and the independent global study
on resolution 1325 (2000) will provide a road map
to accelerate implementation and ensure the role of
women in developing solutions.
In conclusion, President Michelle Bachelet has
agreed with the Executive Director of UN-Women to
convene a high-level event, to be held in Santiago in
February 2015, to contribute to the debate on women’s
participation in decision-taking. We conclude with the
words of Caddy Adzuba, a prominent African activist:
Women, who until now have been victims, must be at
the negotiating table because they know what they have
suffered and what they must demand.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Argentina, Madam President,
for organizing this thematic debate marking the
fourteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and gives us an opportunity to assess our
commitment to the post-2015 agenda. I would like to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women; Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Chaloka
Beyani, Special Rapporteur on human hights and
internally displaced persons, for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome and thank Ms. Suaad Allami for

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

her commitment and courage. Finally, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom delegation for having
successfully conducted negotiations on the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/21) we have just adopted.
When peace and security are threatened, one of
the first indicators is the movement of people. At the
beginning of the millennium, numerous natural disasters
and various armed conflicts, terrorism or simply
economic constraints are visible through a significant
rise in the number or refugees and asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), at the end of 2013 the world had
a record 51.2 million displaced persons, three quarters
of those people were women and children, among them
women and girls represented half. Africa is the primary
theatre of the movement of refugees and displaced
persons. The war in Mali, re-occurring conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan are just a few examples that
have forced hundreds of thousands of people to flee
their homes our countries. Currently in Africa, there
are more than 2.8 million refugees. The principal host
countries are Kenya, Ethiopia, Chad and Uganda. There
are also 7 million IDPs in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, 2.2 million in the Sudan and roughly
3 million in other countries.
Allow me to now focus on the experience in my
country, Chad, which hosts a significant number
of refugees coming from three neighbouring
countries — the Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Nigeria.
The conflict in the Central African Republic,
terrorist violence in Nigeria and intercommunal
violence in the Sudan have stretched the capacities of
my country to host refugees. Respecting the principle
of not turning anybody back, between 1 January and
14 September 2014 we have hosted more than 19,000
refugees from the Central African Republic, 1,000 from
Nigeria and more than 30,000 from Darfur. According
to UNHCR, there are a total of roughly 50,000 refugees
hosted by my country coming from those respective
three countries. More than half of them were women
and children. Among those from the Central African
Republic, about 1,000 children were unaccompanied
minors.
As the Council is aware, the impact of armed
conflicts adversely impacts men and women, boys and
girls very differently. There are also various sexist

S/PV.7289

traditions against women and girls, which bars their
access to resources, education, employment, sexual and
reproductive health and excludes their decision-making.
For that reason, in times of conflict and in post-conflict
situations, women and girls confront major challenges
that make them more vulnerable. In the majority of
cases, these women, separated or having lost their
spouses during war, are alone with their children and
find themselves as heads of their families. Without the
protection of their families or communities, displaced
and refugee women and girls continue to be victims
of sexual and gender-based violence, rape, domestic
violence, forced prostituion and human trafficking. All
of those are daily realities.
In Chad from January to June, there were 668
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against
refugees and displaced persons, according to data from
UNHCR and its partners. The response and protection
were immediate, and that allowed 100 per cent of
known victims to benefit from medical assistance.
Psychological support was provided for 95 per cent of
the survivors, while another 26 per cent of the victims
were in need of follow up and security services. Of the
recorded cases, only 8.1 per cent of them were brought
before tribunals. In spite of that low rate, this was an
increase over 2013, when only 4 per cent of the cases
were the subect of judicial proceedings.
Beyond the various challenges of managing
refugee and IDP flows, the protection of women and
children has its own difficulties, such as identification.
More than 80 per cent of refugee and IDP populations,
in particular women and children, have no identity
documents. More than 75 per cent of the victims of
sexual violence are under 18 years old. We also face the
stigmatization linked to rape and the culture of silence
regarding sexual violence, which hamper the filing of
complaints. There are also various issues pertaining to
security in camps, as well as a lack of capacity on the
police and the army to conduct investigations regarding
sexual violence. Lastly, there is lack of judiciary
capacity to prosecute perpetrators.
Chadian officials, through a national commission
on the hosting, reintegration and repatriation of
refugees, along with the relevant ministries, working
in close cooperation with United Nations agencies and
other national and international partners, promptly
responded to those challenges by implementing a
guiding mechanism with a multisectoral approach
to prevent incidents of sexual violence and gender-

14-5920425/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

based violence. That allowed survivors to receive care,
psychological support, legal assistance and security
protection.
In a more general way, Chad has announced its
strategy for refugees so as to ensure independence
and reduce refugee dependence on humanitarian aid in
the long term. That strategy targets a majority of the
Sudanese refugee population in the 12 eastern camps,
as well as the Central African Republic refugees in
five southern camps. Moreover, Chad is working
to strengthen national laws, and efforts are being
aimed at the ratification of international instruments
regarding international human rights, IDP and refugee
laws as well as international humanitarian law, such
as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, and the African
Union Kampala Convention on the Protection and the
Assistance of Displaced Persons in Africa, among
others.
In conclusion, Chad reiterates its commitment to
developing effective mechanisms to protect women
and girls who are refugees or displaced. That also
goes for institutions to guarantee their protection and
participation in peace processes. Chad endorses the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), and in particular
the principles set out in resolution 1822 (2008) and
resolution 1889 (2009), covering the challenges facing
women and children who are refugees or displaced.
In the 14 years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are all aware that international peace and
security can be possible only with the participation of
women.
Finally, we welcome the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to be launched
in 2015.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet, Special Rapporteur Chaloka
Beyani and civil society representative Suaad Allami
for their insightful briefings.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the progress made
at the normative level to support the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda since the
adoption of the landmark Council resolution 1325 (2000).
We also note with appreciation the continued efforts of
the international community to ensure the protection of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, as well
as their participation in conflict prevention, conflict

26/90

28/10/2014

resolution and peacebuilding. However, Korea is of
the view that much greater efforts are needed to meet
the commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000).
As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/693), in the past year there was a series of
heinous crimes linked to conflict, leading to new mass
displacements, humanitarian catastrophes and serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights. Many of the victims of such increased violence
in conflict are women and girls. Over 51 million people
were forcibly displaced as of 2013 — the highest
number since the end of the Second World War — and
three quarters of the refugee and IDP population are
women and children.
Displaced women and girls continue to face
tremendous threats and violence in the conflicts
in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Syria, among other places. Even more troubling is the
fact that many armed groups bent on violent extremism
are deliberately targeting women and girls. In addition,
the high risk of violence that women and girls face
during the period of displacement usually continues
until the process of return and reintegration. Their
vulnerability increases when gender is compounded
with other factors, such as disability.
Having said that, I would like to make a few
observations on the protection of displaced women and
girls.
First, it is imperative to tackle sexual and genderbased violence committed against displaced women
and girls. Sexual exploitation, forced marriage and
human trafficking are just a few of the human rights
abuses perpetrated against displaced women and girls.
Preventive measures, including heightened security at
camps for refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDP), as well as accountability for perpetrators,
must be ensured. There should be zero tolerance for
sexual harassment and abuse by any troops, including
Government forces, non-State armed groups and even
peacekeepers, who take advantage of the victims’
vulnerability. In that regard, we express our particular
concern over the persistent allegations of the sexual
exploitation of women and girls in IDP camps in
Somalia.
Secondly, displaced women and girls are not only
victims, but also survivors and leaders. They often show
remarkable courage and resilience in protecting and
supporting their families. Currently, one in four Syrian
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

refugee families in Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq and Jordan
are headed by women struggling to take care of their
traumatized families. We should strengthen their selfreliance by supporting their economic empowerment,
legal rights and education.
Thirdly, it is critical to ensure that the voices of
displaced women and girls are heard. In order to
reflect their special needs, they must be included in
decision-making procedures and play a leadership role.
The participation and representation of refugee and
IDP women must be improved during the process of
developing, implementing and evaluating policies and
programmes that affect their lives.
Lastly, improving compliance with international
law serves as a comprehensive measure for the protection
of displaced women and girls. We urge all parties to
armed conflict to uphold their obligations regarding
international human rights and humanitarian law. We
need to close the implementation gap of international
law through awareness-raising, capacity-building and
follow-up legislation.
Displaced women and girls in conflict constitute
one of the most vulnerable groups. They are too often
invisible, forgotten and overlooked. Our empowerment
and humanitarian support is essential for them to
overcome the hardships they face. As part of our
efforts to support the implementation of this important
agenda, the Republic of Korea is supporting Afghan
women refugees by making a multi-year contribution
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the returnees. We also made efforts
to improve the status of women refugees and asylum
seekers in the Republic of Korea, based on our refugee
act. Such efforts include support for their livelihoods,
vocational training and social and cultural adaptation.
As the 2015 high-level review of resolution 1325
(2000) approaches, the Republic of Korea reaffirms its
steadfast commitment to the protection of women and
girls in situations of armed conflict.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
your tireless efforts during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. We would also like to
thank all the speakers for their important briefings
and welcome the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21) earlier today.
I would like to stress the importance of today’s
discussion with regard to displaced refugee women and

S/PV.7289

girls, particularly in the light of the progress achieved
in developing the standards and legal frameworks of
the women and peace and security agenda since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which was further
developed by the Council through the adoption of the
subseqeunt resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013).
In spite of all the efforts carried out to implement the
agenda, we continue to see an unprecedented increase
in the numbers of displaced and refugee women and
girls around the world, in particular in the Middle East.
Recently, due to conflicts and wars, which violate the
most basic rights of women and girls — and which are
mostly unconventional conflicts, in which at least one
party is a non-State actor — the intensity of violations
and the impunity of the perpetrators have increased.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693)
and the recommendations contained therein indicate
that much work needs to be done to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and, most
important, to hold accountable the perpetrators of
crimes against women and girls and ensure that they
do not enjoy impunity. In that regard, we would like
to stress the importance for the Security Council to
step up its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court in the referral of all situations in which horrible
crimes are committed against refugees and displaced
women and girls. The necessary measures should be
taken to identify perpetrators of such crimes among
the ranks of those working to protect displaced and
refugee women and girls. Jordan believes that the time
has come to finalize a draft convention on the criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on
United Nations missions, with a view to implementing
a zero-tolerance policy against perpetrators of such
crimes.
Due to the crisis in Syria, Jordan has been hosting
1.5 million Syrian nationals, 51 per cent of which are
women and girls. Jordan is doing its utmost to provide
high levels of protection and services for Syrian women
refugees on its territory, in accordance with the women
and peace and security agenda and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are doing so in spite of the great
economic, social and security burden that we shoulder
due to the refugee crisis, as well as a chronic scarcity
of energy and water resources. Jordan has opened
both its public and private schools to refugee Syrian
children — it is our duty to do so. The number of Syrian
pupils has reached 120,000, both inside and outside the
camps, 94 per cent of them being girls. As a result, on

14-5920427/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

average, classrooms are overcrowded by 41 per cent.
That has prompted 80 per cent of our schools to adopt a
dual school day. Jordan also recently established special
care centres for refugee children, as well as a centre to
foster a protective educational environment for girls,
in addition to enabling adolescents to obtain necessary
psychological and social support, in cooperation with
UNICEF.
In coordination with specialized United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
active in the Kingdom, Jordan continues its systematic
efforts to organize educational symposiums for
Syrian refugee girls and women, with a special
focus on reproductive and health care services. That
includes workshops to train the staff of NGOs active
in the camps on how to deal with women and girls
who have been subjected to violence and domestic
abuse, in coordination with the family unit of the
Jordanian police. We also provide material support
to microprojects run by women, and particularly in
families headed by women, which are among the most
poor and marginalized families inside and outside the
camps.
Jordan welcomes the promotion of women in
peacekeeping operations, particularly their involvement
in decision-making on issues arising in conflict
settings. The Jordanian armed forces have been
actively favouring the promotion of women’s role in
the military with a view to increasing the effectiveness
of the military in peacekeeping operations and special
humanitarian missions, in addition to promoting
the role of women in the Royal Medical Services in
field hospitals in conflict zones. Jordan’s military
women have played an important role in the reception,
protection and care of Syrian refugees. In that regard,
we support the proposal to dedicate a special budget
within the United Nations peacekeeping budget to
dispatching specialized women’s protection advisers
to all missions and not only a few, as is the current
practice.
In conclusion, I stress that Jordan attaches great
importance to the high-level review on women and
peace and security that is to take place on the occasion
of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) 15
years after its adoption. That will require the support
of all in promoting the women and peace and security
agenda in a manner commensurate with the challenges

28/90

28/10/2014

faced and with a view to creating a better future for the
millions of refugee and internally displaced women and
girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Argentina.
I come from a country where women represent
15 per cent of the military and have achieved the rank of
military officers among the hierarchy. We have become
a country that now promotes the presence of women in
all branches of the army, where they had been banned
until 2012. We have established gender offices in each
area of the military and have strengthened gender focal
points with a view to preparing for deployment the
men and women who will participate in peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, child care centres for parents
who work in the armed forces and the security forces
have been opened.
We have also re-assigned personnel of military
hospitals who have declared that they have conscientious
objections to the interruption of pregnancy, which is
permitted under Argentine legislation, so that women
are able to exercise their right to sexual and reproductive
health services without any obstacle or delay. We
advocate for laws on same-sex marriage and gender
identity and against any form of discrimination. This
year in London, we signed, along with 137 countries,
a commitment to bring an end to sexual violence in
armed conflict.
We work in our region and we work with our
region. I come from a country where women in
particular peacefully confronted State terrorism — I
am speaking of the Mothers and Grandmothers of May
Square — in deciding to fight for justice rather than
for vengeance. They chose to free the truth rather than
remain prisoners of lies. They chose to pass through
the culture of memory rather than the indifference of
oblivion.
I come from that country and that is why we can
understand, as members of the Security Council, that in
all situations of armed conflict, the number of civilian
victims far exceeds the number of combatants. Today,
that number is the highest ever seen in history. We
know that women and men suffer all types of human
rights violations during conflicts. However, only
recently have we been able to reveal and to make people
understand that there are specific forms, different types
of violence that women suffer during conflicts and that

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

there are different impacts at the various stages — prior
to conflict, during conflict and post-conflict — on
women and girls.
We know that, whether we are talking about
civilians or combatants or refugees or displaced
persons, the impact of conflict on women and girls is
multidimensional and complex. The varying types and
modalities of violence affect women disproportionately
and differently, simply as a result of their being women,
with devastating effects on their psychological and
physical integrity and fundamental rights.
Various reports in recent years from United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women and human rights
organizations and women and feminist organizations
have provided accounts and empirical evidence of the
fact that conflicts crystallize, deepen and generate
evidence of the disproportionate practices of violence,
based on the pre-existing stereotypes of inequality,
discrimination and violence against women in society.
Also in peacetime, we still encounter cultural
patterns based on patriarchal power structures that
seem to tolerate or justify violence, rape and other
forms of sexual abuse against women. It is undisputed
that in a scenario where political tension increases
and militarization appears to be the chosen path for
resolving a growing conflict, all forms of violence
seem to increase, including rape and other forms of
sexual violence against women.
We know that violence, which precedes conflicts
and intensifies during a conflict, often remains, in
the post-conflict period, as part of the legacy of the
conflict. It is known that in such situations women and
girls are most vulnerable to sexual violence, especially
rape. Women also face enormous obstacles in obtaining
justice, owing to the stigma that characterizes us as
survivors of sexual violence and the conditions of
structured gender inequality that exist in most of our
societies and often force us to experience and coexist
with the impunity of perpetrators.
On a daily basis, the Council receives reports
describing human rights violations against women
and crimes against the sexual integrity of women and
girls in conflict situations, including the abduction of
women and girls for the purposes of labour exploitation,
sexual slavery and human trafficking. The Council
has been warned that, in many cases, the perpetrators
are members of rebel groups or groups committing
terrorist acts; however, they also belong to militias that

S/PV.7289

are supported by Governments, including members of
governmental armed forces or security forces, or even
members of peacekeeping operations. We know that,
and we know that women reach refugee camps but are
still not safe there. In March, according to a United
Nations report, up to 16 women living in refugee camps
were being raped every day when they went out to look
for water, fulfilling their duties and tasks, because
there was a fear that if men left the camp they would
be killed.
Today we know that acts of violence against women,
refugees and the displaced in the camps, including
sexual violence, are not an exception but, in many cases,
the rule. Furthermore, sexual violence and the rape of
women and girls used as a weapon of war remains so
widespread and present in all situations of conflict that
it is sometimes considered to be an inherent component
of conflict, running the risk of making natural what
clearly constitutes, in international human rights and
international humanitarian law, a war crime and a
crime against humanity.
Moreover, while sexual violence may be the most
extensive type of violence practiced against women in
conflict, we have also learned that women also suffer
specific damage and are disproportionately affected
in many other ways in conflict situations. Economic
aspects of vulnerability, social exclusion and cultural
marginalization are the effects of militarization and
conflict. The adverse impacts on the rights of women
to food, water, housing, employment, health care and
education are just as great a threat to the lives of women
as the physical form of violence.
In 2013, it was said that there were 50.2 million
forcibly displaced persons in the world. We know
that women constitute more than half of the refugee
population. However severe the vulnerabilities of
displaced people may be, women live in situations of
even greater vulnerability still, as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees says,
including once they have managed to reach a place that
is apparently safe. Some women are pursued because
they do not follow certain customs or because they
were the object of an early or forced marriage. The risk
of sexual violence increases also in places where they
go to be protected.
When women become refugees, they must break
with their livelihoods and the cycles of life and become
completely dependent on humanitarian agencies for
basic survival. The anguish is immense for women

14-5920429/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

who leave their homes to begin an uncertain journey,
which more often than not does not include a return
trip. Women and girls who have fled their homes and
communities often experience prolonged suffering,
and the place of refuge becomes a place of violence.
Sometimes they are forced to offer sex in exchange for
food or to obtain the status of refugees or to have access
to documentation.
Women belonging to national, ethnic, religious or
linguistic minorities suffer even more. Age, sex, sexual
orientation and other specific factors can also expose
them to risks of additional discrimination and lack of
protection. Women who are disabled face a greater
risk of lack of protection during a displacement in the
camps. Women and girls who seek refuge in the cities
run the risk of experiencing discrimination and abuse.
Many live in poverty or extreme poverty, which makes
them even more vulnerable and exposed to the risk of
becoming merchandise in the sex trade.
Women and girls who go to camps for displaced
persons and refugees may discover that even there
the material assistance is minimal. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said this year
that only 12 per cent of the projects that are being
financed today in order to comply with international
humanitarian law in the camps — only 12 per
cent — include the gender perspective and a human
rights approach.
The physical distribution of the camps also
represents a problem and a risk for women. In some
cases, the very officials who are supposed to look
after and care for the refugees are the ones who violate
the rights of women. There has been a considerable
rise in the number of undesired pregnancies, sexually
transmitted diseases and abortions. Pregnant women
sometimes have to face a risk to their health due to
the lack of medical assistance, which, along with the
physical and psychological pressure of the conflict,
leads to a disproportionate number of non-provoked
abortions, miscarriages, babies with low birth weights,
representing between 20 and 50 per cent of newborns.
The rate of teenage pregnancy in the camps is roughly
50 per cent. In some cases, the supplies do not include
the specific needs of women.
I note that it was only recently, and thanks to the
impetus and demands of the women’s movement, that
we have included hygienic items in the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ list
of essential supplies even when most of the refugees are
30/90

28/10/2014

women. When there is no access to hygienic products,
women and girls have to remain separate, without
access to education, without being able to look for food,
and without receiving the regular supplies they need
when they menstruate.
Lastly, I believe it necessary and important to
have this debate today because the current members of
the Security Council have experience with the reality
of refugee camps. I believe that, as my colleagues
have said, in the light of the upcoming review of
resolution 1325 (2000); in the light of the post-2015
sustainable development goals; in the light of the
forthcoming review the sanctions system and United
Nations peacekeeping operations; and in the light of
our twentieth-anniversary review the of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action, it is time for
women, as we have said so often — because we are
half the population, because we are human, because we
have the right to enjoy our rights, and because we have
a voice, convictions and courage — we will head into
2015 staking our claims, expressing ourselves, making
our demands and defending our rights. We will exert
the liberty to think, to say, to act and to be what even
women in refugee camps need. We do not want to be
either oppressors or oppressed. We want to be free and
equal, so that we can be the authors of real peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Paet (Estonia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Estonia and Latvia. I
thank all the briefers for their statements today and
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21).
Estonia and Latvia align themselves with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
As highlighted in the concept note prepared by the
delegation of Argentina (S/2014/731, annex), throughout
the development of the normative framework of the

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

women and peace and security agenda, namely, in a
number of Security Council resolutions on the subject,
the particular risks faced by women and girl refugees
and internally displaced persons has been addressed.
Despite that, the issue has been more in the background
than the specific focus of earlier Security Council open
debates. Therefore, we would like to thank Argentina
for choosing this relevant theme for today’s debate.
The forced displacement of women and girls is not
only a humanitarian issue, but a long-term development
issue, a human rights issue, a peace and security issue
and a key challenge for the women and peace and
security agenda. It is paramount that we tackle the
discrimination, human rights abuses and obstacles to
justice that refugee and internally displaced women and
girls are facing every day.
Throughout this year, women and children,
particularly girls, have been affected by newly
emerging forms of violence and conflicts associated
with the proliferation of militias and armed groups
linked to violent extremism. In Iraq, the terrorist
movement called the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant has conducted the abduction, enslavement,
rape, forced marriage and sale into slavery of several
thousand Yazidi and other minority women and girls.
In Nigeria, another extremist movement, Boko Haram,
abducted schoolgirls and has been holding them captive
for over six months now. The international community
must resolutely oppose such barbarity.
Those are only a few examples. Sadly, the list is
longer. Many protracted conflicts that deeply affect
women and girls — in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — remain unresolved.
Unfortunately, this year we have also witnessed a
military conflict in Europe, which has caused suffering
to the people of Ukraine. More than half of the registered
internally displaced population in Ukraine — 66 per
cent — are women, and 31 per cent are children. We
welcome the steps taken by the Ukrainian Government
to address the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
situation. While many IDPs have been able to return
to their homes in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk,
encouraged by the ceasefire, the overall situation of
IDPs in Ukraine requires a long-term solution for their
economic and social integration in host communities or
successful return home. It is a duty of the international
community, and especially of the Security Council, to

S/PV.7289

work towards resolving conflicts and to lessen human
suffering.
Unfortunately, women and girls make up about
half of any refugee or internally displaced population.
Therefore, we must pay special attention to their needs.
The situation of refugee and internally displaced
women and girls is often complicated by restricted
access to resources and inequitable access to services
such as education and health, including comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services, and to training
and livelihoods initiatives.
Improving the educational level of women and
girls is crucial for their political and economic
empowerment. Education is necessary for preventing
the abuse of women and girls’ vulnerable situation as
refugees or displaced persons and for helping them to
adjust to life after conflict and integrating them into
their host society if they do not have the option to return
to their home country. Currently, only 12 per cent of
girl refugees attend secondary school.
It is highly regrettable that sexual violence also
occurs in refugee camps. We must take resolute steps
to prevent situations where women seeking refuge from
war and conflict have to face new threats and fear in the
camps instead.
Ensuring accountability for the perpetrators of
sexual violence crimes is crucial to deterring and
ultimately eliminating sexual violence. It is equally
important for providing justice to victims of those
crimes. As strong supporters of the 2013 Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Estonia and Latvia will focus on the practical
implementation of the commitments to end the use of
rape and sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Sexual and gender-based violence as a war crime or
crime against humanity has been prosecuted primarily
at the international level. The International Criminal
Court therefore has an important role to play when States
lack the capacity or political will to hold perpetrators to
account. Estonia and Latvia are supporting victims of
gender-based and sexual violence in countries affected
by armed conflict through the Trust Fund for Victims
set up by the International Criminal Court.
Unfortunately, even in the United Nations own
peacekeeping missions, sexual violence has been an
issue. We must continue our efforts to provide training
to and raise awareness in all peacekeeping missions
and prioritize the fight against sexual violence when

14-5920431/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

28/10/2014

planning missions. Despite the progress achieved,
continued cases of sexual exploitation threaten the
credibility of the international peacekeeping system and
individual missions. Those cases may also discourage
victims from coming forward. Best practices described
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693) should
be more widely used to avoid any recurrence of such
situations.

at the international level. In view of the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, we will be even more engaged in
our activities on the advancement of women’s rights
and gender equality. We are convinced that the aims of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action are still
very much relevant and should be integrated in the new
post-2015 agenda.

It is self-evident that women’s empowerment
is crucial for long-lasting peace and stability. The
participation of women and women’s organizations in
policymaking and in post-conflict reconstruction must
be ensured from the outset and throughout the process.
Similarly, it is necessary to support post-conflict
countries in the rebuilding of judicial systems in order
to ensure the rule of law and the protection of human
rights.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
remarkable achievements have been made at the
normative level, and the international community
has come a long way since the year 2000. However,
challenges remain at the level of implementation. We
look forward to the global review next year and hope
it will advance the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the follow-up resolutions.

Next year we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Estonia has
included the protection of women in national strategies
on conflict prevention and has adopted a national action
plan to implement the resolution.
Protecting and promoting the full enjoyment of all
human rights by women and girls is one of the principal
priorities of the humanitarian aid and development
cooperation policies of Estonia and Latvia. We have
supported the alleviation of the humanitarian situation
of refugees and internally displaced persons, primarily
women and children, in many conflict zones. For
example, Estonia supports the activities aimed at
improving the quality of women’s health-related
education in Afghanistan, raising knowledge about
reproductive health in Kyrgyzstan and ending child
marriage in Yemen. As to the elimination of conflictrelated sexual violence, I am glad to say that Estonia
has also been providing financial support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we
will continue to do so.
Latvia has been focusing on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) primarily through its development
cooperation policy and, in close cooperation with civil
society organizations, has engaged in projects aimed at
the advancement of women’s rights in different parts of
the world, especially Central Asia.
Over the years, both Estonia and Latvia have
actively promoted women’s rights and gender equality

32/90

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
First, let me thank all the briefers. I would like
to thank in particular Ms. Suaad Allami for her
participation here today. The role and influence of civil
society in preventing conflict and building peace are
both essential and must be supported.
Realizing the women and peace and security agenda
is a top priority for the Nordic countries. Next year
will mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
ground-breaking resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. We need to grasp that opportunity
to accelerate our efforts. It is time to move from
normative commitments to full implementation. In
preparing for the high-level review on resolution 1325
(2000), we encourage all Member States to develop
national action plans on women and peace and security,
and to effectively implement already existing plans.
Gender inequalities lie at the heart of the issue.
Gender equality in political, economic and social life
is a goal in itself and also contributes to preventing
sexual violence and armed conflict. We must therefore
firmly address the root causes of gender inequality.
This includes changing the norms in society that are
denying women and girls their human rights. It also
means pursuing policies that ensures women’s political
and economic empowerment, secures sexual and
reproductive health and rights, and improves women’s

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

security. Not least, we must guarantee the right to
education of all women and girls.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
others to step up their efforts in that regard.

The fight against impunity for sexual and genderbased violence is also crucial, not least at the national
level. We welcome and support the undertakings of the
chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in
this regard. We furthermore recall the unique capacity
of Justice Rapid Response, in close cooperation with
UN-Women, to address situations where expertise
is needed for investigating sexual and gender-based
violence crimes.

It is a sad fact that many refugee and internally
displaced person settings are not temporary situations,
but often become semi-permanent or even permanent
arrangements. In all of these cases, we call on
Governments to find suitable solutions in consultation
with affected populations.

Women are not only victims, but also actors and
agents of change. We therefore need the participation
of women and men alike in formal as well as informal
processes, in mediation, peace negotiations and
humanitarian and peacebuilding efforts. Sustainable
peace and security can never be achieved if half the
population is excluded.
The theme of today’s debate is “Displaced women
and girls: leaders and survivors”. Unfortunately, the
levels of forcibly displaced persons in the world today
are unprecedented. Patterns of violence against women
and girls are often amplified in conflict-affected
settings. As we see in many parts of the world today,
extremism and terrorism are a prominent part of
conflict situations and constitute a threat to women’s
rights and lives.
All the relevant actors, States and the United
Nations and other international organizations must
ensure that displaced populations are protected from
violence, that humanitarian access is granted and that
gender-responsive services, including for sexual and
reproductive health, are delivered. Women and girls
who are forcibly displaced are at particular risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. Effective protection
strategies must include the empowerment of women
and girls, such as access to education and specific
efforts to increase the enrolment and retention of girls
in school, access to registration and documentation,
and livelihood opportunities.
Improving women’s participation and leadership
in situations of displacement is also crucial. In that
regard, we welcome the good practices of the camp
management committees in eastern Nepal, which have
attained 48 per cent participation by women. However,
equal participation by men and women should be the
norm in every case, and we urge the Office of the

The United Nations system has a central role
to play in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda. Next year several critical reviews
will take place, including the Secretary-General’s
review of peace operations, the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, the review of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the high-level review
of resolution 1325 (2000). In order to ensure coherence,
all these reviews should take into account the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) objectives in
a coordinated manner. The work to promote women and
peace and security should not take place in isolation.
Although there has been an increase in the number
of mandates of United Nations missions including
references to women and peace and security, this is
not enough: all mandates should be based on a gendersensitive conflict analysis so as to be tailored for the
needs of women and girls. Gender issues should be
part of reporting requirements and all United Nations
missions should have a gender advisor at the strategic
level.
Before I conclude, I would also like to underline the
importance of the new post-2015 development agenda.
The Nordic countries are actively promoting a separate
goal on freedom from violence and peaceful societies as
well as a stand-alone gender equality goal. The targets
should include the reduction of all kinds of violence,
especially against women and children. We believe that
the post-2015 agenda represents a unique opportunity
to address violence against women, including sexual
and gender-based violence, on a fundamental level.
As I said at the beginning of my intervention, next
year is an opportunity to accelerate our efforts. It is a
chance to make real progress. Let us embrace it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I express my thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/693). I also thank the

14-5920433/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

Assistant Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the High Commissioner for Refugees. I
also thank you, Madam President, for having convened
this open debate on the occasion of the issuing of the
report of the Secretary-General on such a sensitive
matter at such a critical moment for international
affairs. I have first-hand knowledge of your work and
deep commitment to issues relating to women and
peace and security, Madam President, stretching back
many years. The Government of Colombia has always
attached great importance to this topic, and never more
than today as we are engaged in what we hope is an
irreversible peace process resolving more than five
decades of conflict in which women were lamentably
the victims of a great deal of such violence.
Colombia is aware that, as mentioned in the concept
note (S/2014/693, annex), women’s socioeconomic,
cultural and political autonomy are fundamental
elements for living free from violence, enjoying
democracy, international stability and lasting peace.
This recognition, in our case, is based on our belief
and the commitments made 15 years ago in resolution
1325 (2000), which are reflected in the public policy
implemented in our country. The Secretary-General’s
report of 24 September refers to the specific actions
and steps taken by the State of Colombia. For the
sake of brevity, I will leave it for members to read for
themselves, but there are five mentions in the report to
our satisfaction because they reflect significant steps
and progress that other States could implement. I will
refer to just one of them: women’s fully empowered
participation in conflict resolution.
There are two women in the five-person team
participating in today’s peace talks in Havana. Women
constitute an impressive group of mediators and
special envoys, as well as members of civil society
and victims, on the Government and insurgent sides
alike. This recognition in the Secretary-General report
is important to the State of Colombia, not least as it
drives us to continue making progress to consolidate
that differential focus based on the knowledge that
peace processes cannot succeed without the active
participation of women. When it comes to refugees and
displacement, it is clear that women constitute one of
the most vulnerable groups in the world. I would like to
refer to four specific measures from the lessons learned
in our country that could be useful to our discussion
today.

34/90

28/10/2014

The law for victims and comprehensive and
accessible reparations programmes were adopted in
2011. The single victims’ register for identifying and
registering their needs has been a very interesting
process: we have already managed to ascertain that
49 per cent of victims of violence in my country are
women. The gender equality policy adopted in 2003
sought to guarantee women lives free of violence and
has allowed us to develop and implement sustainable
actions longer-term over the past decade. Finally, the
law against sexual violence was enacted to provide
preferential treatment whereby the burden of proof does
not fall on the victim. All those measures are designed
to have an impact on the whole of Colombian society
and to put us on a path that will enable us to build a
sustainable, consensus-based, lasting peace.
Finally, despite everything, Colombia is aware
that we have a long road ahead of us. We are therefore
continuing to work on the main challenges facing the
Government, and reintegrating with full rights the
victims affected by internal conflict, especially women,
is a priority. That is a difficult goal, but we will work
to achieve it, adopting policies to promote participation
in a post-conflict society and to create situations where
our commitment can continue to translate to promoting
a society living in peace, where women and especially
girls enjoy full rights and guarantees. I would like to
explain my country’s position on this and am prepared
to share experiences and to exchange views with other
countries if requested.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank Argentina for its initiative in
convening this debate, and would also like to say that
we support the presidential statement issued by the
Council this morning (S/PRST/2014/21).
Our participation in today’s open debate is very
important to us in the lead-up to preparations for the
high-level review next year of the Security Council’s
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We commend the
Council’s intention to mandate a focus on women
and peace and security in its regular field visits, and
welcome the new five-year gender strategy devised
by the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support, as well as the action plan involving
commitments arising out of resolution 2122 (2013).
We also acknowledge the trend towards greater

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

representation of women in senior United Nations
posts. To cite one example, the appointment of Major
General Kristin Lund, the first woman to command a
peacekeeping operation, is a milestone.
Despite the undeniable progress, however, the
reality does not yet live up to all the expectations
raised by resolution 1325 (2000) 14 years ago. As the
Secretary-General says in his latest report (S/2014/693),
we have to ensure more consistent application of the
agenda on women and peace and security.
One of the most alarming consequences of
armed conflicts today is the increase in the numbers
of displaced persons and refugees. The situation of
displaced people and refugees in conflict-affected
environments makes women and girls more vulnerable
to becoming victims of sexual abuse and other human
rights violations. My delegation therefore emphasizes
the importance of the comprehensive integration of the
gender perspective into policies related to refugees and
displaced persons, in accordance with international
law, and of promoting comprehensive strategies for
protecting women and girls on the ground that take
their specific needs into account.
Mexico believes firmly that we should continue
to enhance the prevention of sexual violence in armed
conflict. In the twenty-first century, it is unacceptable
that sexual violence continues to be used as a weapon of
war, and we are particularly concerned about the surge
in such violence against girls registered by the United
Nations in 2013. We consider it a positive development
that sexual violence is now being more broadly
considered by the Security Council as a criterion in
determining the application of targeted sanctions in
situations of conflict.
We hope that the strategic review on sanctions and
peacekeeping operations to be carried out in 2015 will
take into account the commitments and priorities of the
agenda on women and peace and security. Impunity
in cases of sexual violence in armed conflict remains
continues to be a major challenge for the international
community. Those responsible for such crimes must
be brought to justice, and we believe the Security
Council should take stronger measures to deal with
those involved, including by referring cases to the
International Criminal Court.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing how
strongly my delegation feels that conflict prevention
is a crucial tool for addressing the causes of emerging

S/PV.7289

crises and preventing the reappearance of old conflicts
and the emergence of new ones. We urge the Council,
and the international community as a whole, to pay
more attention to the role of women in early-warning
mechanisms, mediation and prevention in communities,
and we hope that the outcome of this debate will add to
empowerment, peace and security for women and girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalek (Egypt): During the past 15 years,
the Security Council has laid the foundations for
a normative framework for the agenda on women
and peace and security, starting with the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Egypt noted with interest the
Secretary-General’s most recent report on women and
peace and security (S/2014/693). Today’s debate’s focus
on the situation of refugees, internally displaced persons
and stateless women and girls is a good opportunity to
follow up on specific commitments made across various
normative frameworks relevant to this agenda. In that
context, I would like to make the following points.
First, Egypt recognizes that women’s economic,
cultural, political and social empowerment is crucial to
a life free of violence and a key element in sustainable
development. Secondly, we are deeply concerned about
the increasing rates and patterns of violence against
women and girls, mass displacement flows and related
humanitarian challenges that have occurred in many
conflict and post-conflict settings in 2014, especially
in countries bordering on Syria and in some parts of
Iraq, Somalia and the Central African Republic. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s description of such
violations as deliberate campaigns against women’s
rights. 1n that regard, we stress the indispensable role
of justice and the rule of the law in protecting women’s
rights.
Thirdly, Egypt commends the serious investigations
the United Nations has conducted in order to address
violations and abuses of women’s human rights
committed by some United Nations peacekeepers and
personnel. However, the investigations are still slow
and inconclusive, and in that regard we highlight the
significance of references to zero tolerance in the
mandates of new field missions.
Fourthly, we see a gap between policies and
standards and their implementation, with the biggest of
these evident in the working methods of the Security
Council. While we acknowledge that resolution 2122

14-5920435/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

(2013) on women and peace and security addressed
some of those gaps, we believe that more systematic
information-gathering, implementation and monitoring
of implementation are still needed.
Fifthly, Egypt believes that the agenda for
women and peace and security needs more financial
resources directed to projects related to sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations. We also
stress the importance of strengthening the ability of
the United Nations system to effectively prevent and
respond, through early warnings and early action, to
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The latest practices of the Israeli army in Gaza are
clear violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of Arab women and girls under foreign
occupation. According to the Secretary-General’s report
on Palestine contained in document S/2014/650, at least
2,104 Palestinians have reportedly been killed. That
number includes at least 1,462 civilians, 495 of whom
were children and 253 were women. In that context,
Egypt expresses its regret that the Secretary General’s
report on women and peace and security (S/2014/693)
is without a single reference to the atrocities committed
against Palestinian women in the Palestinian occupied
territories.
In that regard, we request the Secretary General
and the field-based entities, particularly UN-Women
and the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to systematically include information on
the situation of women and girls in the Arab occupied
territories in their reports. We urge them to ensure that
forcibly displaced populations are protected against any
form of violence. Egypt reiterates its commitment to
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), in line with its international obligations, as well
as its conviction that women could play a critical and
indispensable role in resolving armed conflicts and
post-conflict situations.
With regard to the reference made by the United
States delegation to a rape incident in Cairo, although
it is totally irrelevant to the theme of today’s debate,
I wish to state that all such incidents are being fully
investigated and that perpetrators are duly prosecuted
before the judiciary.
In conclusion, I also want to express my deep
appreciation to the Argentine presidency for submitting

36/90

28/10/2014

an excellent concept paper (S/2014/731, annex) to the
Council. It has already enriched the debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica.
Mrs. Sealy-Monteith (Jamaica): Madam President,
I am delighted to see you in the Chair leading this
very important debate. I am honoured to address the
Security Council and to participate in this discussion
on women and peace and security, in recognition of
the historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000
and to mark the fourteenth anniversary since that
action was taken. Resolution 1325 (2000) holds much
significance for Jamaica, as it was adopted during our
tenure on the Council from 2000 to 2001 and under the
presidency of our sister African country, Namibia. We
are pleased that you, Madam President, have continued
that tradition. We commend Namibia for its initiative in
placing that important issue on our agenda — an issue
that since 2000 has garnered the attention of, and action
by, the international community.
Resolution 1325 (2000) sought to promote a
gender perspective for peace and security issues by
highlighting the special needs of women and girls, the
significant role played by women in the prevention of
armed conflicts and women’s contribution to the peace
process, as well as the full involvement of women in the
decision-making process for their development.
As we meet on the fourteenth anniversary of its
adoption to review the progress that has been made
in realizing its objectives, it is indeed timely and
fitting that we focus our attention on the situation of
refugees, internally displaced and stateless women
and girls. In the past year alone, we have witnessed
an increase in violence, mass displacement flows and
related humanitarian catastrophes. We note with grave
concern that incidences of sexual violence, abhorrent
crimes, human rights violations, and the forcible
displacement of women and girls from their families
and communities have escalated to unprecedented
levels. We must come to grips with the dangerous
emerging violence and conflicts associated with the
proliferation of militias and armed groups and with the
cases of violent extremism, where innocent civilians,
particularly women and girls suffer the greatest harm.
Against that background, it is important to highlight
the responsibility of the international community, and,
indeed, of each State, to develop and implement measures
to protect women and to ensure access to justice and

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

redress for victims of exploitation. Furthermore, women
need to be included in decision-making processes that
would incorporate a gender perspective and analysis in
the broader political process, and in efforts to prevent,
respond to and resolve conflict, displacement and the
effects of violent extremism.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report on women and peace and security (S/2014/693),
which identifies the areas of progress — limited in
some instances, commendable in others — made
over the reporting period, even as it underlines quite
frankly the remaining challenges and, simultaneously,
the opportunities for all of us to make good on our
commitments. In keeping with that resolution on
women and peace and security and the principle of
gender equality, over the years Jamaica has deployed
a total of 26 female officers who have served with
distinction in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
thereby enhancing their awareness and sensitivity to
those situations.
Jamaica believes that the empowerment of women
and their increased participation in decision-making are
effective strategies that complement other mechanisms
in the maintenance of peace and security. We cannot
but commend the resilience of many of the women who
experience war and conflict. We salute those who have
tackled their situations under difficult circumstances
and have survived, and those who act on their behalf.
In their name, we must move beyond the rhetoric of
support and take actions to implement measures in
areas where progress is possible and achievable.
At national and international levels, it is particularly
important that there be adequate funding for the
sustainability of programmes to effectively enhance
the full participation of women in peace and security
initiatives. That can be greatly facilitated by the more
deliberate involvement of the United Nations system,
Member States and other actors.
Looking ahead to a redoubling of our efforts,
Jamaica welcomes the high-level review to assess
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to be
held in 2015, and the prospects for incorporating and
integrating the commitments made under that and
successor resolutions aimed at prioritizing and giving
greater meaning to women’s issues on the peace and
security agenda.

S/PV.7289

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
Fourteen years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), we note an extraordinary
level of political commitment and activity in the field
of women and peace and security. That would merit a
longer statement than I am able to make here today,
and therefore I ask members to refer to the full, written
version that we are distributing.
We have been witnessing a series of deeply
troubling conflict-related developments leading to
mass displacements, humanitarian catastrophes and
serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, from which women suffer
disproportionately. That challenge should strengthen
our resolve to implement the commitments we have
made in a systematic and sustainable way at the
national, regional and global levels. Neglecting the
rights and needs of women and girls threatens our goals
with respect to peace and security, development and
human rights.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on refugee
and displaced women and girls, who often face multiple
discrimination and multiplied risks to their lives,
health, rights and livelihoods. Displacement frequently
threatens to reverse gains that have been made in terms
of gender equality and the empowerment of women in
general. In addition, we have recently experienced the
phenomenon of gender-specific displacement — women
and girls fleeing their homes to avoid violent extremist
groups that especially target and discriminate against
women and girls.
Women’s limited access to resources, services,
financial independence and decision-making processes
in situations of displacement can have consequences
that last across generations. Nothing demonstrates this
more clearly than the lack of access of displaced women
and girls to education. The European Union continues

14-5920437/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

to focus on ensuring access for all children to education
and protection in crises as a cornerstone of its strategy,
including through the European Union’s Children
of Peace initiative, which has reached over 100,000
children in situations of conflict worldwide.
We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/693), which provides continuous and
comparable information on the global implementation
of the Council’s resolutions on women and peace
and security. We think that the availability of that
continuous and comparable information is an important
step forward. We also emphasize the importance of
regular briefings by UN-Women Executive Director
Mlambo-Ngcuka and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura to the Security Council on
specific country situations.
We share the Secretary-General’s emphasis on
the need for enhanced engagement with civil society,
human rights defenders and women peacebuilders, as
well as support for their capacity-building, which is a
part of our action on women and peace and security.
We also strongly condemn the continuing attacks
and threats against women political leaders, media
personnel and human rights defenders.
In addition, the resilience of women and girls
in situations of conflict and displacement must be
acknowledged as well as their capacity to be active
agents in conflict resolution and in building lasting
peace harnessed.
We note with serious concern the continued sexual
violence — rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution,
trafficking and sexual slavery — that characterizes an
increasing number of conflicts and the continuing use
of sexual violence as a method of war. We welcome
the clear global, regional and national commitments
taken to tackle that, including those made at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
We must end impunity for crimes of sexual violence,
which must be properly investigated and prosecuted. In
that regard, we emphasize the significant advancement
in international law provided by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, as well as non-permanent
international criminal tribunals, in combating sexual
violence in conflict. We also welcome the increased
use of the criteria related to human rights and sexual
violence in the Security Council’s sanctions regimes.

38/90

28/10/2014

Attention to the protection of women and girls
and their participation in conflict resolution and postconflict peacebuilding must be transformed from an
exception to a standard practice through systematic
inclusion in policy guidelines, codes of conduct and
training. It should also receive the attention of senior
management in missions and other conflict resolution
and peacebuilding mechanisms. Gender advisers
must be deployed in all United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We also call
for the further deployment of United Nations women
protection advisers.
We continue to implement a EU systematic plan on
women and peace and security. We have also defined
the EU priority areas for the next reporting period, 2013
to 2015, which include transitional justice, women’s
political participation and economic empowerment,
women’s involvement in peace processes and preventing
sexual violence in conflict. Seventeen of the 28
European Union member States have adopted national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000).
To improve the situation of women and girls,
we need to make better use of the international legal
and policy instruments. General recommendation
No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, on tackling challenges
to gender equality in situations of conflict, is a
landmark achievement and underlines the importance
of reviewing our progress on women and peace and
security in the context of the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. We
further welcome the upcoming entry into force of the
Arms Trade Treaty on 24 December.
We look forward to the global review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) next year.
We hope that it provides an additional push to make
all commitments on women and peace and security a
reality — an overall effort, to which such a meeting as
you, Madam President, have organized today is making
a very important contribution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the NATO Special Representative for Women,
Peace and Security.
Ms. Schuurman: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council in this open debate as the new NATO Special
Representative for Women, Peace and Security. The
creation of a dedicated position within our organization

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

is in itself a clear sign of NATO’s strong commitment
to deliver on the women and peace and security agenda.
I enter that office as we enter the fifteenth year of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a
year of reflection. What did we achieve and how do we
sustain our achievements? How can we ensure that it
becomes simply inconceivable to work for lasting peace
and security without engaging half of the population?
The issue of full participation of women is
particularly relevant for today’s central theme:
displacement. The majority of displaced people
are women and girls. The already existing gender
inequalities make women particularly vulnerable in
situations of displacement. But that vulnerability should
not lead us to conclude that displaced women and girls
are unable to take on leadership roles. On the contrary.
time and again, it has been proven that women are key
assets in preventing conflict, in better responding and
in finding lasting solutions.
Unfortunately, women and girls remain all too
often an untapped resource. I therefore commend
the presidency for highlighting the need for the
meaningful inclusion of displaced women and girls
in decision-making and for integrating a gender
perspective in policies relating to refugees and displaced
persons in all four pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Increasing awareness is key. Within NATO,
integrating a gender perspective in crisis management
exercises ‑ for instance, through scenarios that include
possible indicators that sexual violence is taking place
‑ has proved to be an important tool for increasing
the understanding and preparedness of our staff. At
the recent NATO summit in Wales, we published a
progress report on the NATO implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Much has been
accomplished in order to integrate the agenda into
NATO’s everyday activities. We need to continue to
show leadership and commitment in order to sustain
and consolidate our achievements. To do that, this year
we endorsed a revised policy and an action plan with
clear and ambitious objectives.
I would like to stress that we did not do that alone.
Both policy and action plan were developed with the
participation of all 28 allies and almost 30 partner
nations from all over the globe. Well over 50 nations
signed up for concrete action to further reduce barriers
to meaningful participation, to broaden our partnership

S/PV.7289

with civil society and to continue to mainstream a
gender perspective in our everyday security business.
One of the very concrete deliverables is to develop
military guidelines to prevent and to respond to sexual
violence in conflict. We will strive to deliver on that
commitment within the months to come.
The greater empowerment of women will benefit
all our societies. It will also further our common cause
of promoting lasting peace and security. NATO will
continue to play its full part in the effort and translate
its firm commitment into day-to-day practice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Schuurman for her statement. I now give the floor
to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand welcomes
this opportunity to discuss once again the issue of
women and peace and security. We appreciate the
comprehensive concept note (S/2014/731, annex)
prepared by Argentina, outlining key issues for today’s
discussion. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report (S/2014/693). Our sincere appreciation
also goes to the speakers who provided informative
briefings.
Thailand associates itself with the statements of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and of the
Human Security Network to be delivered this afternoon.
Displaced women and girls often bear the brunt of
any conflict. Their plight is often made even worse by the
risk of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation.
To address effectively the issue of displaced women
and girls requires a comprehensive strategy that
integrates security, humanitarian, development and
gender perspectives. As a country that has hosted
many hundreds of thousands of displaced persons from
neighbouring countries in the past decades, Thailand
would like to share with the Council our experience and
views in that regard.
First and foremost, we must ensure the rights,
safety and well-being of displaced women and girls.
Against that backdrop, Thailand supports the efforts of
the United Nations to mainstream gender perspectives
into peacekeeping operations, to increase the number of
female peacekeepers and to provide training on gender
sensitivity before deployment. Thai female military
observers and police officers have served in various
United Nations missions in Darfur, in Liberia and in
Haiti. We hope that more Thai female officers can join
other United Nations missions in other parts of the world.

14-5920439/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

The increasing presence of female humanitarian staff
also contributes to a more secure, safer environment for
women and girls. Thailand supports the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse committed by
United Nations personnel. It is tragic that protectors
should turn into perpetrators themselves. In the case of
such crimes, we call for a timely response, a transparent
investigation and an end to impunity.
The prevalence of gender-based violence in conflict
and displacement settings continues to be of grave
concern. Measures to protect displaced persons from
sexual violence are therefore crucial and need to be put
in place immediately. Thailand recently established a
legal assistance centre as well as a sexual and genderbased violence committee in the temporary shelters
with the support of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to assist those in
distress and to educate them about their human and
legal rights.
Limited access to basic humanitarian services
adds to women and girls’ vulnerability. Therefore, in
prolonged periods of displacement, we must ensure that
women and girls have access to education and healthcare services that address their specific health needs.
It is essential to provide economic opportunities for
displaced women and girls to enable them to become
more self-sufficient and less dependent. Thailand has
done that by providing them with a wide range of
vocational training and income-generating projects.
Refugees and displaced persons must also
be equipped with the necessary skills for their
voluntary return with dignity. Capacity-building
and development-oriented programmes are essential
for their self-reliance during their reintegration or
resettlement process. Through such programmes,
displaced women and girls can contribute to the
reconciliation and reconstruction of their communities,
peacebuilding and long-term development. In that
regard, Thailand would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all development partners, local and
international non-governmental organizations and civil
societies that have cooperated with our Government in
providing assistance to displaced women and girls and
to promote their empowerment. My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the adoption earlier
this morning of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21.
Thailand is fully committed to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and any subsequent resolutions
on this important issue. Next year will be the fifteenth
40/90

28/10/2014

anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
To mark the occasion, Thailand and the International
Peace Institute will undertake a joint project entitled
“Women in mediation and peace processes”, focusing
on the challenges and opportunities in translating the
commitment of women and peace and security into
practice. We also hope that the high-level review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) next year
will lend even more impetus to the comprehensive and
universal implementation of that important resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We are seeing
unprecedented numbers of displaced persons; 55 million
were reportedly displaced by the end of 2013, including
33 million due to violence in conflicts. Violent outbreaks
in Gaza and Iraq have exacerbated the situation even
further. Displacement is a peace-and-security issue that
needs adequate attention by the Council, in addition to
action by the other main organs. Liechtenstein therefore
welcomes this debate and its very timely focus on
internally displaced and refugee women. My delegation
hosted a workshop and a policy forum on the topic in
collaboration with the International Peace Institute a
few weeks ago in preparation for today’s discussions.
Women and children account for 80 per cent
of displaced persons. Nevertheless, the way they
experience displacement rarely shapes interventions
and programmes. Displacement has been shown to
exacerbate existing gender inequality. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees often lack
identification documents. They are deprived of their
livelihoods and struggle with poverty, which puts them
in a particularly vulnerable position. As a consequence,
women face a drastic increase in violence, particularly
violence inside their homes and from intimate partners.
They are more vulnerable to sexual harassment and
exploitation as well as to child, early and forced
marriages.
We cannot limit our action to assist IDPs and
refugees to what is required for bare survival. IDPs
account for 63 per cent of the aforementioned 33 million
people displaced due to violence and conflicts. Internal
displacement is a long-term experience, lasting an
average of 17 years. The assistance required must
be complemented therefore by protection, which is
currently lacking. Much more is necessary to ensure
protection from further harm and trauma, in particular
to women and children. States also need to invest in
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

prevention, to work on preparedness and to have
policies in place to deal with displacement before it
even occurs.
Displacement is not a short-term problem, and we
therefore have to stop treating it as if it were. It is not
solely a humanitarian issue, but also a development
issue. Early investment in development will help 1DPs
and refugees rebuild their livelihoods. Rapid provision
of identity documents, fair and equal access to asylum
as well as access to education are key. Education in
particular is a crucial element for empowering women,
making them less vulnerable and allowing them to
make active contributions to recovery. Indeed, women
have to be part of the solution, with full and equal
participation.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the World
Food Programme’s excellent initiative in the Sudan,
entitled Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative
Energy in Humanitarian Settings (SAFE). It provides
fuel-efficient stoves that reduce firewood consumption
and the clearing of community forests. The stoves have
reduced expenses for cooking fuel, allowing women
to buy other food items and improve the nutrition and
diet diversity of their families. In addition, women no
longer have to venture far from their homes to collect
firewood. Such trips — as is well known — expose them
to grave risks, including physical and sexual violence.
In less than three years, beneficiaries are reporting that
SAFE has not only changed their lives for the better,
but that many also no longer need food assistance from
the World Food Programme.
It is simply unacceptable that the majority of
humanitarian action still fails to take into account the
vulnerabilities and special needs of women and girls or
their potential to make active contributions. That is not
due to a lack of guidance, since we have the relevant
instruments at our disposal. It is up to us Member
States, the United Nations system and all relevant actors
in the field to ensure the implementation of the guiding
documents. It is now time to hold ourselves accountable
to our own standards.
In tackling displacement, we need a holistic,
inclusive approach based on close collaboration
with civil society and women’s groups and aimed at
prevention, protection, participation and development.
We believe that this is the only way that will allow us
to build long-lasting peace and achieve full recovery.

S/PV.7289

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate of the Security Council
on women and peace and security. The perspective
you have given to the issue, with a focus on displaced
women and girls, is particularly timely and interesting
to us.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
A11 over the world, women are disproportionately
affected by armed conflict and conflict-related
situations. Violence, harassment, sexual abuse, lack
of access to education and the most basic health-care
facilities, as well as water and food shortages, are only
some of the many threats and challenges they face
every single day. In terms of displacement, up to 80 per
cent of the more than 50 million refugees and displaced
persons are found to be women and children.
Italy has been a strong advocate of the women and
peace and security initiative since its inception. In
2010, we were the first country to call for the women
and peace and security agenda to be integrated into the
framework of the universal periodic review mechanism.
Our national action plan has already been revised once
this year to accelerate its implementation in the next
three years. The latest version not only reports on
progress, but also illustrates the efforts that have been
made to adopt a more effective approach. Our new
national action plan hinges on two main concepts: first,
enhancing coordination and integration among the
various administrations dealing with women and peace
and security; and secondly, mainstreaming genderrelated issues into all socioeconomic initiatives.
While national plans are pivotal instruments, some
15 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
they are no longer enough. We need an international
plan that connects all the national plans. In a globalized
world, where international issues become domestic
problems, or domestic problems become international,
the question of displaced people, refugees and induced
migration is a huge challenge for the countries under
the most pressure. Italy is one of those.
With its tradition of tolerance, understanding
and inclusiveness, Italy will always stand by people
who, against their will, find themselves in desperate

14-5920441/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

situations caused by dreadful conflicts or human rights
violations in their homeland. While entire populations
have no other choice but to flee, too often without a
destination, their migration can also create tensions
in the new land, where people might be struggling to
make a living. In that situation, it is no wonder that
women and girls become the most vulnerable targets.
Since conflicts and tensions migrate from
one country to another, together with population
movements, the response must be global. No country
in the world can react effectively on its own and no
country in the world should be left alone to respond to
and address such problems. In that context, a new target
of the women and peace and security agenda is needed
to address, at the global level, the question of refugees
and displaced women and girls, as well as their forced
migration. Our aim must be to see women not only as
victims but also as protagonists, with the opportunity
and tools to play an important role as promoters of
peace, security, understanding and integration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me the opportunity
to commend you, Madam President, for convening
this open debate on the issue of women and peace and
security, which is the third open debate held under your
presidency.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The escalation of crises in the Middle East, Africa
and Europe has thrown into sharp relief how much
work remains to be done, particularly with regard to the
protection of millions of women and children displaced
by such conflicts. The focus of today’s open debate is
therefore timely and critical. Our discussion casts a
much-needed spotlight on the urgent plight of women
and girls forced to flee their homes due to insecure
political, economic and social conditions arising from
war.
The rampant incidence of sexual and gender-based
violence in situations of conflict, especially affecting
displaced women and girls, is deeply troubling.
Displaced women and girls already suffer the trauma
of leaving their homes and livelihood behind. For them
to also fall victim to abhorrent acts of sexual violence
in the places where they seek sanctuary is deplorable.
Malaysia calls upon all parties to respect and uphold
42/90

28/10/2014

international law and ensure the physical security,
safety and protection of the rights of women and girls.
Ending the prevailing culture of impunity and
replacing it with one that promotes the rule of law,
justice and accountability is crucial in efforts to ensure
the protection and prevention of violence against
women. In that regard, Malaysia supports the continued
efforts of the international community towards that end,
including through the building of justice institutions, the
deployment of mobile court systems, the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms, and the prioritizing
of women’s access to justice.
Malaysia places strong emphasis on the importance
of women’s economic empowerment, as outlined in
the declaration on women’s economic empowerment
for peacebuilding, adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2013. We also stress the importance
of access to education and health care services for
displaced women and girls, and call for increased
support for initiatives put forward by Member States,
the United Nations and civil society in that regard.
The international community must remain vigilant
against the forces of violent extremism that have led
to much of the recent mass displacement. Malaysia
condemns the violence wrought by militant extremism,
resulting in untold suffering and gross violations
of human rights, especially towards women and
children. We believe that a key strategy in combating
such extremist ideology is promoting moderation and
inclusivity. That requires ensuring that all stakeholders
in society, especially women, are empowered and given
a voice.
Malaysia reiterates its belief that the equal, full
and active participation of women is key to conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
regard we are encouraged by the increasing trend of
women’s participation in United Nations-supported
peace negotiations and the inclusion of content specific
to the women and peace and security agenda in peace
agreements. We echo calls for enhanced attention to
the role of women in early warning, mediation and
prevention initiatives at the community level as well as
the engagement of women in efforts to address the root
causes of conflicts.
Malaysia is determined to ensure that the plight
of women and girls in situations of armed conflict
continues to receive the sustained attention of the
Security Council. We support all efforts to continue

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

mainstreaming the issue of women and peace and
security in the work of the Council. In that regard, my
delegation also wishes to express its appreciation for
efforts to improve the implementation of arrangements
for monitoring, analysis and reporting to the Council,
including providing gender-sensitive conflict analysis
throughout the reporting chain.
The commitment of the international community
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent, related resolutions, including resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), is today being tested in our
response to the dire situation of displaced women and
girls worldwide. For the sake of millions of innocent
women and children, it is a test that we cannot afford
to fail.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like thank you, Madam President,
for convening this interesting open debate of Security
Council on the theme “Displaced women and girls:
leaders and survivors”, under the agenda item entitled
“Women and peace and security”. I would also like to
thank the four speakers who took the floor this morning
for their informative statements, which taught us a
great deal about the theme that brings us together today.
Since decolonization, it is estimated that Africa has
experienced approximately 80 coups d’état, about as
many armed conflicts and around 40 civil wars. Of the
19 countries around the world where armies intervened
in the 1990s, 15 are located in sub-Saharan Africa, and
my country, Burundi, is one of them. It is estimated that
the number of civilian losses in the current conflicts
is around 90 per cent of all casualties, mostly women
and children. A century ago, 90 per cent of those who
died in war were soldiers or were part of the military
personnel.
That dark portrait raises a very important question:
why Africa? Answering that question requires points of
reference. As serious and recurrent as they are, violent
conflicts should not give rise to an analysis that locks
Africa in a hawkish caricature or in a passive position.
The Africa of peoples ‑ the Africa of men and of women,
the Africa of girls ‑ does not only suffer conflicts; it
also tries to prevent and resolve them, and in all that the
role of women and girls is to be promoted.

S/PV.7289

After having heard the speeches that preceded mine,
I would say that the overall picture that emerges is that,
14 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), no
conflict can be resolved, no transition can be envisaged
without taking into account the participation of women,
who constitute half of humankind. The consequences
of conflict are devastating, including for the equality
between men and women. Women often have fewer
resources than men with which to protect themselves.
With children, they generally constitute the majority of
refugee and internally displaced populations. They are
the recurrent targets of tactics of warfare such as sexual
violence. They are often kept out of peace talks, even
though they lead peace movements and are the source
of community recovery after conflict.
Women and girls are also particularly affected by
the destruction of the socioeconomic infrastructure,
such as hospitals, health centres, schools, water
systems, roads and transportation routes. That situation
radicalizes their inability to gain access to basic social
services and aggravates problems related to primary
and reproductive health. It also paves the way for an
increase in the maternal and infant mortality rate,
growth in and lack of protection from violence and
sexual exploitation, and the spread of and lack of
protection from risks related to HIV/AIDS.
The abuses suffered by women and girls in
situations of armed conflict are variable and take the
form of rape, sexual slavery and forced prostitution.
Women and girl refugees are very vulnerable to the
violence and exploitation at the heart of conflicts, and
rather than return home they prefer to seek asylum in
other lands.
We welcome the fact that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has issued
guidelines for the protection of women refugees,
including the prevention of sexual violence against
them and measures to be taken if such acts have been
committed, and that it seeks to ensure that international
law provides adequate protection to women and girl
refugees.
Responding to challenges specific to men and
and to women in conflict and post-conflict requires
sensitivity and focused awareness of the human realities
experienced specifically and differently by each sex.
That in turn requires the appropriate training needed
to make informed decisions. That ultimately requires

14-5920443/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

appropriate tools, firm commitments, measures for
action and evaluation, and accountability mechanisms.
With regard to the maintenance of peace, Burundi,
which is the leading French-speaking troop-contributing
country, supports the deployment of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Deployment of female
troops and police and the appointment of advisors on
the protection of women have demonstrated that one
could promote the empowerment of women and address
sexual violence in armed conflict and thus play a major
role in post-conflict reconstruction.
With regard to women’s involvement in the peace
negotiation and reconciliation processes, in Burundi
women played a very important role in the various
negotiations that led to a comprehensive peace
agreement. At the signing of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi in Arusha, Tanzania, in
2000 — an agreement that enshrines political,
ethnic, regional and gender inclusiveness — women
participated actively, and their recommendations were
taken into account. For example, in the context of the
integration of women in the process of social, economic
and political development, the Burundian Constitution
grants a minimum quota of 30 per cent for women in
the highest levels of decision-making. Thus, since 2005,
women have been at the forefront of reforms in the
country. Some 44 per cent of the members of Burundi’s
Parliament are women, and 43 per cent of Government
ministers are women occupying significant posts.
Burundi’s good experience in that respect shows
today that the contributions of women in reconstruction
and peacebuilding processes are crucial in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in postconflict reconstruction. We must therefore consider
them as full partners in the formal and informal
processes of conflict resolution and peace negotiations.
We can refer to an example of mobilization very close
to us, namely, the meeting of women’s organizations in
the Great Lakes region, which was held in Bujumbura
in July 2013, within the framework of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, whose
headquarters are located in my country, Burundi.
Finally, my country would once again emphasize
the great importance it attaches to the role of women
in prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding and reiterates at the same time its strong
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and

44/90

28/10/2014

security. It will continue to attach particular importance
to the situation of girls and women who are refugees and
displaced. Of course, we eagerly await the results of the
independent review commissioned by the SecretaryGeneral on the state of implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which was adopted almost 15 years ago.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ms. Beham: I thank you, Madam President, for
allowing the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) to participate in this important
debate. I too would like to thank the briefers for their
interesting and thought-provoking statements this
morning.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe deals with early warning, conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation.
It has a uniquely broad concept of security that
encompasses a wide set of areas that we believe
influence the stability and security of a country. It
is not just traditional security stemming from the
security forces such as the police and the military that
we address, but the politico-military dimension and
aspects ranging from the economic and environmental
to the human dimension, which includes the rule of law,
legal reform and human rights.
In fact, as the OSCE Heads of State and Government
endorsed in 2010, it is the inherent dignity of the
individual that is at the core of comprehensive security.
Thus, gender equality as a concept for ensuring the
dignity of women and men is one of the cornerstones
of our comprehensive security approach. That approach
recognizes, as I already indicated, that security analysis
should go beyond the traditional understanding of
security and include aspects of economic rights,
environmental security and human rights, including
women’s rights. In the OSCE, we therefore view gender
equality as a basic concept for attaining security. That
is where we believe the OSCE comprehensive security
approach is largely congruent with resolution 1325
(2000), on the women and peace and security agenda.
I am here today as a representative of the OSCE,
the world’s largest regional security organization, with
57 participating States, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok. As such, I would like to emphasize that
we wholeheartedly support and try to proactively
contribute to the ongoing process of strengthening the

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

role of regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In an effort to strengthen the strategic partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations, we have
developed, among many other things, together with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and in close coordination with the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons — whom we heard speak today — a
handbook on a collaborative approach to addressing
displacement and the protection of displaced populations
and affected communities throughout the conflict cycle,
from early warning and conflict prevention to crisis
management, conflict resolution and post-conflict
transition and rehabilitation. That so-called protection
checklist has been fully gender mainstreamed and
includes separate references to sexual and genderbased violence against displaced persons, in particular
women and children. As its name says, the protection
checklist offers very concrete operational instructions
and recommendations for field staff on how to protect
displaced populations and their rights, and it draws
from the unfortunately rich experience of the OSCE
and of course UNHCR in dealing with displacement.
Among the many lessons that we have learned from
tackling displacement is that there has to be a special
focus on the different experiences women and girls have
in the various phases of the conflict cycle and that the
different protection needs of women and girls have to
be taken into account when responding to displacement
situations.
Last week, the OSCE launched a study on national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the OSCE region, which we undertook in
cooperation with the Peace Research Institute Oslo. The
study looks into the 27 national action plans that exist
among the 57 OSCE participating States and identifies
good practices, lessons learned and challenges that still
hamper the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Although different protection issues feature high
on the women and peace and security agenda, the
national action plans that we studied focus mostly on
the protection of women against sexual violence. Many
of the national action plans in fact refer to protection
against sexual violence as an important reason to create
women and peace and security policies.

S/PV.7289

However, such an approach, as important as it is,
reduces women to mere victims and does not take into
account the many other significant provisions of the
women and peace and security agenda that call for the
participation of women in decision-making, conflict
prevention and resolution and peace processes. It
does not take into account the political and economic
empowerment of women and the crucial role of women
in rebuilding societies. Our study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions
indicates that States tend to disregard the empowerment
aspect when designing their national action plans,
in particular when it comes to the domestic security
sector or the inclusion of women in conflict prevention
measures such as early warning, confidence-building,
dialogue facilitation, preventive diplomacy or
mediation. On the basis of the study, we will work
with OSCE participating States to improve that aspect.
We have heard some of them today speak about their
national action plans.
In an effort to strengthen the empowerment and
conflict prevention elements of the women and peace
and security agenda, to strengthen the linkage of formal
mediation and dialogue facilitation with informal
peace initiatives, and to ensure that women, including
displaced women, become active stakeholders in
peace processes, we published our Guidance Note on
Enhancing Gender-Responsive Mediation in 2013 and
are now working on its implementation.
In our most recent effort, the OSCE has again
proven its commitment to the principles of the women
and peace and security agenda in setting up its Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine as a response to the
ongoing crisis there. The Mission includes a gender
adviser in its core team at headquarters to assist with
gender mainstreaming in conflict analysis, in addition to
reaching out to women’s groups from all sides. We have
created a gender focal-point network in the teams that
are deployed throughout the country. We also strive to
increase gender balance among the monitors. Currently
approximately 27 per cent of them are women.
Among other things, the Mission is monitoring the
situation of the internally displaced persons (IDPs), of
whom the majority are women, in order to ascertain
what their needs are. We are also looking at ways to
include women and women’s organizations in the
formal negotiations to put an end to the conflict. We
have invited Ukrainian women to come to Vienna in
November to meet with OSCE senior representatives to

14-5920445/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

discuss the situation of women in the conflict, including
as IDPs, and their suggestions for resolving the crisis.
We feel that it is of utmost importance that women now
become part of the peace process in Ukraine and of any
dialogue to settle the conflict and rebuild trust.
As we are approaching the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we need even
more concerted efforts to further the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. There
has been much progress since the adoption of that
ground-breaking document, but much also remains to
be done. The OSCE will be happy to feed the findings
of our study on national action plans into the global
review of resolution 1325 (2000) led by UN-Women for
the upcoming anniversary, and we will be pleased to
contribute to that review by offering the results of our
work on the gender aspects of violent extremism that
leads to terrorism. Over the years, we have gathered
unique expertise in that area, and we are proud to share
it in order to improve the global fight against terrorism.
Regional organizations, such as the OSCE, working
on the maintenance of international peace and security
have a recognized role in promoting all aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
which include the protection and empowerment of
displaced women. But it is obvious that States have
the primary responsibility for ensuring that the
provisions of the women and peace and security agenda
are translated into action. I strongly believe that an
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE will benefit our member States, as well as our
Organization’s efforts to strengthen the commitment to
global peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, on your successful
presidency of the Council. I would like to thank you
also for providing us with an opportunity to participate
in this important session. I would like to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights
of internally displaced persons, and Ms. Suaad Allami
from the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their valuable contributions and briefings.

46/90

28/10/2014

The attention focused on the women and peace
and security agenda by the Security Council and the
international community since the adoption of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000) has contributed to
shedding light on the impact of conflicts on women
and girls and on women’s important role in resolving
conflicts, building consensus and facilitating stability,
democracy, prosperity, conciliation and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Hence, we look forward to the highlevel review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to be held in 2015. We believe that review will
provide an opportunity to focus on best practices and
deal with existing challenges and concerns, particularly
that women and girls, including female refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), are still the ones
most affected by armed conflicts.
Since women and children represent the greatest
proportion of IDPs and refugees due to the terrorism
and conflicts that continue to prevail in the world, not
only do they face enormous difficulties, but they also
suffer from discrimination, violence and human rights
violations. That would not happen if more attention
were paid to the strict enforcement of international laws
to protect women during armed conflicts, and which
call upon all warring parties to take measures to protect
women and girls from violence, including gender-based
violence, in a cases of armed conflicts.
Since sexual violence in armed conflict is an
urgent humanitarian issue, we would like to commend
the joint UN-Women/Justice Rapid Response training,
roster management, and deployment mechanism on
sexual and gender-based violence. That mechanism
provides support to the international community in the
achievement of justice and accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence in cases of conflict. We share
the Secretary-General’s concern over the emerging and
continued patterns of violence against women and girls
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
We regret that in many parts of the world, particularly
in our Arab region, the problem of displacement is a
major problem due to conflict and terrorism. That is
clear in the figures included in the relevant reports.
There were 51.2 million victims of forced displacement
at the end of 2013, representing an increase of 6 million
over the figure reported in 2012. Qatar has provided
humanitarian assistance commensurate with the
immense humanitarian impact of that crisis, especially
on women and children.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the need
for humanitarian agencies to have access to those
affected and for the provisions of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions on humanitarian
issues to be implemented and to hold the perpetrators of
serious violations accountable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Madam, for presiding over this meeting and for
your leadership on this topic.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
instructive presentations.
Next year we will witness a convergence of global
milestones on gender issues. Brazil looks forward to the
Security Council high-level review of resolution 1325
(2000) and the celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of the Beijing Platform for Action, a major landmark in
the advancement of women. In parallel, as supported
by Brazil and recommended by the report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, the
post-2015 development agenda is expected to include a
stand-alone goal for ensuring gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls.
Yet major challenges remain, particularly when the
threats of forced displacement and gender inequality
overlap. Nearly two decades ago, the Beijing Platform
for Action recognized that refugee and displaced women
are especially vulnerable to violence and need specific
measures of protection, assistance and training. At a
time when the global population of forcibly displaced
persons and asylum-seekers has reached record levels,
it is especially important to intensify efforts to prevent
women and girls from falling victim to sex and labour
trafficking, gender-based violence, legal discrimination
and other abuses.
Prevention is always the best solution. Even after
hostilities have begun, diplomatic measures should
not be prematurely discarded. The temptation to
employ forceful and military measures to resolve
international crises constitutes, in many instances, an
additional hazard to all civilians, including refugees,
displaced or stateless women and girls. Women should
be acknowledged and empowered as key actors in all
activities that influence their future, from humanitarian
assistance to decisions on displacement and repatriation;

S/PV.7289

from the planning of economic recovery to the pursuit
of accountability for serious crimes; and from peace
processes to peacebuilding initiatives.
We should also recognize the transformative
potential of the greater participation and leadership
of women in society, including in conflict settings.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil
convened in September an event, entitled “Women,
Everyday Peacebuilders”, that stressed the crucial role
played by women in reconciling former combatants
and mending community divisions. Given appropriate
tools, women can greatly contribute to the effectiveness
of post-conflict activities and therefore enhance
the prospects of reaching a sustainable peace. The
Secretary-General’s seven-point action plan on genderresponsive peacebuilding (see S/2010/466) is a central
reference in that regard.
The long-term protection of displaced women and
girls is also improved when their basic needs are properly
addressed. Education, training and employment, legal
assistance, land and property rights and health services,
including sexual and reproductive health services,
are vital areas to provide women subjected to forced
displacement with a better perspective for their future.
Although Brazil does not fall into the category
of a conflict or post-conflict situation, our National
Plan of Policies for Women integrates relevant
recommendations contained in resolution 1325 (2000),
including those aimed at fighting sexual violence. On
the external front, Brazil has launched South-South
cooperation projects to tackle sexual and genderbased violence in countries affected by violence or
instability. We stand ready to share our experience
of social inclusion with other countries, as they could
be instrumental for women in areas emerging from
conflict.
Brazil has a long tradition of offering shelter and
safety to victims of distant wars, regardless of their
gender, religion, sexual orientation or ethnic group.
Since last year, we have granted humanitarian visas
to over 5,000 asylum seekers, including hundreds of
women and girls who would otherwise be subject to a
situation of extreme danger. Specific policies aimed at
welcoming Syrian refugees have also been adopted by
other countries in our region, which shows that, besides
being a peaceful and stable region, Latin America and
the Caribbean remain committed to the cause of those
displaced by conflict and persecution.

14-5920447/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

In keeping with this long-standing regional
commitment, Brazil will host, in partnership with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, on 2 and 3 December, a ministerial meeting
in commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, a non-binding
regional instrument that reflects Latin America and
the Caribbean’s tradition of granting asylum to those
in need. The declaration and action plan to be adopted
in Brasilia shall represent a further step towards the
improvement of our regional framework regarding
the protection of refugees, internally displaced and
stateless people.
At the domestic level, renewed attention is presently
being given to the issue of statelessness, a worldwide
challenge affecting millions of persons, often due to
unequal treatment of women and men by nationality
laws. The Government will soon submit to the Congress
a draft law on the protection of stateless persons.
The Council has been playing an increasingly
relevant role in emphasizing the particular needs of
women and girls affected by conflict, including those
who have been forcibly displaced. The far-reaching
nature of this agenda, however, demands that we do
not lose sight of the important work being done by
other bodies. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Population Fund and
UN-Women also require and deserve our full support
and attention in the enduring quest to promote, protect
and empower all women around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
having organized this open debate on a topic of such
relevance to the work of the Council. We also thank
the main briefers for their participation and invaluable
presentations.
We note the report of the Secretary-General which
is the basis for our discussions (S/2014/693) and express
our special appreciation to the Republic of Argentina
for the lucid concept note prepared for this annual
meeting on women and peace and security (S/2014/693,
annex). We also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21 this morning.

48/90

28/10/2014

Today’s debate gives us the opportunity to consider
the comprehensive implementation of the important
resolution 1325 (2000), given our firm belief in the
essential role women have to play in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts; promoting justice and
reconciliation; supporting demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration; and rebuilding national institutions,
all of which are essential pillars for building a lasting
peace.
It is undeniable that women and girls suffer the
most devastating effects that come with conflict, in
particular the increasingly widespread use of genderbased violence, rape, sexual exploitation, sexual slavery,
forced pregnancies resulting from these deplorable
acts, and stigmatization in their communities. All of
these aspects affect their mental and emotional stability
and even threaten their lives.
All assistance provided to such women and girls
must take into account the trauma they have suffered
and continue to suffer as displaced persons, through
flashbacks, constant rejection and prolonged family
separation. There is therefore a major need for
counselling, but the road towards recovery also requires
efforts to restore normalcy to their lives. This includes
a job and the dignity won by earning one’s own money
and the freedom to spend it, and education for one’s
children, which in turn holds the promise of a better
future.
It should be underscored that a child’s ability to
attend school, even in a bombed building or a refugee
camp, symbolizes having a system, a routine and a path
towards normalcy — recovering from and overcoming
trauma. Women should be empowered from girlhood,
with access to education, the certainty that their rights
are protected and promoted, and the knowledge that
they are part of any process affecting their welfare and
future.
We will not rest until we see the special needs of
women and girls on the ground receiving the special
and privileged attention they deserve, with the
active collaboration of the relevant agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system and
Member States, with the support of non-governmental
organizations and civil society. In this context, my
delegation would like to acknowledge the important
work of UN-Women and the progress achieved to date
in mainstreaming gender throughout all activities on
the ground of United Nations missions. We urge them

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

to continue their valuable contribution to the challenges
at hand.
In the light of the fact that human rights abuses and
violations — including discrimination, sexual violence
and gender-based violence — can occur at various stages
of the displacement cycle, the primary challenge for
Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian
actors face is the need to ensure and improve a protective
environment for displaced persons. We reiterate that it
is the responsibility of Member States to protect their
populations, in particular displaced women and girls,
who are the most vulnerable.
In order to protect and improve the rights of
displaced women and integrate a rights-based approach
into national governance structures, there is a need to
step up the capacity-building of public institutions,
which often lie broken or weakened following a conflict.
This means ensuring that the practice of protection is
more consistent and effective; training national security
forces and raising their awareness; supporting local
civil society groups working on human rights and the
protection of displaced women; and advocating for the
rights of displaced women with relevant stakeholders.
We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
that the process of strategic reviews of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and sanctions and, in turn, the
review the peacebuilding architecture should guarantee
the inclusion of the commitments and priorities of the
women and peace and security agenda. The use of genderand age-disaggregated data remains indispensable to
ensure adequate attention is given to protecting the
human rights of women and girls, promoting their
empowerment and effectively implementing activities
that will lead to the full application of resolution 1325
(2000) and full respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights.
In conclusion, let me underscore how important it
is that gender equality and the empowerment of women
be placed at the centre of the post-2015 development
agenda, and that that goal should put an emphasis
on building peaceful societies and institutions, both
of which are central for realizing the commitments
undertaken on women and peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this very important
debate today. We also express our appreciation to

S/PV.7289

this morning’s briefers for their thought-provoking
presentations. We are touched by the courage and
determination of refugee women leader Ms. Suaad
Allami. Her story indeed demonstrates how women can
rise to the challenge of armed conflicts by taking charge
of their own lives and leading the struggle against
violence to restore sustainable peace and security.
I also add my voice to those of previous speakers in
agreeing that, as a vulnerable group, women and young
girls bear the brunt of armed conflict. The trauma of
violence and the travails of camp life are felt the hardest
by women and girls. Displacement from their homes
exposes women and girls to sexual violence, rape and
molestation — often used as a deliberate instrument
of war. Camp settings make women and children
vulnerable to trafficking, with stateless and separated
women being the most susceptible.
But that is just one side of the story. Women
and girls are not merely the victims who suffer the
most; they are also the most potent agents of change
in situations of armed conflict. The involvement of
women in peacebuilding can make a real difference in
efforts to contain a conflict and ensure a speedy return
to peace and security. With a little support from the
international community, women can play that crucial
role at every stage of conflict resolution, including in
peace negotiations, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
and in transitional justice systems.
Let me say that over the past 14 years, the Security
Council’s engagement with the agenda on women and
peace and security has laid down a normative structure
and yielded positive results. Despite that commendable
achievement, however, more must be done to ensure
its effective implementation on the ground. The sharp
increase in the refugee population, coupled with the
emergence of various types of extremism, has worsened
the situation for women and girls in several parts of
the world. The international community’s efforts
should therefore focus on converting commitments
into concrete and action-oriented measures through
preventive strategies, robust responses and effective
solutions, as part of an integrated global strategy for
women’s empowerment and gender equality.
We support the Security Council’s agenda on
women and peace and security as outlined in its
mandate — a mandate aimed at preventing sexual
violence in armed conflict and promoting women’s
participation in post-conflict peace processes, with a
view to maintaining international peace and security.

14-5920449/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

The focus should therefore remain on resolving
armed conflicts and preventing relapses into conflict.
Multidimensional peacekeeping and its missions, with
relevant mandates, play an important role in protecting
women and combating sexual violence. As a leading
participant in peacekeeping, Pakistan has contributed
to that global effort. Pakistani women continue to
serve as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans.
The agenda on women and peace and security should
also include the crucial aspect of women’s participation
in conflict resolution. An effective strategy should pay
adequate attention to the four pillars of protection, relief
and recovery, participation and conflict prevention.
Women’s participation at all stages of a post-conflict
recovery must be visible and meaningful, and women
must be encouraged to take leadership roles in the drive
towards ending conflict and restoring sustainable peace
in their societies. Ultimately, we hope that those crucial
aspects of the agenda on women and peace and security
will be part of the debate at the 2015 high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you very much, Madam President, for organizing
this debate and for your presence here today.
(spoke in English)
Equality between women and men, and the full
and meaningful participation of women and girls
in all aspects of the life of their communities and
countries, is at the core of Canadian values. Canada
is committed to protecting and promoting the human
rights, empowerment and well-being of women and
girls around the world. We are concerned about the
dire situation in countries where the barriers to a life of
dignity for women and girls undermine their safety and
security, preventing them from reaching their potential.
Not only does that affect the fate of those women and
girls, it affects the fate of entire communities.
Girls must be protected and educated if they are
to grow and become full and contributing members of
their society. Women must be empowered to become
active members of their communities and to contribute
to all decision-making, including in the political,
economic and peace processes. It is only through
women’s empowerment that countries can reach their
full potential and prosperity. It is not enough to have
50/90

28/10/2014

issues affecting women and girls discussed in the halls
of power; women must be in those halls, at the head of
the table, talking about security and prosperity in terms
of their own experience.
(spoke in French)
Canada is also committed to improving maternal,
infant and child health around the world, and to
bringing an end within one generation to the highly
destructive practice of the early and forced marriage
of children. Eliminating all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, is an integral part
of the future security and development of communities
and countries. We commend countries that defend those
causes with similar determination. We are constantly
made aware of the ways in which armed conflict
further jeopardizes women’s and children’s security,
dignity, health and development. For example, in times
of war it is often impossible to access basic maternal
and neonatal health services. The most vulnerable are
too often the biggest targets.
(spoke in English)
Women and girls are at an increased risk of
violence in humanitarian crises and are often subject
to abuse, including in exchange for assistance or
protection. Refugee and displaced families are known
to force marriage on their daughters in badly misplaced
attempts to provide for their security or in response to
their daughters’ rape. Rape is all too often used as a
weapon of war, with devastating effects on the victims,
their families and their communities that can endure
long after the conflict ends.
The so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has taken sexual violence in conflict to a
horrifying new level of depravity. Women and girls
from ethnic and religious minorities are being raped,
forced into marriage and openly sold as slaves. Canada
is at the forefront of international efforts to address the
situation in Iraq and will continue to collaborate with
like-minded partners in responding to the crisis. We
are contributing to humanitarian assistance for those
in need, including refugees and displaced persons,
and we have committed more than $62 million in
humanitarian, stabilization and security programming.
Most important, however, our commitment includes up
to $10 million to support survivors of sexual violence
in ISIL-held areas, including supplying funding for
Justice Rapid Response and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to respond to and

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

investigate sexual violence and other serious abuses.
The perpetrators of those crimes must be held to
account.
(spoke in French)
A disproportionate number of women and girls are
suffering in conflict situations today and are unable
to play a significant role as agents of resilience and
positive change. Their full participation in the lives
of their communities and countries is essential to
sustainable prosperity, peace and development. The
international community is addressing the problem
through, for example, today’s debate, as well as at such
events as the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, recently held in London.
(spoke in English)
In 2015 we will have further chances to address
those important matters in several initiatives, including
the planned global study of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General’s highlevel review of the agenda on women and peace and
security. We will also have reviews of our peacebuilding
architecture and of the post-2015 development agenda.
The role of women and girls is essential to all of this
work, and Canada looks forward to continuing its
engagement with the United Nations and its agencies,
and with like-minded Member States, to ensure followthrough.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Ms. González Román (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Chaloka Beyani,
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons; and Ms. Suaad Allami, Director of
the Sadr City Women’s Centre and Legal Clinic, who
gave us the perspective of civil society.
We would also like to align ourselves with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
We would like to thank Argentina for organizing
this debate. We commend you, Madam President, for
focusing this year’s open debate on the special situation
of displaced women and refugees.
This year, which marks the highest number of
refugees displaced since the Second World War, we
believe it is more important than ever to recall that half
of them are women and girls and that the extremism

S/PV.7289

we are witnessing today in certain parts of the world
will perhaps increase those numbers exponentially.
That is reflected in today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21), which Spain welcomes.
Displacement is in and of itself an exacerbation
of the vulnerability of, and discrimination against,
women and girls who are deprived from a safe family
environment. In the majority of cases, they have to
assume the functions of the head of household, for
which their social and cultural circumstances and
education have not prepared them. Displacement also
increases the vulnerability of women and girls in the
face of threats emanating from trafficking networks,
recruitment by armed groups, forced marriage,
statelessness, prostitution and sexual violence. Forced
disappearances also make it impossible to enjoy one’s
basic rights, such as the right to education and the right
to appropriate sanitation.
Throughout recent years we have noted with
satisfaction that the Security Council has been
increasingly proactive and focused when it comes to
women in armed conflict. However, it is important to
bear in mind that the main responsibility for protecting
displaced persons is on the shoulders of the States,
which have an obligation to adopt whatever steps are
needed to prevent the weakening of the basic rights
of displaced persons, mitigate the negative effects of
displacement on the enjoyment of those rights and
investigate and punish the instigators and perpetrators
of crimes, such as recruitment and sexual violence. In
that regard, we once again reiterate the importance of
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
held in London in June, and we underscore the need
for implementing its outcome. We believe that it is
vital that, in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, we bolster the gender perspective when
it comes to protection, as well as the priorities of the
women and peace and security agenda, as reflected in
the Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2014/693).
We also believe that post-conflict situations
require that we continue to step up vigilance and adopt
the necessary measures so that women’s participation
in repairing the country’s economic and social fabric
can be guaranteed. The rebuilding stage is the source
of many of the problems that affect women in the areas
of accessing the labour market, education, health care
and decision-making mechanisms. As the SecretaryGeneral report’s notes, 2015 is a unique opportunity
for all United Nations agencies to focus their attention

14-5920451/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

on empowering women. That should be central to the
post-2015 development agenda and be a key factor
in promoting both bilateral and multilateral aid for
development.
With regard to the opportunity presented by the
2015 review of resolution 1325 (2000), we should reflect
on the progress achieved in implementing the resolution
and on the challenges that are still before us in the area
of women and peace and security. As to the progress
and achievements, women’s peace groups have gained
in strenght, and in some contexts have succeed in
having their concerns included on the agendas of peace
talks. In addition, transitional justice mechanisms are
becoming increasingly effective in responding to war
crimes against women, increasingly including specific
provisions to protect women who testify. We also note
that planning strategies in post-conflict situations are
increasingly recognizing the need for putting women
in decision-making positions. We also think it is an
achievement that increasingly countries now have
national action plans to implement resolution 1325
(2000), based on their specific circumstances. We
see that with Spain, for example. In addition, more
and more civilian and military personnel destined
for peacekeeping operations are being provided the
necessary information to correctly incorporate the
gender perspective in the context of their respective
missions.
Despite that progress, however, there are still many
challenges. Since 1992 fewer than 10 per cent of those
involved in peace negotiations have been women, and
the responses to gender issues in peace agreements
still fall short. Women’s participation is also lacking
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Sexual violence in conflicts continues to
be carried out systematically and with impunity.
There is no doubt we have made progress on the
women and peace and security agenda, but a major
challenge lies before us. We must ensure that women
are definitively recognized as agents of peace, and
protecting their rights needs to be an integral part of
peace processes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you very much, Madam President, for this excellent
initiative of holding this debate on women and peace
and security.

52/90

28/10/2014

(spoke in English)
We commend the excellent work of the UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, and all the
participants in today’s debate. We welcome the key
role that UN-Women has been playing in empowering
women and eliminating violence against women and
girls through various activities and instruments.
While aligning ourselves with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, I wish to make
few additional points in my national capacity.
Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, adopted almost 14 years ago, underlines
the importance of the equal participation of women
and their full involvement in efforts to maintain and
promote peace and security. Despite many endeavours
and achievements, not all commitments have been
satisfactorily met or implemented. Armed conflict
affects women harder than men. They are often deprived
of their rights and are subject to violence. Violence
against women constitutes not only human rights abuse,
it is increasingly becoming a security issue. Targeting
civilians, women and children is an extremely abhorrent
act that must be punished accordingly.
Women’s role in peace and security is indispensable.
Yet peace processes mostly remain the domain of men.
The number of women involved in peace and security,
including in decision-making, remains very low. On
the other hand, it is commonly recognized that the
participation of women in security forces increases the
effectiveness, credibility and the legitimacy of those
institutions. One of the main obstacles to increased
female participation in United Nations peacekeeping
missions remains their underrepresentation in national
armed forces and police services, in particular at senior
levels and in operational roles. In that regard, we must
all strengthen our efforts to increase the engagement
and advancement of women in the security sector and
its personnel.
Efficient, professional and accountable security
forces are indispensable for protecting the basic safety
of citizens, including women and girls. In that respect,
Slovakia considers security sector reform to be a crucial
instrument in transforming a security apparatus into a
professional, transparent and accountable institution
that is able to prevent, eliminate, investigate and punish
sexual violence in armed conflicts. That is why we call
for the effective implementation of resolution 2151

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

(2014), on security sector reform. Among other things,
the resolution underscores the importance of the equal
and effective participation and full involvement of
women in all stages of the security sector reform. It
also underlines the vital role of women in prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and in strengthening
civilian protection measures in the security services
during the reconstruction process. It also suggests
including more women in training for security
personnel, and calls for effective vetting processes in
order to exclude perpetrators of sexual violence from
the security sector.
Slovakia supports the full implementation of
the United Nations Security Sector Reform Integrated
Technical Guidance Notes, officially launched in
December 2012. The guidance notes are focused,
inter alia, on the inclusion of women’s perspectives in
security sector reform to ensure that United Nationssupported initiatives in that area respond to the
different needs and capacities of women, girls, men and
boys endangered by sexual violence.
The situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons is a persistent challenge. Today, we face too
many cases in too many regions where, due to various
reasons, the armed forces and police are simply not
able to provide basic security for citizens, including
women and girls. That results in many cases in their
forced exodus and the inevitable loss of their families
and homes. Women should be highly represented in the
security units of refugee camps and in decision-making
and security positions, including police boards, security
sector institutions and oversight bodies.
Ending impunity for crimes committed against
displaced people, in particular women and girls, is a key
priority. Greater support for justice reform initiatives
is needed. That includes legislative development,
specialized judicial training and building equal
and timely access to justice. Initiating legal rights,
awareness-raising and providing free or affordable
legal services can improve access to justice for all who
need it due to any kind of abuse, including genderbased abuse.
We fully support the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.
The numbers of substantiated allegations, despite the
downward trend, still give us a cause for concern.
Additional efforts are required to shorten the time

S/PV.7289

needed to complete investigations and to ensure that
investigations address allegations comprehensively.
Last but not least, we should not forget about the
role and protection of women-led society groups, which
play an important role in combating violent extremism
in many countries. It is therefore essential to involve
women’s groups and female experts in decision-making
in national, regional and international counterterrorism initiatives. Ensuring the safety and protection
of women human rights defenders, such as Nobel Peace
Prize winner Malala Yousafzai, needs to be prioritized
by Member States and their security sector institutions.
To sum up, in many documents we have addressed
many elements in terms of how to improve the situation.
Let me mention six of them. First, with regard to the
protection of women’s rights, women and children are
the main victims of rights violations in situations of
violence and conflict. Secondly, on participation, we
must encourage women to move into the public sphere
and the security sector, to come forward and speak and to
be active. Thirdly, with regard to inclusivity, resolution
1325 (2000) cannot be implemented without gender
inclusivity in security sector reform, demobilization
and reintegration. Fourthly, there must be transparency
and accountability. Fifthly, justice and healing are
critical issues for women. Impunity for crimes must not
be allowed for anyone. The last element is financing
gender equality. Resources and financing mechanisms
should be considered for the increased participation of
women in peace and security.
No women, no peace is affirmed by many practical
examples. Many conflicts could have been prevented if
women had been involved at the early stage. The year
2015 will mark our common endeavours to advance
the agenda of women and peace and security with the
adoption of the post-2015 sustainable development
goals, as well as the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. Let us therefore
work together to mark those important benchmarks
with concrete actions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I wish to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, Mr. Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced

14-5920453/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

persons, and the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Allami,
for their briefings. We also welcome the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21 earlier today.
The role of women in peace and security and the
specific impact of the lack of peace and security on
women have only recently attracted consistent attention
from the highest international decision-making
bodies. Yet the progress made is very significant.
Such progress has led to a better comprehension
of the sources of conflict, as well as of the paths
towards peace and reconstruction. It has also led to the
orientation of resources towards a deeper knowledge
of the consequences of conflicts and better institutionand capacity-building with regard to the role and the
empowerment of women.
Turning to the matter at hand, I would like to
congratulate Argentina, and the Security Council at
large, on the choice of the subject for today’s open
debate. It is a subject of cruel pertinence. This year,
we have reached the highest number of refugees and
internally displaced persons since the Second World
War. Unfortunately, we must expect the situation
to worsen before it improves. New reasons to expect
further displacement are emerging at an alarming
rate. State and non-State sponsored violence, often
tinged with religious extremism, targets civilians,
in particular women and girls. Disease generates
panic and the disruption of economic and social
networks and is itself fanned by further displacement,
misinformation and fear. The short- and longterm impact of mass displacement requires no
further description. Nonetheless, it requires mutual
cooperation and concerted action by all stakeholders.
However unprecedented and unconventional today’s
conflicts may appear, they nevertheless have wellknown, traditional and destructive effects on the
civilian population, in particular those at the greatest
risk: women and girls.
Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments as regards women and peace and security,
such as the fact that this issue is a consistent feature
in Security Council resolutions and peacekeeping
mandates, as well as the fact that gender-sensitive
reporting is now understood as a fundamental element
for a thorough understanding of a given situation. We
are proud to have worked towards such mainstreaming,
together with many partners within the Security
Council during our recent mandate on the Council,

54/90

28/10/2014

as well as with the wider membership of the United
Nations, thereby fulfilling pledges assumed before our
election to this body. A very special word of thanks and
encouragement must also go to the non-governmental
organizations and civil society community, which
has been of invaluable support and generosity in its
advocacy.
At the multilateral, regional and national levels, we
should also welcome the fact that organizations such
as the African Union and NATO have named special
envoys for women and peace and security and that an
increasing number of countries have developed national
action plans to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successors. It is now necessary to sustain and develop
the progress already achieved. The Security Council,
as well as the entire United Nations system, must
maintain its commitment to that agenda. In that regard,
Portugal welcomes the expanding focus on sexual
violence in conflict. Sexual violence is a scourge that
affects directly and indirectly generations of victims of
conflict.
Our work on this matter strengthens the broader
women and peace and security agenda and underlines
the need to further empower women politically and
economically. The year 2015 will provide a unique
political opportunity for the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda. The high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
global study requested in resolution 2122 (2013), as well
as the celebrations of Beijing+20 and the discussions
of the post-2015 development agenda, will all take
place. All of us will have a renewed chance to make our
policies on that matter more tangible.
Let me conclude with a specific call to action by
drawing the Council’s attention to the goal that the
High Commissioner for Refugees has set: to eliminate
statelessness worldwide by 2024. Statelessness is widely
recognized as a source of injustice, discrimination,
marginalization and life-long stigma for millions of
individuals. It perpetuates the tragic effects of conflict,
forced displacement and migration. The discrimination
against women in nationality laws is a widespread and
grave source of statelessness. Women are particularly
victimized in that instance not only because of genderbased discrimination but also because they can be
perceived as the source of discrimination from which
their children and extended families suffer, often with
pervasive, devastating effects. It is high time that the

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

matter be addressed at the highest level with a view to
its complete eradication.
I take this opportunity to call on all countries that
have not yet done so to accede to or ratify the 1954
Convention relating to Stateless Persons and the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, the
key legal instruments and fundamental elements for
the prevention of international conflicts and for the
mitigation of their effects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Minami (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for your initiative to convene this
open debate on such a timely issue.
At the outset, I should like to emphasize that the
Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Shinzo Abe, places
great importance on the promotion and protection of
women’s rights and women’s participation. We aim for
a society in which women shine, not only domestically
but also globally, including in conflict-affected and
post-disaster situations.
In order to effectively empower women, we
must undertake holistic interventions, which include
improving education, enhancing livelihoods, increasing
access to reproductive health care and reducing
gender-based violence. In September, Japan hosted the
symposium of the World Assembly for Women (WAW!
Tokyo 2014). I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, tExecutive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their participation and
contributions. The Chair of the conference drafted
a summary of the opinions expressed during the
symposium and issued a set of 12 concrete proposals.
Turning to today’s agenda item, Japan, in
cooperation with United Nations agencies such as
UN-Women and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as various
non-governmental organizations, has been supporting
numerous projects around the globe related to the main
theme of today’s discussion. I would like to showcase
some of our efforts.
First, I would like to highlight the story of Hamidah
Hassan, who was introduced in our Prime Minister’s
address to the General Assembly in September (see
A/69/PV.9). She is a girl of 10 years living in camps

S/PV.7289

for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Mogadishu.
Japan provided the camps with solar lanterns made by
a Japanese company, Panasonic, which banks electrical
energy generated from sunlight during the day and
converts it to lamplight at night. A lighted tent not only
acts as a deterrent to sexual violence, but also under that
light, she is now able to work and study later into the
evening and dreams that one day that she will become
a doctor.
Secondly, economic independence is critically
important to the advancement of the status of
women and to decreasing violence against them,
especially in displaced settings. Faced with the grave
humanitarian crisis in and around Syria, Japan has
supported UN-Women activities aimed at economic
empowerment, such as vocational training and cashfor-work programmes for female Syrian refugees and
IDPs.
Japan has also supported the activities of the
Government of Jordan to assist Palestinian female
refugees in the country. That project has provided
instruction for refugees in such skills as dressmaking,
using donated kimonos, which is a traditional Japanese
dress, as instructive materials. It has also provided
marketing lectures to educate women in the tailoring
business. Those two examples are just indicative,
but represent two important aspects, protection and
empowerment. In today’s discussion, I think those
two aspects have been mentioned by many delegates.
Protection and empowerment are the main pillars of
human security, which Japan has been advocating for
more than 10 years.
I would now like to mention the follow-up to
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). In the World
Assembly for Women symposium in September, we
recognized that high-level political leadership and
commitment are essential for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Japan and civil society have
been earnestly developing a national action plan, which
we expect to be able to launch before the end of the
year. Japan also wishes to support the development
and the implementation of the national action plans of
developing countries.
Finally, in July, our Permanent Mission to the
United Nations held a panel discussion in collaboration
with a civil society organization, the Global Network
of Women Peacebuilders. We hope the summary of the
discussion, together with the recommendations of the
World Assembly symposium and, most importantly,

14-5920455/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

the implementation of our national action plan,
which includes more than 100 indicators, will serve
as inputs to the global assessment of resolution 1325
(2000). Through such efforts, Japan commits itself to
contributing to furthering the momentum towards the
high-level review in October 2015.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting on the
escalation of conflicts and violations of international
law that result in unprecedented massive flows of
refugees, stateless persons and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), the vast majority of whom are women
and children. Their situation is further aggravated by
meaningless death, the outbreak of diseases, food, water
and energy crises, poverty and heightened vulnerability
due to the breakdown of entire societies.
Hence, in accordance with the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), and resolutions that have followed, the
role for women in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery is an important consideration for rehabilitation
and recovery processes, ultimately leading to
reconstruction and development. Women often tend to
be marginalized and alienated from those processes,
and therefore must be involved in shaping their own
destinies. That is especially the case when it comes
to the provision of basic survival needs, medical care,
primary and secondary education and opportunities
for economic self-reliance. Therefore, the elimination
of gender-based discrimination, violence and impunity
remains critical to promote the economic and social
empowerment of women. We welcome its becoming a
focus in many recently established comprehensive and
multidimensional peacekeeping and hybrid operations.
At present, at least 3 out of 10 United Nations
peace agreements include provisions on women’s
political participation and protection. Mechanisms and
structures must be provided in every peacekeeping
operation so that women can serve as equal partners
in field missions and in all United Nations mediation
support teams. The minimum of 15 per cent set by the
Secretary-General’s seven-point action plan on genderresponsive peacebuilding is a target that we must strive
for.
We note that more women are being appointed as
heads of missions, including as force commanders,
special envoys and chiefs of police contingents. More

56/90

28/10/2014

than 90 per cent of the mandates calling for police
components in peacekeeping operations address
women’s security. The implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) stipulates gender-specific provisions
in all mission mandates, placing gender experts in
the substantive sections of United Nations peace
operations, deploying women protection advisers to
monitor and report on sexual violence and providing
training accordingly. International commissions of
inquiry currently and routinely include gender crime
investigators. Women must therefore be engaged
at every stage to reassert the rule of law and rebuild
society through transitional justice.
The Security Council must consider the full
range of violations of women’s rights during conflict,
and peacekeeping mandates should support national
prosecution for serious international crimes against
women.
The Council should focus on its women and peace
and security mandates during at least one of the periodic
field visits in the coming years. Commissions of inquiry
related to various war-torn zones and UN-Women must
provide regular briefings to the Council.
My country, Kazakhstan, is increasingly engaged
in peacekeeping — starting in 2003 in Iraq and Nepal
and currently in Western Sahara — with further
deployments planned to other missions in the future.
The protection, special treatment and care of women
and girls, together with women’s empowerment and
gender-sensitive approaches, are always given due
attention and encouraged by Kazakh peacekeepers.
Over the last decade, my country has witnessed
increased and complex flows of asylum seekers,
refugees, migrants and victims of trafficking, which
also pose a considerable risk to the Governments of
the region. Kazakhstan is both a transit and destination
country and works closely with the relevant United
Nations agencies, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
We have adopted a law on refugees based on the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol. The UNHCR Regional Office, in close
cooperation with my Government, contributes to
strengthening regional and international efforts.
Kazakhstan is committed to joining the global
efforts to achieve international peace and security,
including through promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls — among whom

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

the most vulnerable are refugees and IDPs. We wish
further success to UN-Women and other relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security, with a focus on the
important topic of displaced women and girls. I also
congratulate you on your successful presidency of the
Security Council this month.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
comprehensive presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21)
adopted by Council members by consensus this
morning. We join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report (S/2014/693), which
provides important information on the progress made
thus far and the considerable challenges that remain
in the full implementation of the agenda. We would
also like to thank Executive Director of UN-Women
Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her bold call to action. In
addition, we would like to thank this morning’s briefers
for their thoughtful and important presentations.
Today’s open debate is focused on displaced
women and girls, which is of the utmost importance as
new crises and outbreaks of violence increase the levels
of forced displacement. Today’s 51 million refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) represent the
largest number of refugees, asylum-seekers and IDPs
since the Second World War; three quarters of the
displaced persons are women and children.
Many here present have acknowledged today in
their statements that as Member States we must work
together to address this issue. We must ensure consistent
leadership to strengthen the meaningful participation
of and leadership opportunities for women, including
in tackling the root causes and impacts of displacement.
We need to ensure the consistent and effective
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security.
Within the United Nations system, we need to
encourage further gender-sensitive conflict analysis
and stand by our women and peace and security
commitments so that we can best understand the
progress that has been made, as well as the challenges
that remain in implementation.

S/PV.7289

Through those actions, we the Member States can
do our part to ensure that the women and peace and
security agenda remains central to efforts to achieve
our shared goal of international peace and security.
It has been 14 years since the historic adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), whereby the international
community formally recognizes the vital role played
by women in the prevention, mitigation and resolution
of conflict, in addition to recognizing the differential
burden borne by women and girls during conflict.
Much progress has been made in the field of women
and peace and security. Within the United Nations
system, the women and peace and security agenda has
been increasingly integrated. The data in the SecretaryGeneral’s report shows important progress. In terms of
prevention, there is more consistent attention to women
and peace and security in Security Council deliberations;
three quarters of United Nations resolutions adopted in
2013 contained women and peace and security related
references.
Under the protection pillar, there have been
improvements in peacekeeping mission mandates and
monitoring and training, with clear directives calling
for the increased participation of women in the ranks of
United Nations police and military.
At the level of relief and recovery, there has also been
an increased focus on women’s economic empowerment
in peacebuilding, with a growing recognition of the
importance of post-conflict economic stability in
resolution 2122 (2013) and in the declaration adopted
in 2013 by the Peacebuilding Commission on women’s
economic empowerment. The resolutions recognize
that women’s economic empowerment generates longterm social dividends, as evidence shows that women
tend to reinvest up to 90 per cent of their income back
into their families. The economic security of women
in post-conflict situations is therefore fundamental to
ensuring lasting peace and stability.
Yet many challenges remain. Today’s statements
recognize that unacceptable lags remain in the
implementation of widely accepted norms, despite the
clear presence of political will. For example, while there
has been increased global attention towards sexual
violence in conflict, much work remains to ensure that
this attention is translated into action, including justice
and assistance for the victims.

14-5920457/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

Widespread violations of international humanitarian
law continue worldwide, as do the challenges in
ensuring the protection of civilians. The culture of
impunity remains widespread. As many Member States
have recognized, we are also navigating a shifting
security context where the rise of violent extremism
has led to increased and targeted violence against
women and girls, which is unacceptable to the United
Arab Emirates and all responsible Member States.
Although this is a global reality, it is a particularly
urgent problem in our region. In Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria and Turkey, four out of five refugees and displaced
persons are women or children. Within Syria, there
are 4.25 million internally displaced persons, with
6.8 million in need of humanitarian assistance. We note
the important data brought to light by the September
report of the International Rescue Committee on the
plight of Syrian women and children. The collection
of data must remain a priority for the international
community to further bolster our arguments and ensure
that justice prevails — without exception — for all.
The numbers of the forcibly displaced continue
to rise daily and require our urgent attention, with
many fleeing today to neighbouring States. Displaced
persons comprise one fifth of Lebanon’s population.
In Jordan, the Zaatari refugee camp is Jordan’s third
largest city, in terms of sheer numbers. The pressure on
host communities is enormous, with ramifications in
neighbouring countries as well.
The United Arab Emirates has tried to play its part
and has taken measures to address the needs of those
forcibly displaced and to prevent and protect women
from violence at international and regional levels.
The United Arab Emirates has built the Mrajeeb
Al-Fahood refugee camp at the Jordanian border, for
Syrian refugees, exclusively for married couples,
children and women. The family-focused nature of the
camp has helped to protect women from harassment,
extra-marital violence and exploitation and has served
to reduce overall levels of violence towards women and
children within the camp.
The United Arab Emirates is also committed to
advocacy within the United Nations. We have launched
a panel series on women and peace and security in
partnership with UN-Women and the Georgetown
Institute for Women, Peace and Security in support of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The series aims to address the challenges

58/90

28/10/2014

associated with the implementation of the resolution and
to identify emerging issues and generate opportunities
to further the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda.
Yesterday our panel discussion explored the many
roles that women play both in countering violent
extremism and also, sometimes, as protagonists in
its spread. The discussion was nuanced, but some
clear recommendations and themes emerged. First,
women must be included at the conceptual stage in the
development of effective strategies to counter violent
extremism. Secondly, we must acknowledge that
women are not a homogenous group, and our approach
should reflect that. Thirdly, we need to create the
political spaces for the many voices of women to be
heard. That is the space where we may find solutions
in local and culturally specific contexts. Fourthly, we
must recognize women as the agents of change that they
are, and not solely as victims. Fifthly, we must always
challenge the dominant narrative that views violent
extremism through a strictly security-focused lens.
By linking women’s roles in strategies to counter
violent extremism with security issues, we run the
risk of further marginalizing women and women’s
organizations. We need to take a more holistic
approach to forced displacement, where we look
outside of conventional security approaches and focus
on the development and everyday needs of the forcibly
displaced. By addressing the everyday needs, we can
help create an environment that allows for women, their
families and communities to fully participate in the
prevention of violent extremism in their own societies.
Finally, we must continue to call for increasing funding
for data collection and reporting to ensure that what
is emerging as consensus in the conversation on the
women-peace-security nexus is reinforced by hard
facts.
The United Nations remains the central forum
for addressing the women and peace and security
agenda. Much progress has been made through the
continual, concerted efforts of UN-Women and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in addressing the gender-specific needs of
internally displaced persons and refugees. The United
Arab Emirates stands with our United Nations and
international partners in that important endeavour and
urges for 2015 to be the year where we move the dial
forward in a significant way.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

effective participation in peace processes, mediation
efforts, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and recovery.

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngucka, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mulet and Special Rapporteur Beyani for their
insightful briefings. I also thank Ms. Suaad Allami
from the Sadr City Women’s Centre and Legal Clinic
for her remarks.

Thirdly, in order to sustain their livelihoods, we
need to empower displaced women and girls through
a comprehensive approach to their education, health,
psychosocial support and human rights. Empowered
women and girls bring together empowered families
and resilient communities that play a fundamental role
in preventing violent extremism.

As the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) draws closer, we welcome the continuing
attention paid to the women and peace and security
agenda in the Security Council and the Council’s
spotlight on the issue of displacement and its effects
on vulnerable groups. As the number of people who
have been forcefully displaced now exceeds the number
reached during the Second World War, which led us to
establish this Organization, we are compelled to take
urgent action to address the needs of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), especially women
and girls.
Women and girls continue to be specifically targeted
in conflicts. They are also vulnerable in post-conflict
situations, mostly during contested political processes,
ceasefires and the early days of the implementation of
peace agreements. Moreover, conflict and displacement
taking place in urban areas often increase the risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. The informal urban
setting has the potential to expose displaced people to
evictions, discrimination in services and lack of access
to housing. Therefore, displaced persons in urban areas
require carefully crafted durable solutions that combine
humanitarian and development approaches. We believe
that there are three ways to tackle these challenges.
First, eliminating the root causes of a conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual violence. Yet that is
not always easy. Therefore, in the short to medium
term, ensuring the protection of IDP women and girls
from sexual and other forms of gender-based violence
is imperative. Prosecution of these acts is another
necessity. During this period, multisectoral responses
and continuing humanitarian assistance for displaced
and stateless women have immediate lifesaving effects.
Secondly, it is necessary to increase women’s
meaningful participation and leadership in all aspects
of decision-making and policy processes related to the
displacement and protection of international peace and
security. In this vein, there is a need to ensure women’s

In response to the forced displacement due to the
tragedies in Syria and Iraq unfolding right across our
border, Turkey has taken important steps to ensure
assistance, protection and durable solutions for
displaced women and girls. Let me take this opportunity
to touch upon some measures and practices that Turkey
has employed in the camps established for the Syrians
fleeing the crisis, as they are, in our view, relevant to
the women and peace and security agenda.
Ensuring the gender balance in education is
paramount. Therefore, the enrolment of girls in school
and the continuation of their education are priority
policies for Turkey. We also offer extensive vocational
training for women and continue to provide additional
subsistence assistance for women with no families for
their empowerment in households and camps.
Syrian families and women in the camps have
an opportunity to attend lectures on issues such as
maternal health, child mortality, psychosocial support,
the human rights of women and girls and domestic
violence. Measures to discourage early and familyforced marriages are also undertaken.
Turkish personnel employed at the camps
are regularly trained on the legal framework of
international protection and gender-related issues, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Within camps, public areas are constantly lit and
put under closed circuit television surveillance in order
to maintain public order. Outside the camps, Turkey has
established violence monitoring and prevention centres
in 14 provinces where significant Syrian populations
live. We have more than 90 shelter houses at the disposal
of Syrian women fleeing domestic or sexual violence.
In order to complement primary health care
services, we have given priority to reproductive health
and psychosocial support services for victims who were
targeted before and during their escape from violence.

14-5920459/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

We continue to give priority to women’s participation
in camps, with their inclusion in decision-making and
camp administration, and we enable them to improve
their awareness and skills through the support of
various non-governmental organizations.

28/10/2014

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.

ASEAN is deeply concerned about the increasing
number of refugees, internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and stateless people. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
51.2 million people were forcibly displaced in 2013, a
staggering 6 million more than the number only a year
before. When basic institutions are in tatters, one cannot
hope for better basic services for women and girls, let
alone ways to address their specific health care needs.
Of further concern is the fact that immediate security
needs and chaos may force the normative framework
and efforts for the protection of women and girls to be
neglected and relegated to obscurity. ASEAN therefore
welcome the initiative by Argentina to focus on the
issue of women and girls as refugees and IDPs.

Ms. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.

As we are about to review 15 years of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), ASEAN
finds it imperative that the international community,
with the United Nations playing a central role, renew
our commitment to promote the framework on women
and peace and security. ASEAN believes those efforts
should focus on the following areas.

We commend your initiative, Madam President,
to convene this annual open debate on women and
peace and security. We are grateful for the detailed and
comprehensive reports and briefings by the SecretaryGeneral, the Assistant Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women.

First, it goes without saying that, in addressing
issues that women face in conflict settings, we must
deal with the conditions that give rise to conflicts
in the first place. Conflict prevention mechanisms,
especially those under United Nations auspices, should
be promoted. Political reconciliation, the rule of law,
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
are the foundations for sustainable opportunities for
women and girls. Institutions for gender equality and
respect for human rights at the national and international
levels should be continuously strengthened.

In conclusion, I congratulate the Argentine
presidency for today’s timely debate on the women and
peace and security agenda. We thank the Member States
and all the relevant United Nations bodies, in addition
to all stakeholders at the local, national, regional and
global levels, that are giving priority to the issue of the
effects of displacement on women and girls.

ASEAN is heartened by the progress made in the
implementation of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
the subsequent relevant resolutions, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693). The role
of women and issues related to women, including sexual
and gender-based violence, gender equality and social
exclusion, have been increasingly integrated in relevant
mechanisms and regimes. Women’s participation in
peace and security issues has been growing across the
spectrum. The normative framework has been gradually
strengthened and enforced on the ground.
However, there is no room for complacency.
More conflicts are raging. More women and girls are
fleeing their homes. Basic services are badly needed,
especially in health care and education. Sexual violence
and organized crime targeting women and girls are still
a source of serious concern in many regions. Gaps in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) remain to
be addressed as we tackle new challenges.

60/90

Secondly, women’s participation in peace and
security matters, especially at decision-making levels,
must be enhanced. Their involvement has indeed
been proven to be a vital factor in securing peace
and promoting reconciliation in many instances. It is
therefore essential to mainstream gender-sensitive
approaches in promoting more inclusive and effective
responses to conflicts, displacement and other
humanitarian emergencies. With well-targeted actions
to address their specific needs and ensure their full and
meaningful participation at all levels, women and girls
can thrive as both survivors and leaders.
Thirdly, normative standards on women and peace
and security should be further integrated into the
relevant regional and national mechanisms. Efforts

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

by ASEAN in the contex of the work of the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights, the
ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Women and Children and regional
workshops on women and peace and security are cases
in point.
Fourthly, our understanding of many issues relating
to women and peace and security and the way forward
rely heavily on clear, current, accurate and verifiable
data. It is important, therefore, that due care continue
to be taken to ensure the integrity of data before reports
emanating from the United Nations are released.
Finally, ASEAN looks forward to the upcoming
comprehensive review of the 15 years of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by various
United Nations entities, Member States and civil
society. We welcome the global study announced by
Ireland, the United Arab Emirates and UN-Women last
month as a contribution to that process. ASEAN finds
it most important that the review gather best practices,
examine challenges and propose concrete measures
for more effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions and frameworks.
Let me conclude by reiterating ASEAN’s
commitment to working closely with Member States, the
United Nations and regional organizations in our joint
efforts to safeguard the rights and promote the role of
women in conflict-related situations. That commitment
stems from our collective understanding that, as women
and girls are better off, so is all humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all thank
today’s briefers for their insightful presentations, and
Argentina for organizing this open debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the presidential statement adopted by
the Council today (S/PRST/2014/21) and the detailed
analysis of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693),
which identifies many achievements on the women and
peace and security agenda in the past years, but also
the challenges remaining in order to ensure an effective
and meaningful participation of women in all conflictrelated settings. We share the view expressed by the
Secretary-General that the review processes in 2015

S/PV.7289

should be used for greater synergies to strengthen the
rights and participation of women.
The plight of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is growing ever more alarming, and
women and girls make up more than half of those
displaced. The crises in Syria, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic and the growing number of
people fleeing from the terror of the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant have given rise to those
numbers.
Over past years, we have witnessed targeted
violence against women and girls, often committed
in front of family members, being used as a tactic of
warfare to terrorize local populations and break down
community structures. That development has forced
many people to leave their homes and their lives behind
in order to protect their families and themselves. We
need to ensure that women and girls — but also men
and boys — who have suffered from violence receive
adequate psychological counselling, especially all the
necessary health-care services, to go from being a
victim of violence to becoming a survivor.
We also cannot forget those refugees who have
spent decades away from their homes, as many Afghans,
Somalis and Congolese have. Their experience shows
us that we cannot just focus on the immediate needs
of refugees, but need to consider the long-term task of
enabling them to lead a life of dignity and determine
their own fate. Education is a key factor for children
who grow up in situations of displacement. Only quality
education can lead to change, enabling future adults to
have a self-determined life and to not simply be defined
as a refugee.
The dire situation of the Syrian refugees, especially
women and children, has been the focus of many
debates over the past years. In response to the request
of Syria’s neighbours and urgent calls for action by
the United Nations, German Foreign Minister FrankWalter Steinmeier invited 20 ministers and heads of
United Nations agencies to a conference on the Syrian
refugee situation, which took place today in Berlin and
was co-chaired with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Participants agreed
to strengthen medium-term humanitarian assistance
and to mobilize additional development assistance in
order to increase the resilience of communities and
refugees in the face of what has already become a
protracted situation. The conference has strengthened

14-5920461/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

the bond between the international community and
the host countries in the region in recognition of their
hospitality towards millions of refugees. Participants
agreed to pay particular attention to the situation of
women and girls.
In addition to taking political leadership, Germany
has financed many concrete projects over the past
years to support women in situations of displacement
and their reintegration into society. To name but a few
examples, we have funded projects for refugee camps
in Jordan, Turkey and Iraq aimed at empowering
women by supporting their common kitchen initiatives
and creating child-friendly spaces. In Lebanon, Syrian
women were trained in health care, hygiene and family
planning in order to enable them to make informed
decisions about their lives. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, repatriated women were supported in
their reintegration into economic activities and trained
in organization and management skills.
In Germany itself, where we welcome increasing
numbers of refugees, we have introduced a free
nationwide multilingual helpline for women who are
affected by violence. The specialized personnel giving
initial counselling and guidance include experts on the
issues of violence suffered in conflict settings.
Women in displacement settings have great
potential to be future leaders in their communities and
countries. That potential cannot be wasted. We need
to empower women in those situations and provide
education and vocational training to them, especially
in camps. They should be trained in order to take up
positions in the management of refugee camps.
While we focus today’s debate on displacement
settings, we need to keep the full women and peace and
security agenda in mind at all times for all conflict and
post-conflict settings. We cannot emphasize enough
the importance of effective, meaningful and real
participation by women in conflict prevention, conflict
management, peace negotiations, transitional justice
and recovery efforts. It is not enough to merely let
them be observers or beneficiaries of decision-making
processes. The United Nations needs to ensure that
women are involved in all United Nations-led peace and
reconciliation processes. In that regard, we welcome
the new gender forward-looking strategy for 2014-2018
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support. The United Nations
needs to set a good example and include women at
all levels if we want others to follow. Civil society
62/90

28/10/2014

organizations can also play an important role. They can
connect women’s organizations, train representatives
and therefore empower women to take their rightful
place in all decision-making.
We believe that the Security Council can play a
stronger role in this regard and implement the women
and peace and security resolutions directly in this very
Chamber. The Council should start to systematically
mainstream women’s issues in all relevant spheres of
its work. Whenever the Security Council is mandating
or renewing mandates for United Nations missions
or requesting briefings from envoys and special
representatives, the issue of women and peace and
security should be a central part of all considerations,
as called for in the presidential statement adopted today.
Germany will continue its support to UN-Women
and all other relevant actors, including civil society
organizations, to ensure that women’s roles and their
important contribution in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding are adequately taken into account.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting. Last
month, the Secretary-General reminded us in his opening
speech (see A/69/PV.6) at the General Assembly that
not since the end of the Second World War have there
been so many refugees, displaced people and asylum
seekers. It is a disturbing truth that makes it highly
opportune to devote this Security Council meeting to
the precarious situation of women and girls affected
by displacement. In such situations, the increased
vulnerability of women and girls is undisputable. We
therefore greatly value the assistance that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) is delivering to all in need, including women
and girls, as well as the work of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
present in the Chamber today.
But the very fact that women and girls are displaced
or have to leave their country means that the State
concerned, the region in question and our international
community have already failed — failed in preventing
crises that force people to flee in fear for their lives and
physical integrity. Therefore, the increasing focus of the
United Nations on prevention is encouraging. Resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security was a
visionary document in that regard, one that perfectly

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

recognized the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response
and post-conflict reconstruction. Now, 14 years after its
adoption, we have the latest report (S/2014/693) of the
Secretary-General in front of us, showing remarkable
progress based on concrete indicators, but also gaps to
be filled.
The important appeal of the report is the stress
on direct interaction with civil society and women
peacebuilders, as well as the recognition of the important
role of women political leaders, media personnel and
human rights defenders, including the recognition of
the high risks they are running when engaging publicly.
More support and attention must be given to those
courageous women, such as Ms. Allami, who spoke
earlier at this meeting, as they are peacebuilders and
peacekeepers at least to the same extent as the members
of the United Nations missions.

S/PV.7289

Mr. Riecken (Austria): It is an honour for Austria
to speak today in its capacity as current Chair of the
Human Security Network and therefore on behalf of
the following countries: Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland,
Thailand, Slovenia, South Africa as an observer, and
my own country Austria.
Let me first of all thank all speakers for their
briefings and commend them for their important work.
We also welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/21 earlier today.

It is a sad reality that next to the well-known
conflict and post-conflict situations that the SecretaryGeneral examines in his report, we are faced with
new situations where women are threatened with rape,
torture and kidnapping, as well as forced displacement.
That is happening in regions where, just a year ago, few
would have expected such acts could possibly occur.

I would like to express our strong appreciation for
the focus of today’s debate on refugee and displaced
women and girls. The vast majority of displaced
persons are women and girls who often face increased
insecurity in their lives, health, rights and livelihoods
and are particularly vulnerable to gender-based
violence and sexual exploitation. While we note that
significant progress has been made, especially at the
normative level, we are deeply concerned that the
progress has been hampered by a proliferation of new
crises with outbreaks of violence and unprecedented
levels of displacement, particularly affecting women
and girls. Moreover, we are witnessing armed groups
and violent extremist groups targeting women and girls
in particular.

We have recently heard disturbing accounts of the
lawlessness, violence and brutality of paramilitary
forces in Crimea and eastern Ukraine that affect
severely both women human rights activists and
ordinary women and girls of Ukraine, many of whom
choose to flee their homes. According to the UNHCR
figures of 2 September, there were over 260,000
displaced persons in Ukraine escaping the violence in
eastern Ukraine. Obviously, a large number are women,
girls and children. We are thankful for the concern
voiced by High Commissioner Guterres in relation to
Ukraine.

Our group is deeply concerned about the use
of systematic and widespread sexual violence as a
tool of intimidation, retribution and social control,
as well as the continued use of sexual violence as a
means of displacing populations. We urge all parties
to immediately cease such atrocities and to hold
perpetrators to account. We also call upon the members
of the Security Council to use all means at its disposal
to address sexual violence in armed conflicts, including
making referrals to the International Criminal Court
and other relevant actions. We welcome the clear global,
regional and national commitments taken to tackle that.

At the same time, that deteriorating situation should
not get notice only in relation to women internally
displaced persons. Because of the high risk environment
in which all women activists, media workers and social
workers now operate in eastern Ukraine, we believe it
deserves the continued attention of the United Nations
and the Security Council, when debating issues such as
women and peace and security.

We also welcome the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693), including
those on steps that can be taken by the Security Council
to reinforce and implement the prevention framework
outlined in resolution 2106 (2013). We recognize
especially the need to pay increased attention to
improved protection and accountability for the full range
of gender-related human rights violations. We support
the efforts to strengthen early warning and early action
ability to prevent and respond to serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.

14-5920463/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

I wish to highlight in particular that women’s
empowerment and participation are essential to any
prevention and protection response. We need to
strengthen our efforts to ensure that women in situations
of displacement have access to resources, services,
financial independence and decision-making processes.
We need to develop tailor-made services for displaced
women, foster gender-sensitive needs assessments and
the collection of sex- and age-disaggregated data and
to make progress in linking relief, rehabilitation and
development.
To improve the situation of women and girls, we
also need to make better use of international legal and
policy instruments. In that respect, we welcome the
upcoming entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty,
which mandates exporting States parties explicitly to
take into account the risk of serious acts of genderbased violence or violence against women and children.
Strengthening civil society, including grass-roots
women’s organizations and networks that provide
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence
in conflict, can enable the restoration of dignity and
respect and provide the necessary skills, treatment and
care to empower individuals to protect themselves and
defend their rights.
The Human Security Network would like to
reiterate the importance of women’s participation in
all stages of conflict resolution processes. We strongly
support the deployment of women protection advisers
and the designation of gender focal points in the
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
and believe that their positions should be provided for
within the missions’ budgets.
To conclude, let me highlight the importance we
place on reviewing our progress on women and peace
and security next year in the context of the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. In particular, on today’s anniversary, we
are looking forward to the high-level review in 2015
to assess progress at the global, regional and national
levels in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and
especially to the renewed momentum we will gather to
further strengthen and implement all our commitments
on women and peace and security. The global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is an
important step in that direction and we look forward to
the results of that important study.

64/90

28/10/2014

We must all strive to improve the protection
of women and girls in situations of conflict or
displacement, and the Human Security Network will
continue to contribute to that shared goal.
Finally, in my national capacity, I would like to
add that as a contribution to UN-Women’s campaign in
the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as to the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), Austria will host an international symposium
in Vienna early next month. The symposium’s
results will be published in a policy paper intended
to sum up real-life expertise in conflict prevention,
analysis, resolution and peacebuilding, and to provide
recommendations on how to address the most pressing
issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank you
for convening this important debate today, Madam
President. I would also like to thank this morning’s
briefers for their thought-provoking presentations.
New Zealand welcomes the ongoing development
and strengthening of the normative frameworks
around the agenda on women and peace and security,
made manifest through the various Security Council
resolutions adopted over the past decade and a half. The
challenge now is to put those concepts into practice,
as is the case in other areas of the Council’s work.
Focusing on the needs of particular groups can shine
a light on the implementation gaps that should be
addressed. That is why we particularly welcome your
initiative, Madam President, in focusing today’s debate
on displaced women and girls.
As other speakers have noted today, the number of
displaced people is higher now than at any time since the
Second World War. The rise of violent extremism is also
raising severe challenges to protection. In the turmoil
of conflict and post-conflict situations, displaced
women and girls are uniquely exposed to the erosion
of protection standards. Traditional community-based
frameworks of stability disappear, and the urgency and
uncertainty of ongoing violence obscure its long-term
consequences for vulnerable groups.
The challenges to the protection of displaced
women and girls remain acute. Sexual violence in
conflict is still a particular vulnerability. There is a

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

need for responses that can address all violations of
rights in conflict. Incorporating gender indicators into
early warning frameworks could be a useful practical
step to help identify vulnerabilities as quickly as
possible and to target responses. To have a real chance
of finding solutions, we should combine that awareness
of vulnerability with an equally strong recall of the
premises of the agenda on women and peace and
security, going back to resolution 1325 (2000) — that
is, that women and girls have an important active role
to play in preventing and resolving conflict. Sustainable
solutions cannot work if women’s participation is not
addressed with that perspective in mind.

It is a fact that women bear a disproportionately
higher share of the burden of conflict, but have a
marginal say on matters of war and peace. That is a
function of the gender imbalance in our societies
reflected in positions of power and influence. It
is therefore important to underline that the equal
participation of women in power structures and their
full involvement in all efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts are essential to the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security. To put it simply, women should
occupy positions of influence. Looking at you, Madam
President, we are pleased to see that there has been
some progress in that direction.

That is why we must ensure that women and
girls are consulted and listened to at every stage of
peacebuilding and programme design. That is the only
way we will realize their potential as leaders. There are
worthy examples of this in practice, but the challenge is
to ensure that it happens far more regularly. It requires
sustained and conscious effort, including the active
recruitment, training and promotion of women leaders
both in affected communities and at Headquarters,
so that they are part of the most senior levels of
decision-making. Regional organizations can also play
an important role in facilitating the rise of women and
girls as agents of change.

In its resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
set out a visionary agenda for achieving gender equality
as a prerequisite for peaceful, inclusive and just societies.
As the Secretary-General has noted, considerable
progress has been made at the normative level. The
challenge lies in implementation and in sustaining
progress. Of particular concern are extremism and the
targeted violence and human-rights violations linked to
terrorist acts against women and girls. It is important
that the situation of displaced women and girls be
directly addressed. As the concept note (S/2014/731,
annex) circulated by the presidency indicates, on every
single day in 2013, violent conflicts displaced some
32,000 people from their homes. Three quarters of the
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) were
women and children. We support the recommendation
that a gender perspective be integrated into policies
concerning refugees and IDPs.

As we have heard today, the cycle of displacement
can often last many years, spanning initial
displacement, resettlement and recovery — and,
eventually, return. We acknowledge that the challenges
that displaced women and girls face are not related
merely to immediate protection, but also extend to the
consequences for their livelihoods, health care and legal
status and rights. We must ensure that the international
community’s response addresses those challenges in
an holistic way, so that displacement does not lead to
a lifetime of disadvantage and vulnerability, and that
their leadership potential and contribution to peace and
security can be realized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you for organizing
this debate on a matter of considerable importance,
Madam President. We would also like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and the representatives of civil society for
their briefings.

We do not subscribe to the view that women should
form part of the military component of peacekeeping
missions. No useful purpose would be served by women
becoming a part of military culture and glorifying it.
That said, we do feel that women can play an important
role in policing functions. Research has repeatedly
shown that women perform certain specific police
duties better than men. We are therefore happy to be
contributing an all-female formed police unit to the
United Nations Mission in Liberia. I should also take
this opportunity to mention an Indian police inspector,
Shakti Devi, who was deployed to the United Nations
Assistamce Mission in Afghanistan and recently
received the International Female Police Peacekeepers
Award for exceptional achievements in establishing
women police councils in several parts of Afghanistan.
Her consistent engagement in improving services for
victims of sexual and gender-based violence has led

14-5920465/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

to the successful investigation and prosecution of a
number of cases. We are proud that the work of a female
Indian police officer in a United Nations peacekeeping
mission is inspiring others to follow her example in
the quest to redress the disproportionate burden that
women bear in times of war and conflict.
I turn now to a point that we have made previously
before the Council: by definition, it is States that are
parties to the treaty-based system of international law.
By and large they respect it, and when they do not,
penalties arise through the provisions in the treaties.
When their actions gravely threaten peace and security,
sanctions can be imposed against them through the
action of the Council. The most egregious crimes
against women, however, have been and are committed
by irregular forces, often warring against Governments.
They obey no laws and are, as experience has shown,
much more immune to sanctions than Governments
are. The Council needs to focus its attention on such
forces, which are responsible for the bulk of the crimes
committed against women.
Conflict situations vary; each has its own causes
and consequences. There can be no off-the-shelf remedy
or panacea. We need to take practical and effective
steps to mitigate the impact of conflict on women and
to enhance their ability to restore and preserve peace.
This will be our last statement before the Security
Council under your presidency, Madam. We would
therefore like to place on record our very warm
appreciation for the work of your delegation in the
Council and for the maturity and understanding that
your country has brought to issues relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like add the
following remarks in a national capacity.
My delegation thanks the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, Mr. Chaloka Beyani; and the founder and
Director of Sadr City Women’s Centre and Legal
Clinic, Ms. Suaad Allami, for their statements. My
delegation also thanks the Argentinian presidency for
having convened today’s open debate.

66/90

28/10/2014

Belgium welcomes the subject chosen for today’s
debate, which remains of great relevance. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693),
the past year was marked by a series of troubling
developments and heinous crimes related to violent
conflicts, in many cases of a terrorist nature, resulting
in new mass displacements of populations. My country
is concerned about the persistence of sexual and genderbased violence against women in conflicts. The violent
acts committed in Nigeria by Boko Haram and in Iraq
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are further
evidence of a determination to deliberately target
women and girls, kidnap them, enslave them or even
sell them as slaves. It is an abhorrent development to
which we absolutely must find an appropriate response.
We know that the vast majority of displaced
persons are women and girls. Their specific needs
must therefore be recognized and taken into account
in situations of displacement and in refugee camps.
In times of conflict, it is often important to respond
quickly. It is all the more important, therefore, to
anticipate and provide for the specific contexts and
needs of women so as to ensure that those aspects are
not overlooked during emergency interventions.
To ensure the safety and protection of women and
girls in the framework of humanitarian work, it is
also important, first, to take into account the specific
requirements for the protection of women and girls in
the context not only of humanitarian assistance, but
also of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform.
Secondly, we must ask humanitarian organizations
to make the security of women and girls a priority in the
organization and management of refugee camps. In that
regard, it is essential to improve the participation and
leadership of women in decision-making committees
and structures in refugee and displaced persons camps
so as, inter alia, to ensure that they can express and
highlight their concerns with regard to matters of
organization, health and safety.
Thirdly, we must accord the necessary priority
to financial support for women heads of households
in situations of displacement and in refugee camps,
because without income, their precarious situation puts
them at further risk.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to commend you, Madam
President, for convening this debate. We express our
appreciation to all those who work daily to promote
peace and security, especially women. I also wish
to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for their presentations.
The focus of today’s debate, “Displaced women
and girls: leaders and survivors”, could not have be
more timely, now when we are seeing the number of
displaced persons rise to alarming proportions and
mass violence and humanitarian disasters continue
to get worse in various parts of the world. According
to the Global Trends report prepared annually by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the number of displaced people had reached
51.2 million by late 2013.
The Uruguayan Government has taken steps to
provide a humanitarian response in the crisis being
experienced by refugees from the conflict in Syria by
undertaking to host 120 Syrian refugees. Five families,
including 33 children, have already reached our country.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has noticeably
advanced in both breadth and depth. It now occupies
a recognized place among the set of legal instruments,
policies and concrete actions of the Organization,
championing the importance of the gender perspective
in all conflict situations, especially in rehabilitation
and post-conflict reconstruction. In that regard, the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693) lists a number
of accomplishments in 2013, such as the adoption of two
new Security Council resolutions, the declaration by
the Peacebuilding Commission on women’s economic
empowerment for peacebuilding, and the inclusion of a
provision on gender-based violence in the Arms Trade
Treaty, among others.
We welcome that progress. Unfortunately, despite
the legal and policy developments, we as a troopcontributing country can attest that in the areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, civilians, particularly
women and girls, remain the main victims in armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. In particular,
we note with deep concern the violence against certain
groups of people and violations of the human rights of
women and girls arising from terrorism, transnational
organized crime and extremism. In that regard, we

S/PV.7289

agree with the Secretary-General when he notes the
challenge of implementing and sustaining progress
in all measures and standards relating to women and
peace and security.
Prevention is a cornerstone of the women and
peace and security agenda. In particular, the prevention
of sexual violence in conflicts is a priority to which
my country gives special attention. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where Uruguay has deployed
some 1,000 troops to fulfil many tasks in the protection
of civilians, joint protection teams are used to monitor
and address violations of human rights in remote
areas. Our troops conduct patrols to prevent the rape of
women and girls in remote places, such as when they
go to fetch water, and have successfully prevented and
deterred potential aggression.
The vulnerability to sexual or gender-based
violence experienced by refugees, asylum-seekers,
returnees, stateless persons and the internally displaced
during conflict, flight and displacement is alarming.
The international community should give serious
consideration to effective ways to prevent that. We
also emphasize the need for greater attention to the
rehabilitation of victims of grave violations and the
reinstatement of their rights, particularly in cases
of sexual abuse or exploitation. We believe activities
to combat impunity are important, including the
appointment of specialists to investigate sexual and
gender-based crimes.
Finally, we think it is important to ensure
strict adherence to the code of conduct by all those
participating in United Nations contingents deployed
on ground, based on the zero-tolerance policy. The
participation of women in all aspects of the peace and
security agenda is also extremely important. It is clear
that there is a link between the participation of women
in decision-making and the enjoyment of their human
rights. Therefore it is fundamental to increase their
participation and leadership in the context of refugees
and internally displaced persons.
Although the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2014/693) the trend, particularly from 2010,
of increasing participation by women in all processes,
including the appointment of women as mediators and
envoys, we think that we are still far from achieving
the desired goal. Moreover, we share the idea expressed
in the report that improving the protection of women
and girls will require more women police and military
personnel.

14-5920467/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

Uruguay has been in the vanguard when it comes
to incorporating women into the armed forces, and
that is reflected in the number of women deployed
by the armed forces and the national police in the
Uruguayan contingents in the peacekeeping missions.
Women always participate on a volunteer basis and
have acquitted themselves in an outstanding manner,
with interesting repeat figures that demonstrate their
commitment to the objectives of those missions.
However, we note with concern the data published in
the report that indicates that as of March 2014, 97 per
cent of military personnel and 90 per cent of police in
peacekeeping operations were men. That percentage
has not changed since 2011.
Uruguay believes that the women and peace and
security agenda is a fundamental part of the broader
agenda linked with children in armed conflicts and the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. It is therefore
fundamental to make progress in a coordinated way,
achieving synergies, avoiding duplication of efforts and
making the most effective use possible of the instruments
that this Organization has on the ground. We think that
many of the limitations can be corrected with clear,
predictable strategies, appropriate for each mission,
and with better coordination among the different actors
on ground — especially with the host country, which
has primary responsibility for protection.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia thanks the
Argentine presidency for convening this annual debate
on women and peace and security, because it is an
important issue that requires our full and constant
attention.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.
Croatia welcomes the focus of today’s debate on
refugee and internally displaced women and girls, in
particular the women’s role as leaders in displacement
and refugee settings and, in the broader context, their
role in addressing the root causes of the conflicts that
resulted in the displacement. We also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693), as well
as the presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21) adopted
earlier today.

68/90

28/10/2014

Today’s debate comes at a timely juncture, in
light of the forthcoming 2015 high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as a
massive increase in global forced displacement. For the
first time since the Second World War the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons has exceeded
50 million people worldwide. Half of that population are
women and girls. That is not only a reason for our deep
concern; it is also an incentive for concrete actions.
Croatia is particularly worried about the recent rise
of radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism that
leads to new mass displacements, increased incidents
of sexual and gender-based violence, targeted attacks
on women and girls and those defending their rights,
and other atrocities and human rights violations. One
of the reasons why my country pays so much attention
to that matter is the fact that Croatia itself experienced
war and a long and painful refugee crisis. In the 1990s
we provided protection and assistance for hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons, as well as for
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, most of whom
were women and children.
We know from our own experience how war can
affect women and girls. Women suffered violations of
their human rights, including rape and maltreatment.
Rape was used as a tactic of war and an instrument
of ethnic cleansing. We have seen the impact of the
violations on women’s human rights, on their lives and
on their physical and mental health. Our own experience
teaches us the importance of adequately addressing
conflict-related violations of women’s rights, including
sexual violence, and of providing necessary assistance,
health care, psychological counselling and financial
support for those women.
Displaced women and girls are among the most
vulnerable groups in the world. The reasons often
lie in the entrenched gender-based stereotypes and
discriminatory legal frameworks and practices,
including gender-based discrimination in access to
documents and resources, education and employment,
poor reproductive health care and exclusion from
decision-making processes.
However, women should not be seen only as victims
of conflict. They are also agents of peace and should be
an integral part of decision-making in the process of
restoring and maintaining peace and rebuilding their
societies. Still, the sad fact is that women continue to
face significant barriers to successfully participating

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

and playing roles in those processes. To ensure their
equal participation and to guarantee the protection of
their rights remains one of the major challenges.

we strongly believe that if peace and security are to
be sustained, women must be empowered, their voices
heard and their participation guaranteed.

Crises and conflicts increase the economic and
social vulnerability of women and girls. Nevertheless,
the post-conflict period also offers opportunities to
transform societies in order to change the entrenched
patriarchal norms, including by addressing longstanding inequalities, empowering women and ensuring
their roles as leaders and agents of democratic changes
in their respective communities.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.

At the ministerial side event that Croatia organized
on the margins of the General Assembly’s sixty-ninth
session this autumn, as a sort of follow-up to the
Peacebuilding Commission ministerial meeting held a
year ago — a meeting chaired by the Croatian Foreign
Minister — we had the privilege to hear inspirational
stories of women from Afghanistan, Myanmar, South
Africa and Croatia who help bring about peace,
development and reconciliation in their communities.
We believe that it is very important that the post2015 sustainable development framework contributes to
achieving gender equality, women’s empowerment and
women’s rights. We particularly stress the importance
of providing women and girls with equal access to
education — but also of educating boys and men.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security set out a visionary
agenda for achieving gender equality as a prerequisite
for peaceful, inclusive and just societies. What we
need now is to translate the existing commitments into
concrete actions that will bring tangible benefits for the
advancement of women and girls with regard to their
political and economic empowerment, as well as the
full realization of their human rights, both in times of
conflict and in times of peace.
Let me conclude by stressing once again that
Croatia strongly supports any effort aimed at increasing
the role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, promoting women’s
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security
and ending impunity for sexual violence in conflict,
preventing and punishing acts of sexual violence, as
well as bringing justice, services and reparations to
victims.
We wholeheartedly advocate the advancement of
the women and peace and security agenda because

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our deepest appreciation to Argentina for
organizing this important open debate on women and
peace and security. We especially welcome the special
focus on displaced women and girls. The urgency of this
topic is evident. The world faces unprecedented numbers
of refugees and displaced persons. Three-quarters of
them are women and girls.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report (S/2014/693) on resolution 1325 (2000).
The Netherlands fully endorses the report and its
recommendations. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union.
In view of the time constraints, my full speech
will be available via Twitter and on our website. Here,
I will limit myself to the key points on the need for
women’s leadership, the need for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), and the way
ahead.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
in the power of women. They must be leaders; they
must be key participants in political decision-making,
in conflict prevention, in conflict resolution, and
in conflict recovery. Women can and must play an
important role in addressing the root causes of the
conflicts that cause so many refugees. Women must
participate in decision-making on humanitarian issues,
such as the provision of emergency assistance.
We admire the work of women’s human rights
defenders, who fight for equality, also within conflictaffected areas. The international community should
acknowledge the risks they face, support their efforts
and ensure their safety. We support the call of the
Secretary-General for comprehensive sexual and
reproductive health and rights services in conflictaffected settings in all its aspects, including familyplanning material and safe abortions for victims of
rape.
In the light of the current humanitarian needs
around the world, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has substantially increased humanitarian funding,

14-5920469/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

providing a total of €570 million for the period 20142017. This includes €10 million for UNICEF in view of
its focus on the vulnerability of girls in humanitarian
emergency situations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands gives priority to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122
(2013). We supported the women of Syria in coming
together under the Syrian Women’s Initiative for Peace
and Democracy. We made their voices heard, working
closely together with the Department of Political
Affairs and UN-Women. We invest in gender expertise
at strategic positions to allow for a more effective and
strategic implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. In addition, we believe in the added
value of training people on the ground on issues related
to women and peace and security.
In our National Action Plan 1325 (2000), the
Government, knowledge institutions and civil society
work in partnership in the Netherlands. The purpose of
the Plan is to empower women in six focus countries
and in the Middle East and North Africa. It has an
annual budget of €4 million. This cooperation is a
powerful instrument for effective action for women’
s empowerment. We aim for the inclusion of women
in peace negotiations and of women and peace and
security dimensions in peace agreements. We welcome
the sustained positive trend reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General, and we are committed to
working with the United Nations system and with other
countries and relevant partners to further improve on
this trend.
With respect to the way ahead, we are horrified by
today’s violent extremism and its despicable effects on
women and girls. We should include the women and
peace and security agenda while drafting responses
to these terrible situations. We should support the role
of women as mothers, wives and sisters in countering
violent extremism, and we should strengthen women’s
civil society and women’s political participation
and leadership. Furthermore, we should use the
opportunities which the coming year has to offer. The
Netherlands supports the inclusion of a stand-alone
goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment in
the post-2015 agenda, and we support the integration of
these issues across the framework.
In February, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will
organize an international conference that will address
the 1325 agenda and the review process for peace

70/90

28/10/2014

operations. The results of the conference will provide
input for the United Nations high-level review of peace
operations, the report of which should be ready by April
2015. Key issues, in our view, will be the participation
and leadership of women in conflict and transitional
situations.
In conclusion, together we must maintain the women
and peace and security agenda as a priority. Together,
we must translate our words into concrete action on the
ground, by empowering women, by promoting gender
equality, by investing in training, by working together
with civil society, by learning from each other, and by
seeing women as leaders, and not just as victims. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has the ambition to be a
partner for peace, justice and development, and women
are crucial in all these three domains.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
you, Madam President for organizing this important
and timely debate. Our thanks also go to all of today’s
speakers We take their remarks very seriously.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier today by the observer of the
European Union.
At the outset, I will quote the Secretary-General’s
statement of 1 October in Geneva to the Executive
Committee of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees:
“Never before in United Nations history
have we had so many refugees, displaced people
and asylum-seekers. Never before has the United
Nations been asked to reach so many with
emergency food assistance and other life-saving
support.”
In the context of these alarming words, we want
to express our deep concerns about heavy civilian
casualties, massive displacements of population,
serious human rights violations and worsening
humanitarian situations in several parts of the world.
We are distressed by the global trends report, which
shows that 51.2 million people were forcibly displaced
in 2013 alone. In the same year, 2.5 million people
from one single country — Syria — became refugees
and 6.5 million became internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Furthermore, all statistics shows that women
and children, who make up the majority of refugees and

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

IDPs, are the most vulnerable part of the population.
We had the same situation in the 1990s during the war
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bearing all this in mind we strongly call upon the
entire international community, the United Nations
and major players and stakeholders to provide a more
comprehensive response to the current crisis in order
to protect civilians and human rights. We recognize the
achievements made at the normative level through the
adoption of resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013),
and we especially welcome the commitments made in
the areas of woman, peace and security regarding the
situation of refugees, IDPs and stateless women and
girls.
We appreciate the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and all her activities to highlight the need for
more sustainable protection of women and girls in that
regard. A crucial element in women’s protection is the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and all
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law. In that regard, we strongly support the work,
activities and role of UN-Women and all its initiatives.
My country is committed to the provisions of the
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict
adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Group of Eight
in London in 2013. We believe that the prosecution of
sexual violence crimes, as well as national ownership
and responsibility in addressing of the root causes
of sexual violence in armed conflict, are central to
preventing such acts. Sexual violence in conflict cannot
be accepted as a cultural phenomenon. Bearing in
mind that sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations affects women and girls, as well as men and
boys, we see it as the most brutal manifestation of
discrimination against the human being. The victims
very often have to fight outside factors — such as
social stigma, where the victims are blamed and
penalized — yet perpetrators are free to lead a normal
life. Therefore, we advocate the importance of victims’
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict situations.
My country has a track record of action to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), and we were the first country in
Central Eastern Europe to develop and comprehensively
implement a national action plan. For example, our
plan requires that a zero-tolerance approach be applied
to any form of illicit sexual behaviour on the part of
peacekeeping personnel. In this context, we would like

S/PV.7289

to stress the importance of recent tangible changes in
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions, which includes monitoring training for
peacekeepers in the prevention of violence against
women refugees and IDPs.
Integrating a gender perspective into peacekeeping
policies, the promotion of women’s participation
in peacekeeping operations, and the deployment of
women protection advisers to missions is fundamental
to a more effective performance on the ground. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a police- and troop-contributing
country. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have adopted a policy to ensure that one-third of the
nominated candidates for peacekeeping missions
are women. Accordingly, among the deployed police
officers from my country in South Sudan, Liberia and
Cyprus, 21 per cent are female. Women peacekeepers
have an operational advantage by empowering local
women, girls and society as a whole. Education should
be one of the priorities, as refugees and displaced
girls are often short-changed on education. We want
to highlight this issue as an essential to ensuring the
safety and empowerment of the individual.
Finally, we would like to point out that the time has
come to strongly convert our commitments and promises
into real actions on the ground in order to prevent
violence, protect individuals, punish perpetrators and
provide redress to victims. My country stands ready to
contribute to those efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland commends you,
Madam, for organizing today’s debate and its particular
focus on refugee and displaced women and girls. We
align ourselves with the statement made on behalf of
the European Union and with that delivered by the
representative Austria on behalf of the Human Security
Network.
We welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21, which recognizes the
heightened risks faced by refugee and internally
displaced women and girls.
This debate could not be more timely. Today, as
many speakers have observed, the proliferation of
crises and protracted conflicts has led to a situation in
which we have the highest number of refugees, asylumseekers and internally displaced persons since the end
of the Second World War, with more than 51 million

14-5920471/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

affected. If this number represented a country, it
would be greater than the population of Argentina and
would be approaching that of the Republic of Korea.
It is a simple fact that the majority of this vast wave
of dislocated humanity is comprised of women and
girls. It is also a fact that they face multiple forms of
discrimination and violations.
In Syria, we have witnessed the largest one-year
refugee exodus since the Rwandan genocide 20
years ago, with almost a third of the country on the
move involuntarily. In South Sudan, where more
than 1 million displaced people are surviving in dire
conditions, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms Bangura,
attested to the “unimaginable living conditions, acute
day-to-day protection concerns and rampant sexual
violence” (S/PV.7282, p. 4) in that country.
The specific threats of conflict faced by women
and girls present themselves in some very old ways and
also in new and disturbing ones. I am glad, however,
that today’s debate takes full account of resolution
2122 (2013) and moves away from a narrow view of
women as victims of their circumstances, recognizing
that they are often leaders within their communities
who must be politically, socially and economically
empowered. The emphasis in presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/21, on the need to ensure the full and
meaningful participation of women and girls through
all stages of the displacement cycle, is welcomed.
There is, however, quite evidently a significant
gap in implementation, as the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/693) outlines, and there is a
need to link the women and peace and security agenda
to other policy frameworks. The yardstick for change
lies at the level of implementation; the challenge before
us is to translate political commitments into real,
positive improvements in the lives of women and girls
affected by armed conflict.
In addition to confronting sexual violence in conflict,
there is a need to improve the protection afforded to
women and girls in humanitarian emergencies. The
protection of women and girls is one of the key criteria in
Ireland’s decisions on humanitarian funding, including
in programmes of support to displaced persons. Our
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), which is
currently being updated, also prioritizes empowerment
and access to services for refugee and asylum-seeking
women in Ireland.

72/90

28/10/2014

In April, on the occasion of the most recent
open debate on women and peace and security (see
S/PV.7160), Ireland supported a discussion involving
Ms Bangura and a Myanmar representative of civil
society and former refugee, Ms. Naw K’nyaw Paw.
Fleeing persecution, Ms. K’nyaw Paw’s family joined
110,000 Karen people now living in refugee camps that
run the length of the Thailand-Myanmar border. In line
with resolution 2122 (2013), we must step up efforts to
support the leadership of thousands like her. We must
listen to, invest in and build the capacity of individual
women and of women-led civil society organizations to
ensure durable solutions.
Across the women and peace and security agenda,
the lack of a clear evidence base remains a challenge.
Attaining greater access to data is the only way in which
we can truly assess progress and identify barriers to
implementation. Ireland supports the increased use
of sex- and age-disaggregated data in the design and
implementation of programmes. Evidence shows us
that gender markers contribute to better planning and
understanding of how the women and peace and security
agenda is funded. Ireland welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2014/693), which suggests
that the Council request data and analysis on the
situation of women and girls on a more frequent basis.
We also welcome the call by this Council in today’s
presidential statement for more systematic collection,
analysis and utilization of sex- and age-disaggregated
data.
The Arms Trade Treaty is the first legally binding
international agreement adopted by the General
Assembly to regulate international transfers of
conventional weapons and ammunition. It has been
ratified by 80 per cent of the members of the Council
and is also the first treaty to recognize the links between
the international arms trade and gender-based violence.
Both of these firsts signify meaningful advancement
for international humanitarian law, human rights, and
peace and security. As one of the Treaty’s strongest
supporters, Ireland looks forward to its coming into
force within a number of weeks. We need, however,
to ensure gender criteria and related commitments are
given full attention in its implementation.
As we look towards the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) next year, we must fully grasp
this opportunity to take stock of where we have had
significant impact over the past 15 years, to fill in
knowledge gaps, to critically examine persistent and

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

emerging challenges, and to capture lessons learned and
good practices across all regions. Last month, Ireland
was delighted to co-host the launch of the global study
to review resolution 1325 (2000), and we will continue
to support the study over the coming months.
In conclusion, we need to move beyond mere
potential and opportunity and to effect real change in
the lives of women and girls. We need more consistent
and systematic application of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on the issue. We need to be
ambitious in driving local ownership and in addressing
the root causes of why women and girls are so
disproportionately affected by conflict. And we need to
ensure that women are fully and effectively empowered
as key stakeholders in the prevention and resolution of
conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this important
debate to discuss ways to advance the women and peace
and security agenda, with a focus on displaced women.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2014/693), which updates us on the progress
and challenges pertaining to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our appreciation also goes to all
briefers for their informative statements earlier today.
Conflicts, with their security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian implications, continue to expose affected
countries on the whole, and women in particular, to
the full range of human rights violations. Regrettably,
abuse, gender-based violence and discrimination have
become recognizable patterns in the conflict and
post-conflict settings. It is a matter of great concern,
as highlighted in the report, that these trends are
deliberate campaigns against women’s rights. Based on
our own tragic experiences of the aggression to which
Azerbaijan was exposed in the early 1990s, acts of
violence and the trauma they cause to victims are not
easy to heal physically and psychologically, and have
long-term impacts on societies that also have a bearing
on the prospects of lasting peace and reconciliation.
In situations of mass displacement, ensuring the
physical security, well-being and protection of the rights
of women should be seen not as an add-on element,
but rather as an essential component of the protection
agenda. Greater and timely support for efforts promote
gender equality and facilitate women’s economic and

S/PV.7289

political empowerment can be an important practical
step towards mitigating the vulnerability of displaced
women in conflict and post-conflict settings. Special
attention should be paid to the situation of women and
girls in protracted displacement. By the same token,
more needs to be done to strengthen the capacities of
Governments and to complement efforts of hosting
societies to ensure the sustainable social reintegration
and rehabilitation of displaced persons, in particular
women and girls.
The unresolved conflicts in many parts of the
world — involving continued incidents of violence
against women and girls, mass displacement flows
and related humanitarian crisis — require renewed
attention to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and leadership to deliver on the
commitments set out in the landmark resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome the efforts that the United Nations
system has put in place to mainstream the priorities and
commitments under the women and peace and security
agenda into policy and operational tools. These certainly
have contributed to strengthening normative and
institutional safeguards and accountability frameworks
in support of implementation. Beyond doubt, much
more needs to be done by States, the United Nations
system, and human rights and humanitarian actors.
Prevention should be our common goal, and
we share the view that it is important to explore the
broader prevention aspects of resolution 1325 (2000).
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of the
designation criteria relating to human rights and
sexual violence within the current sanctions regime
as an important step towards the operationalization
of prevention and enforcement tools. Strengthening
mechanisms for the control of small arms and lights
weapons and enforcement can also serve as effective
means of prevention. In the meantime, we should
remained focused on strengthening the capacity and
capability of peacekeeping missions to identify early
risks and effectively respond to them, including
through regular training for gender advisers and the
promotion of the role of women protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions.
On the next steps, while appreciating that gains
have been made in strengthening the political will
and international legal framework to secure justice
for conflict-related sexual violence crimes, we believe
that more attention should be paid to addressing
the full range of violations and crimes experienced

14-5920473/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

28/10/2014

by women, including gendered impacts of enforced
disappearances, foreign occupation, mass forced
diplacement, restrictions on humanitarian aid, conflictrelated trafficking and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure. Combating impunity and strengthening
both international and national justice responses to
these crimes is equally crucial.

that my delegation has provided to international officials
over the past three years, including documentation of
the responsibility of various armed terrorist groups and
the sponsors who have deployed them in Arab States,
the region and beyond for the crimes of rape, sexual
abuse, kidnapping, human trafficking and the murder
of women and girls in Syria.

It is critical to ensure respect for the rule of law,
and that the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations comprehensively promotes justice and
accountability in ways that further the equal rights
of women and their right to equal participation in
decision-making. Reparation programmes, a key
justice priority for women, deserve greater attention
and support as a tool for delivering justice and recovery
for victims and long-term peace dividends within
communities. The need to rebuild the justice and
security sectors is critical, not only for the protection of
women and combating impunity, but also for enabling
women to participate in all aspects of post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation, which are key pillars
of the women and peace and security agenda.

This Chamber also bears witness to the number
of times that we have asked the Governments of those
States that support terrorist armed groups with funds,
weapons and media assistance to stop that support, halt
their hostile and interventionist policies against my
State, and show respect for the conditions of membership
in this international Organization, primarily respect for
the sovereignty of States and non-intervention in their
internal affairs.

Azerbaijan remains committed to implementation
and is pleased to have made a contribution to the work
of the Council during its presidency in October 2013,
including the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013). We look
forward to the high-level review of the implementation
and cooperation with interested States, UN-Women and
other relevant entities in the process of preparations of
the global study.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Syria.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this very important meeting at a very timely juncture.
Members of the Council can bear witness to the
numerous times I have actively sought to draw their
attention, and that of the Organization — as represented
by the Secretary-General, various high-level officials,
the Secretary-General’s special representatives and
humanitarian agencies — to the atrocities, violations
and immoral religious opinions held by armed terrorist
groups for over three years against Syrian women. This
Chamber can bear witness to the many times we have
warned of the dangers of the spread of non-Islamic,
Takfiri, pagan terrorism and the need to combat its
perpetrators, as well as to the hundreds of letters, reports,
statements, photographs, videos and medical evidence

74/90

Unfortunately, the efforts of our delegation have
only been met with shameful rejection and denial.
The so-called international community, including
some high officials of the United Nations and several
Western States that are known for how often they speak
out in support of the rights of women, together with
Western and Arab media outlets, have all been too busy
levelling accusations against the Syrian Government.
Their main attention has been focused on criticizing
the Government, inventing falsehoods against it and
demonizing it in order to weaken Syria’s sovereignty
and destroy its State in order to create a situation of
utter chaos as has happened in Libya, for example.
Today, more than three years after the start of the
multinational terrorist war that was launched against
my country, in which the women of Syria have suffered
the worst forms of extremism and terrorism, painful
facts and reality have proven the validity and accuracy
of what we have tried to tell the Council so very often.
Today, in their reports and statements, including in
the report before us today (S/2014/693), the SecretaryGeneral and his representatives have acknowledged
and recognized the reality of terrorism affecting Syria.
However, that recognition and acknowledgment have
come too late. Yes, the Member States are too late
in helping the Syrian Government in its war against
terrorism.
The question before us now is, what is the cost of
that delay? Unfortunately, the price has been the lives
of hundreds of thousands of Syrian citizens, including
men, children and the elderly, and the suffering of
millions from the worst forms of terrorism, extremism

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

and the destruction of infrastructure. What is most
deplorable today is that until this very minute we have
not yet heard a word of apology from those who persist
in their mistakes and crimes or an apology for their
prolonged denial of reality.
A number of members and non-members of the
Security Council have evoked in their statements today
the magnitude of the suffering of Syrian women in
Syria and in refugee camps in neighbouring countries.
Some States have boasted that they have spent millions
of dollars to assist Syrian women in their ordeal, and
that is true. However, the very same countries have
overlooked — and blatantly so — the fact that the
policies of their Governments towards my country
were the primary cause for this level of suffering of
Syrian women and this degree of deterioration of their
status as a result of the direct involvement of those
Governments in financing and underwriting terrorism
and in facilitating terrorists’ transit and passage. From
the start of the crisis in my country, those countries have
armed terrorist armed groups and have acknowledged
that fact publicly. They have supported terrorists
financially and through the media, have helped with
recruitment for these organizations in their territories
and have created training camps for terrorists in various
countries before sending them off to Syria to carry out
their crimes following a name change from “terrorists”
to “the moderate opposition”.
We should also never forget the so-called sex
jihad, in which girls have been recruited — France and
Tunisia are supposedly the greatest sources for these
misled and misguided girls — to travel to Syria through
the borders with Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon, where
terrorist groups are carrying out killings, rapes, sexual
and psychological abuse, forced marriages, trafficking
in human beings and human organs, making women
victims of Takfiri ideologies and a distorted and
backward vision of women, in which they are treated
like spoils of war and personal property — slaves — of
the terrorists who falsely call themselves jihadists.
In conclusion, today, now that terrorism has
come knocking at the gates of those States that have
long denied its existence in Syria and is exploiting
women and girls, and now that extremist and criminal
ideologies are spreading, it is time to ask whether those
States engaged in a terrorist war against my country
should not start rethinking their criminal plans and
their support for terrorism in Syria. Is it not time for
senior officials at the United Nations to reconsider their

S/PV.7289

scepticism about the evidence provided by the Syrian
Government about the activities of foreign terrorist
fighters in Syria? Is it not time now for everybody
to start implementing resolutions 1325 (2000), 2133
(2014), 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), in a manner free of
subjective and prejudiced interpretations?
We reiterate here our call for a sincere and
honest international effort focused on putting an
end to the crimes committed by criminal groups and
seeks to create a mechanism for holding accountable
Governments of States that have jurisdiction over those
who support or help spread those ideologies. Those
ideas will, with their violations, denigratinons and
demeaning view of women, have a noxious impact on
the rights of women everywhere because their negative
effects and ramifications will not be limited to Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to warmly thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate devoted to the topic
of women refugees and victims of forced displacement.
My delegation would also like to commend Argentina
for promoting the issue of the rights of women in the
Security Council as one of that country’s priorities.
This year is the fourteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security
Council. The resolution acknowledges the contribution
of women to peace and security, both at the
international and national levels, and promotes their
participation in all aspects of conflict resolution as well
as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It also urges all
States and United Nations agencies to a wide range of
measures to enhance the participation of women in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
promote the respect and protection of their fundamental
rights.
Since 2000, six other resolutions have been adopted
by the Security Council aimed at strengthening the
normative architecture for protecting the rights of women
before, during and after conflicts. These resolutions
mark a turning point in the international community’s
commitment to promoting the participation of women
in peace negotiations and send a clear message against
the endemic and systematic use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war.
Fourteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and in spite of the six other Council

14-5920475/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

resolutions, we must nevertheless conclude that there
is limited progress in their effective implementation.
The report released by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on 20 June notes that
the number of refugees, asylum seekers and internally
displaced persons throughout the world has reached a
record level for the first time since the end of Second
World War — specifically, 51.2 million refugees,
internally displaced persons and asylum seekers.
In 2013 there were 32,000 displaced people every
day, three quarters of whom were women and children.
In addition, the reports reveal that women and girls
are increasingly exposed to a lack of basic services,
humanitarian aid or even official documents. Those
women and girls, in fleeing violence and fighting, find
themselves once again exposed to sexual exploitation,
rape, prostitution, forced marriage or pregnancy,
or forced sterilization. Worse — in the twenty-first
century — they are being auctioned off and sold at the
slave markets. That is reprehensible.
Morocco strongly condemns such barbaric, brutal
and inhumane methods and practices, especially as
they have serious consequences for the establishment
of peace and lasting reconciliation. Such acts of
violence, threats of such acts or incitement to commit
them constitute a serious violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law and a grave breach
of the Geneva Conventions. I would even say they are
a crime against humanity, as women make up half of
humanity.
Helping those women and girls is a major challenge
for the international community, as many of them are
in conflict zones where aid is difficult to deliver and
they do not have the international protection granted to
refugees and internally displaced persons. Applicable
international law holds that States have the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of all persons within their territory, and it is within
their jurisdiction to prevent gender-based violence and
respond effectively. At the same time, it is incumbent
on the parties to armed conflict to take all possible
measures to ensure the protection of civilians and
to fulfil their basic needs. Non-State armed groups
undoubtedly represent a major challenge, given their
responsibility in most of the recent armed conflicts,
their involvement in atrocities and massacres of
civilians and their appropriation of humanitarian aid
resources or commandeering of such resources for the
purposes of war.

76/90

28/10/2014

The Kingdom of Morocco believes that the best
protection is based on full respect for refugees’ basic
rights, regardless of their status. That is a primary,
noble and fundamental aspect of human rights, which
should be the bedrock of international protection. Those
fundamental rights include, on a priority basis, that of
free return to the country of origin in safety and dignity
and resettlement or integration.
Similarly, registering refugees becomes particularly
important in that it allows them to ensure the protection
and enjoyment of their fundamental rights. Registration
and identification programmes can also have a positive
impact on the empowerment of refugee women.
In conclusion, let me highlight the following
elements. First, strong political will and total commitment
by Member States to the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) will allow for active participation by women
in national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations. Secondly, the militarization of refugee
camps is a gross violation of human rights that makes
the distinction between combatants and non-combatants
difficult and hinders the work of humanitarian actors.
Thirdly, women refugees and internally displaced
persons should be informed of the fundamental, legal,
security and material rights offered by their country
of origin. Fourthly, I would highlight the importance
of ensuring broad participation by all refugee and
internally displaced women in decision-making bodies
in refugee or internally displaced communities. Fifthly,
there is a need to increase the funding necessary to
ensuring comprehensive multisectoral responses, such
as the availability of medical and legal of services that
are essential for the empowerment of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing such an important meeting,
and congratulations on your leadership of the Council
this month. I would also like to thank previous speakers
for their statements and the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2014/693) on women and peace
and security. I look forward to his global study of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
upcoming high-level review of the resolution.
This debate could not have come at a more timely
moment. War and conflict affect more lives today — all

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

over the world, but particularly in Afghanistan and
the wider region — than at any time in recent history.
Millions of families have been forced to flee their
homes, and millions of women and children have been
left vulnerable, bearing the brunt of the burden of those
tragic circumstances.
The people of Afghanistan, particularly women
and girls, have suffered immensely as a result of
almost 40 years of war and conflict. The violence in
my country has shattered their lives, interrupted their
educations, threatened their livelihoods, destroyed
their communities and pushed them from their homes
to other countries or to unfamiliar cities and slums.
Afghanistan’s refugee situation remains the largest
protracted such situation in the world, and this year
the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
increased due to a resurgence of insecurity in parts
of the country. Women suffer disproportionately in
situations of displacement. They often lack access
to the most basic services and resources and are at a
higher risk of discrimination and human rights abuses.
In the past year, there has been a rise in the violent
activities of the Taliban, terrorists groups and other
anti-Government armed opposition and the greatest
increase in civilian deaths of the past 13 years, including
many of women and girls. The Taliban and other
anti-Government elements continue to launch targeted
attacks and intimidation campaigns against women
from all spectrums of society, from schoolgirls to
female leaders, including women police officers, human
rights defenders, media personnel and politicians.
Insecurity has also hampered the Government’s ability
to prosecute human rights abusers and uphold the rule
of law, thereby exacerbating women’s vulnerability
to sexual and gender-based violence, domestic abuse,
harassment, forced marriage and other crimes.
Despite those challenges, Afghanistan has arrived
at an important turning point that offers tremendous
opportunity for strengthened progress on the women
and peace and security agenda. Last month, the new
President was inaugurated, representing the first
democratic transition from one elected president to the
next in the country’s history. In this year’s presidential
and provincial council elections, millions of women
participated as voters, and hundreds played a significant
role as candidates and as campaigners, despite facing
threats and intimidation. Their involvement set the tone
for an Afghanistan in which women participate and
contribute equally to the country’s future.

S/PV.7289

President Ghani Ahmadzai and the national unity
Government are committed to women’s full and
equal participation at all levels of governance and
decision-making. The President made that clear in his
inaugural address, in which he pledged to promote
women’s advancement in Afghanistan and praised his
wife, Rula Ghani, for the role she would play as an
active public figure dedicated to promoting women’s
rights. This gesture is a first for our young democracy.
Just a few days ago, Afghanistan signed the women
and peace and security national action plan, which aims
to make progress on the four main areas of participation,
protection, conflict prevention and relief and recovery.
We appreciate the Government of Finland’s support for
the development of the plan and remain committed to
implementing the women and peace and security agenda
through key institutions and the national action plan for
the women of Afghanistan. We are also dedicated to
promoting the participation of women in the security
sector and aim to increase the number of women police
officers from the current 2,230 to 10,000 by 2017.
As Afghanistan prepares for the full transfer
of security responsibility from international to
Afghan forces at the end of 2014, the President and
new leadership of the country are committed to a
comprehensive reform agenda. Over the next two
years, Afghanistan will hold district and parliamentary
elections, reform electoral laws, convene a loya jirga to
consider amendments to the Constitution and conduct
a reinvigorated outreach and reconciliation process
with the armed opposition. Throughout, the active role
of all segments of the Afghan population, particularly
Afghan women, will be essential. The Government of
Afghanistan believes adamantly that their participation
is critical to preserving and enhancing the gains of the
past 12 years and to the future stability, democracy,
prosperity and peace of the country. In that regard,
the international community’s continued support for
Afghanistan’s efforts to advance women’s rights and
status remains crucial.
Afghan women have suffered immensely as a
result of Taliban rule, extremism and decades of war.
Only when they are free from violence, want and fear
will we be able to secure stability and lasting peace
in Afghanistan. For those reasons, we welcome the
opportunities provided to us by the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Conference on Women, the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
adoption of the sustainable development goals to make

14-5920477/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

further progress on the issue of women and peace and
security, and the agenda for women in Afghanistan and
for women around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Sinjaree (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me to congratulate you on having
assumed the presidency for this month; we thank you
for the efforts made in order to fulfil your mandate.
We also welcome the presidential statement adopted
this morning by the Council (S/PRST/2014/21). We
would like also to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the support he is
providing to the work of the United Nations aimed at
promoting the rights of women.
Let me stress the political will of the Iraqi
Government to continue to support the rights of
women. This approach began in 2003, with a view
to strengthening the role played by women in Iraqi
society. Allow me to refer here to a few of the successful
measures taken by the Iraqi Government to support
women and resolve various problems in this area.
First, the Iraqi Council of Ministers set out two
national strategies on the promotion of women. The
first relates to the struggle against violence against
women, and the second promotes the role of women in
general. Also, the Commission on the Rights of Women,
under the authority of the Iraqi Ministry on Women,
created a joint working group among ministries aimed
at implementing the two national strategies effectively.
Secondly, the Iraqi Government set up a national
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, from 2014 to 2018. The
plan of action was launched in February. Iraq is one of
the countries most advanced in the field of women’s
rights in the Middle East.
The plan of action stresses the importance of
enabling women to participate in decision-making
and in conflict resolution while providing them with
protection and care. It also calls for the carrying out
of a study on legislation in Iraq so as to identify those
provisions that pose an obstacle to ending discrimination
against women and violate the rights of women as set
out in the Constitution, and to review current related
legislation so as to either end or amend it, to ensure that
it is in compliance with international instruments on
the rights of women.

78/90

28/10/2014

In addition, gender divisions have been created
within all Iraqi ministries to respond to the request made
by the secretariat of the Iraqi Council of Ministers, so
as to respect human rights and the principle of justice
and equality of opportunities between the different
genders in Government, giving prime importance to
all women’s issues. That division is also responsible
for preparing statistics on the number of women in
State ministries and the percentage of women in those
ministries, so as ensure a better distribution of women
across the various departments of different ministries.
Thirdly, the Iraqi Constitution, in its article 49,
paragraph IV, states that women must occupy 25 per
cent of seats in the Iraqi Parliament. Currently 81 of
the 325 seats in the Iraqi Parliament are occupied by
women.
The Government of Iraq has always worked, and
will continue to work, to promote the status of women
in Iraqi society despite the considerable challenges we
are facing as a people and a Government as a result
of the barbaric terrorist attacks against us, which have
undermined social cohesion within the country. Iraqi
women have been the prime target of such attacks, and
particularly following the events of 10 July, women
were subjected to serious violations carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in various
parts of Iraq controlled by that criminal entity.
ISIL has carried out measures including killings,
kidnapping, rape, forced marriage and other kinds of
practices that have traumatized the victims thereof and
their families. Furthermore, the fate of Iraqi women
kidnapped by ISIL remains unknown, which further
traumatizes the families of the victims and is of deep
concern to all Iraqis.
ISIL attacks and intimidation have led people to
flee their homes to try to find safe haven far from the
terrorists. This has exacerbated the suffering of Iraqi
families and Iraqi women in particular, especially with
the arrival of winter in Iraq. There is also an urgent
need to support medical care, including vaccinations
for pregnant and lactating women.
The Iraqi Government has used all of its available
resources and has collaborated with the international
community and Iraqi and foreign non-governmental
organizations to try to alleviate the suffering of those
women by providing urgent aid for displaced persons
and to protect and liberate the regions controlled by
that criminal entity. Furthermore, we will continue to

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

work to determine the fate of the kidnapped women and
to free them.
Once again we call upon the international
community, including States and organizations, to
continue to help the Government of Iraq in its war
against terrorism to try to liberate the regions from those
criminal groups and prosecute the perpetrators and
instigators of such attacks. We call on the international
community to help the victims of terrorism by providing
psychological assistance, especially women. We know
that women have a vital role to play in rebuilding Iraqi
society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like first to thank
you, Madam President, and your team for chosing the
important issue of displaced women and girls for the
subject of today’s debate. Let me also commend all the
briefers, who contributed so significantly to our debate
today.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
present a few remarks from our national perspective.
We remain deeply concerned about the spread
of conflicts, which has made refugee and forced
displacement figures soar to levels not recorded since
the Second World War. It is worrisome that, according
to estimates of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 86 per cent
of refugees are from the developing world. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/693)
that effective responses to the threats affecting women
and girls in conflict settings must include mobilizing
attention and resources on prevention, mitigation and
the strengthening of national infrastructure for peace.
Building on good practices that have delivered results,
often in cooperation with civil society, helps to tackle
risks and obstacles.
Consistent with the Peacebuilding Commission’s
declaration on women’s economic empowerment
for peacebuilding, we also reaffirm the significance
of concerted efforts in carrying out peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. It is important to
recognize that women’s economic empowerment creates
conditions for their political and social leadership and
for counteracting inequalities and discrimination.

S/PV.7289

For the last two years Poland has been an active
partner in implementing programmes and projects
supporting women’s and girls’ economic needs in
Nigeria, the Sudan, Zambia and Kenya, as well as in
Palestine, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Georgia, Bolivia
and Cuba. Since 2012 we have continued our assistance
to the Syrian people by channelling resources via
the UNHCR field office that takes care of Syrian
refugees in Lebanon and by the implementation of
non-governmental organization projects for Syrian
refugees in Jordan and Lebanon.
In Poland we have introduced improved asylum
procedures. Polish national authorities exercise the
UNHCR’s recommendations on the suspension of return
regarding foreigners coming from countries affected by
conflicts. Specific health services are being provided
in the process of granting protection to female asylumseekers. If a medical or psychological examination
confirms that a woman has been subjected to violence,
her hearing is held in the presence of a psychologist or
doctor.
We have welcomed the recent launch of a global
study to review the progress achieved and challenges
remaining since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). By mid-2015 we hope to receive guidance not
only on how to translate good practices into standard
practices, but also how to utilize synergies between the
commitments and priorities set by the United Nations
within agendas dealing with issues of women and peace
and security. Such advice would be extremely useful
in the context of current global security challenges,
including the escalation of terrorist and extremist
threats.
Finally, mindful of the dramatic situation of
female survivors from conflict-affected areas and the
rising demand on humanitarian assistance, we call
on the Security Council to use its mandate to pursue
accountability for any substantiated case of misconduct,
including sexual exploitation and abuse.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on such an important matter. On behalf
of the 15 member States of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), I wish to express
appreciation to you, Madam, for providing us with
an insightful concept note (S/2014/731, annex) to

14-5920479/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

guide today’s discussion. I also would like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for
their comprehensive and informative briefings.
In recent years, the world has witnessed a
multiplicity of conflicts leading to an unprecedented
increase in the scale of refugees and displaced persons.
The increase in violence, mass displacement and
humanitarian catastrophes has had a disproportionate
impact on women and children. There is growing
recognition that newly emerging unconventional threats
to peace and security associated with the proliferation
of militias, armed groups, jihadists and terrorists linked
to violent extremism affect women and girls more than
their male counterparts.
It is estimated that three quarters of the refugee
and internally displaced persons (IDP) population are
women and children. Displacement and statelessness
exacerbate existing gender inequalities, amplifying
the discrimination and hardships borne by both
women and girls. In that regard, women refugees and
IDPs constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in
armed conflict, as well as post-conflict situations.
Displacement causes women’s heightened risk of
poverty, human trafficking, sexual exploitation and
child, early and forced marriages and the lack of
access to basic resources, such as education and health
services. The majority of the world’s refugees originate
from Africa, with new displacements from intensifying
conflicts in the Central African Republic, South Sudan,
Mali and Somalia.
In the year 2000, the Security Council laid the
foundation for the women and peace and security
agenda in the landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions calling for the special
protection and full participation of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in post-conflict
and peacebuilding processes. In the 14 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), significant
steps have been taken to address the plight of women
and girls and to improve international, regional
and national responses to the protection of women
and girls. The Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law, complemented by regional instruments, have gone
a long way in addressing the challenges both prior
and during the process of displacement. Today the

80/90

28/10/2014

narrative on conflict prevention and resolution reflects
our collective commitment to prevent sexual violence
in conflict and address its disastrous and far-reaching
consequences.
As we continue intensifying our engagement on
the matter, SADC believes that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their women and girls from
all forms of gender-based discrimination and abuse,
including in conflict situations where those are often
aggravated. While international cooperation and
assistance are important, they should not replace the
central role of the State in the protection of women
and girls. We also believe that women’s economic
empowerment and full participation are essential to any
prevention and protection response.
The SADC Protocol on Gender and Development,
signed in August 2008, seeks to harmonize the various
commitments made by SADC member States in regional,
global and continental instruments to achieving gender
equality. Articles 20 to 25 of the Protocol provide for
the implementation of a variety of strategies, including
enacting, reviewing, reforming and enforcing laws
aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based violence
and trafficking. Article 28 provides for women’s equal
representation and participation in key decision-making
positions in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes, as well as for the integration of a gender
perspective into the resolution of conflicts in the region,
in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. Constitutional and legal rights,
education, health, productive resources and economic
empowerment are some of the other areas the Protocol
covers. And it promotes women’s empowerment
through the development and implementation of
gender-responsive legislation, policies, programmes
and projects.
SADC fully subscribes to continental-level
programmes such as the five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme of the African Union (AU),
launched on 2 June in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and
designed to serve as a framework for developing
effective strategies and mechanisms for increasing
women’s participation in promoting peace and security.
It is also designed to enhance the protection of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations in Africa. The AU
Commission Chairperson’s appointment on 30 January
of Ms. Bineta Diop as its Special Envoy for Women,
Peace and Security attests to Africa’s commitment to

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

firmly addressing issues affecting women and children
in conflict.
While considerable progress has been made since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), gaps still remain
in our efforts to achieve sustained change and overall
peace and security. There is a growing consensus that
a peace process that does not include women is flawed.
It is our firm belief that women’s economic, cultural,
political and social rights underpin democracy, stability
and lasting peace.
It is unacceptable that in spite of the existence of
legal and normative frameworks, displaced women
and girls continue to suffer. SADC is concerned about
the continuing gross abuses, sexual exploitation and
abduction of women in areas of conflict. Other gaps
exist in, for example, the exclusion of female refugees
and IDPs from decision-making at all levels, and their
restricted access to basic services. Women and girls
who are the heads of households, young mothers, and
girls with disabilities are the most likely to encounter
major barriers to accessing services and participating
in community life and decision-making.
SADC urges the entire international community to
unite in responding effectively to the problems women
IDPs and refugees face, taking a holistic approach that
combines proactive strategies, responses and solutions.
That entails addressing the root causes of conflict and
strengthening national infrastructures for peace and
reconciliation. We need to do more work on deterring
new crimes by holding perpetrators accountable. More
attention should be given to women’s role as leaders
and their participation in decision-making, which
must be meaningful if we are to realize opportunities
for positive change. Women should be viewed not
merely as victims and survivors but also as a great
resource for their communities and countries, capable
of contributing significantly to peace and security.
We know that women’s participation is essential to
building sustainable peace, and it is therefore important
to ensure that the agenda on women and peace and
security is duly reflected in all engagements relating to
international peace and security.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm SADC’s
continued strong support for the agenda on women and
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.

S/PV.7289

Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): I am honoured to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Republic of
Cyprus on today’s important topic, and we wish to
warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on taking
that initiative. Cyprus would also like to align itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Cyprus has direct experience of the subject
under discussion through the role of women in the
context of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), and through women’s role in our
country’s struggle for liberation and reunification.
Resolution 1325 (2000) mandates that women should
participate in making and keeping peace. The adoption
at the highest level of such a resolution is testament to
the Council’s recognition of the gender inequities in
that regard. It arises from an understanding of armed
conflict’s disproportionate impact on women and girls,
and the importance of enhancing their contributions
to conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Unfortunately, 14 years after the
resolution’s adoption, we are still seeing a gap between
the aspirations of the global and regional commitments
and the realities of peace processes. My Government
remains committed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000) within the Cyprus peace process, where there is
admittedly plenty of room for progress.
My delegation welcomes the emphasis of today’s
discussion on displaced women and girls as leaders
and survivors. We deplore the fact that in current
conflicts civilians and women are increasingly
purposely targeted and that sexual and gender-based
violence is deliberately employed as a war strategy.
Numerous international and regional human rights and
international humanitarian law instruments are aimed
at protecting women during armed conflict, and yet
today women and children make up three quarters of
the refugee and internally displaced population. The
role of women as leaders is essential in enabling their
protection needs to be identified and responded to.
Cyprus would like to take this opportunity to
underline the important role of women in preventing
and resolving conflicts. It is vital that peacekeeping
operations work to improve the gender balance in
peacekeeping mission staff, including at senior
management levels. The presence of women in
peacekeeping operations empowers women in the host
community to serve as role models; enables women to
train female cadets at police and military academies;

14-5920481/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

gives women and children a greater sense of security;
improves access and support for local women and
focuses attention on the specific needs of female excombatants during the process of their demobilization
and reintegration into civilian life.
We note with pleasure that five women are currently
leading peace operations, including Lisa Buttenheim
of the United States in my own country. We are also
pleased to note the appointment of Major General
Kristin Lund as Force Commander of UNFICYP, the
first woman ever to serve as Force Commander of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. The United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus is the first
in the world to have a dual female leadership. As
Major General Lund has mentioned, in order to face
a challenge, it is important that the other 50 per cent
of the population be represented in the peacekeeping
forces.
Being under foreign occupation for the past
40 years, my country has had direct experience of
the disproportionate effects of conflict on women.
One third of our population consists of internally
displaced persons, deprived of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms. During all those years,
the country’s struggle for reunification has borne
the mark of the women’s movement, as women have
provided shelter and relief to victims in the aftermath
of war, struggled to learn the fate of missing persons,
participated in the international legal and political
effort to restore the rights of the displaced, worked to
raise international awareness and promoted a message
of peace, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
Our recent history makes us sensitive to similar
experiences worldwide. For that reason, Cypriot women
have been particularly active throughout the years in
international humanitarian organizations such as the
Red Cross and have made important contributions in
solidarity and humanitarian aid campaigns.
In conclusion, I would like to mention the
words of Hester Paneras of South-Africa, the Police
Commissioner of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the first woman to hold
the top police position in a peacebuilding mission of
such magnitude:
“Opening up to alternative approaches is very
important, but the most important thing is to show
that it does not have to be like that. You can get out
of it.”

82/90

28/10/2014

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for holding today’s open debate on the highly
important issue of displaced women and girls. We
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN-Women and the other
invitees for their substantive briefings.
Ukraine welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21 earlier today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
However, we wish share some observations in our
national capacity.
The year of 2014 marks 14 years since the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which established
the basis for the women and peace and security agenda
and called for special protection for and the full and
equal participation of women in all conflict prevention,
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.
Ukraine remains fully committed to the implementation
of the the resolution, as well as to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the outcome documents of the Beijing
Conference and of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly.
A national action plan in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000) to promote women’s equal and
full participation as active agents in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
as well as to incorporate the gender perspective in
all areas of peacebuilding, is being developed by the
Government of Ukraine, in close consultation with
United Nations agencies and civil society. The plan
will provide for a number of practical steps aimed at
promoting women’s greater participation in political,
economic and social life, as well as addressing the
current challenges faced by women and girls, first
and foremost those caused by the ongoing foreign
aggression against our country.
Despite certain setbacks affecting women in
Ukraine, including the budget cuts caused by more than
six months of foreign aggression, Ukraine, in close
cooperation with its international partners, is making
efforts to address imbalances based on gender and to
review its gender policies with the view to promoting
the effective participation of women in public and
political life and to empower them.
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7289

Ukrainian society is united. Our country is fully
committed to build on the momentum inspired by
our European choice and to ensure access to crucial
services for those women and girls who are currently
internally displaced and, ultimately, to make women in
Ukraine equal and active members of society who are
able to lead and coordinate in promoting their rights.

authoritative sources, at this stage the humanitarian
situation is being managed properly by the Government
of Ukraine, in coordination with our international
partners. It is exactly in that context that we provided
every assistance to one of today’s briefers, Mr. Chaloka
Beyani, Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
IDPs, during his visit to Ukraine.

In its recent report, the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine finds that in the
Donetsk region women comprise 15 per cent of those
killed and 15 per cent of those wounded as a result of
the conflict. Women who have remained in the area are
forced to clean, cook and wash clothes for the members
of illegal armed groups supported by Russia. Groups
of volunteers helping to evacuate people received firsthand reports of rape or detention of women at checkpoints. There have also been incidents of abductions
of women by illegal armed groups whose whereabouts
remain unknown.

According to the latest official statistics, the number
of IDPs in Ukraine stands 275,489 people. Two thirds of
adult IDPs are women. The Government fully realizes
their specific needs, as most IDP families include
elderly and unaccompanied women with children. A
national law on IDPs was adopted on 20 October this
year. It aims at ensuring the rights and freedoms of
IDPs, including women, and at addressing key issues
in this area, including by facilitating humanitarian
assistance. Measures to strengthen the capacity of
our communities to absorb IDPs are being undertaken
by the Government. The issue of IDP women will be
of particular concern in the course of elaborating,
adopting and implementing the national action plan in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).

We are particularly alarmed by reports of the
abduction of people in the territory of Ukraine and their
subsequent illegal transfer to the Russian Federation
for interrogation. Ukrainian servicewoman Nadiya
Savchenko, captured in the Luhansk region in July
without any legal grounds, remains in a detention
facility in the Russian Federation, where she is
subjected to inhuman practices that constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and obligations under
bilateral treaties. We demand the immediate release
of Ms. Savchenko and will do everything possible to
ensure that those involved in her abduction and illegal
detention are brought to justice.
This morning Russian delegation stated that
currently there are 830,000 Ukrainian refugees on
Russian territory. That number cannot be trusted, as it
has not been independently verified and comes from
a single source, Russian Federation itself.Yet, what
Russian delegation failed to mention in the first place
is that the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in Ukraine is of Russia’s own making. It is a
direct consequence of its aggression against Ukraine,
which started with invasion and occupation of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, an integral part of
Ukraine, and continued with the creating and now
fuelling of conflict in the east of my country.
The Russian delegation also did not mention
that, according to the Secretary-General, his UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and other

The Russian delegation also forgot to mention its
so-called humanitarian convoys sent to Ukraine in
clear violation of the international and national law, in
a unilateral and shadowy manner without involvement
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, let
alone Ukrainian Government consent. Should Moscow
proceed with the fourth such convoy as it has announced
today, it will be yet another violation of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Time and again we have stressed that the only
way that Russia can contribute to the alleviation of
the humanitarian situation it has created in the east
of Ukraine is to stop waging a hybrid war against
my country, to halt sponsoring and arming terrorists,
to fully withdraw its troops and mercenaries and to
establish effective and verifiable border contributionrol.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this crucial debate,
which affords the broader United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the women and peace
and security agenda. I am also grateful for the concept
note that you have circulated (S/2014/731, annex), which
we believe will guide our deliberations to a successful
conclusion. And I wish to thank the Secretary-General

14-5920483/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

for his personal and steadfast commitment to this issue,
as well as the briefers for their insightful presentations.
We underline and insist that all forms of violence
against women are unacceptable and should in no way
be tolerated. Unfortunately, statistics show that this
phenomenon continues to be pervasive in all countries.
It is therefore necessary to intensify efforts at all levels,
particularly in terms of prevention and awareness. We
urge all Member States to strengthen their support to
women victims of violence and ensure their access to
the justice system in accordance with human rights
standards and regardless of their status.
The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to rise worldwide to unprecedented
levels, and with it the increased risks faced by displaced
women and girls. Due to their vulnerability, women in
many conflict situations around the world continue to
face intolerable hardship, as they become targets of all
forms of violence.
We underline the particular vulnerability of women
and children refugees and displaced persons, including
exposure to discrimination and sexual and physical
abuse, violence and exploitation. In that regard, we
acknowledge the importance of preventing, responding
to and addressing sexual and gender-based issues.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
United Nations has adopted specific policy directives
to achieve gender equality in peacekeeping operations.
To further contriubute to that end, there is a need
to consider having the United Nations step up the
deployment of women protection advisers and gender
advisers in both peacekeeping and political missions,
as well as in humanitarian operations.
At the regional level, the African Union has made
the protection of women’s right across the continent
a priority. It is committed to promoting and working
to achieve gender equality in line with the gender
policy adopted by the African Union in 2009. In that
regard, we emphasize that States have the primary
responsibility to provide protection and assistance to
refugees and internally displaced persons within their
jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the
displacement problem, in appropriate cooperation with
the international community.
Since the ratification of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women in 1996, Algeria has made great efforts
to place the protection and promotion women’s rights at
84/90

28/10/2014

the centre of its national policies, strategic objectives
and programmes. The situation of women in Algeria
has experienced a very positive trend through combined
efforts by the Government and civil society.
While we reiterate Algeria’s support for the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolution 1325 (2000), we would like to underline that
firm political will and full commitment by Member
States on the relevant measures set out in the resolution,
which marks this year its fourteenth anniversary,
will guarantee the active participation of women in
national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.
I am happy and proud, Madam President, that your
actions eloquently attest to your sober handling of the
work of the Security Council this month, including by
placing this issue on the Council’s agenda. For me, in
our troubled world, “women”, “peace” and “security”
are synonimous.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Indonesia associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Viet Nam on behalf of the member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian nations.
Allow me to convey our highest appreciation to you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
an issue that is of high importance to Indonesia. Allow
me also to thank today’s briefers for their informative
briefings made this morning.
As I speak before the Council today, Indonesia
continues to encourage the implementation on the
ground of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security.
Indonesia takes positive note of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on women and peace and security
(S/2014/693), which provides valuable insights on how
we can further improve the United Nations presence
and performance in armed conflicts, including in
peacekeeping operations, to the benefit of women
and girls, particularly the survivors of the horrors of
conflict and those displaced by armed conflict.
Indonesia has supported various initiatives that are
complementary to Security Council resolutions that
protect and empower women and girls in armed conflict
situations, including by being one of the countries to
14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

champion the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
Initiative.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has stated that women and girls
make up half of the refugees and internally displaced
persons in the world. They face certain risks and
vulnerabilities, particularly a heightened risk of
discrimination and violence. Therefore, the theme of
today’s discussion — the situation of displaced women
and girls — should be guided by the principles set out
in international humanitarian law.
There is ample evidence that conflict may serve
as an opportunity for women to assume leadership in
the community when men are either in combat or are
recruited into war. Nonetheless, when peace gradually
emerges, so does the return of the gender status quo.
Hence, it is imperative to ensure that women and girls
can continue to enjoy full and effective participation and
leadership at all levels, including during humanitarian
emergencies.
Allow us to share our view on how United
Nations missions can deliver on their mandates in
armed conflict situations, specifically with regard to
internally displaced women and girls in times of war
and during the post conflict period. Allow me draw the
Council’s attention to three aspects: prevention, specific
assistance and protection, and women’s empowerment.
First, with regard to prevention, integrating the
gender perspective for a more effective and equitable
humanitarian and development assistance response to
displacement and early recovery is important. We should
also continue to promote gender mainstreaming among
peacekeping contingents. In that regard, sensitization
about gender, humanitarian law and human rights
should form a coherent part of predeployment training.
Secondly, recognizing that women and girls have
distinct needs, specific assistance and protection
should be arranged. That includes ensuring that women
and girls have equal access to all forms of humanitarian
assistance, providing specific basic services such as
reproductive health and protection from gender-based
violence, and ensuring women’s participation in the
administration of shelter and in the formulation and
implementation of assistance programmes.
Thirdly, to effectively ensure that women and girls
can thrive as survivors and leaders in time of emergency
situations, we have to empower them. In that regard,
we need to ensure their access to educational service,

S/PV.7289

in particular for children and girls in particular. We
need to help improve their effective livelihoods. We
also need to increase strategic educational programmes
that can support women’s capacities and skills so as to
benefit them in the post-conflict phase.
Despite the myriad challenges, displacement can
enable women to take on new roles and bring about
positive change in the family and community, provided
they obtain the right and adequate support. We therefore
need to continue building women’s resilience and
strength to support their empowerment, strengthen their
protection and promote their meaningful participation
in all decisions affecting their lives.
With your able leadership, Madam President, I
am certain and hopeful that this debate will generate
further significant momentum on the issue of women
and peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to express its gratitude to you,
Madam President, for convening this debate on women
and peace and security as we mark the fourteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
We also welcome the presence of the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the various other briefers at this
meeting.
My country’s Government attaches particular
importance to the issue of women, as evidenced by
various steps it has taken that have led to the adoption
of several strategies and plans, including a strategy
on promoting women’s participation covering the
period 2013 to 2027. Furthermore, my Government has
established a unit to combat violence against women and
an independent commission for human rights. We have
also appointed two women to head those two bodies
pursuant to the principle of parity. My Government
also attaches special importance to combating violence
against women, in particular in refugee camps in the
states of Darfur, the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan,
in cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping
mission and the country team in the Sudan.
The report submitted for this meeting notes the
participation of women in elections and decision-making
around the world, and that it is not satisfied with the low
level of that participation of women. On that point, it is
a pleasure and honour for me to declare that the right to
vote and to run for elections are rights that have been

14-5920485/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

guaranteed to Sudanese women since the 1950s. The
current rate of participation of women in Parliament
is 28 per cent. Women fill the positions of Vice
Speaker and Chairs of a number of the most important
parliamentary comissions. As for participation in
politics, which is also mentioned in the report, women
in the Sudan have been able to run for the office of
President of the Republic and have filled key positions,
such as the Adviser to the President and ministers, as
well as at the local level. They have played key roles not
only in ministries in charge of women’s issues but also
in other ministries.
The Sudan has enacted national legislation to
combat the threat of human trafficking, in particular
the trafficking of women and children, given that the
Sudan is a transit country owing to its immense stretch
of desert. Khartoum hosted a regional conference
only two weeks ago, on 13 October, on the topic of
combating human trafficking in the Horn of Africa.
That conference included the participation of highlevel representatives from various international
organizations and countries of the region and from
around the world. My country has signed agreements to
guarantee the security of borders with its neighbours.
With regard to economic measures, my country
is implementing a development project for women in
rural areas and in displaced persons camps. We are also
implementing projects for the economic rehabilitation
for women and to ensure microfinancing for women
and funds for the informal sector. Women’s inheritance
rights are guaranteed. With regard to basic services
and schooling, there are more young girls and boys at
school and in higher education. The infant and maternal
mortality rates have dropped significantly.
Furthermore, my country provides significant
assistance to displaced persons in the states that I
mentioned: Darfur, Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan. I
will not go into details owing to the lack of time. Such
efforts have produced very positive results that are in
line with various humanitarian indicators. However,
rebels moving through the area hinder those efforts.
The Government has also undertaken efforts to ensure
the voluntary return of refugees to the neighbouring
country of Chad, assisting people in returning to their
villages through development projects once stability
and security are restored.
Given that this meeting is aimed at underscoring
challenges to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and in pursuant to your letter, Madam President, my
86/90

28/10/2014

delegation would like to express its support for the
objectives set out in the concept note (see S/2014/731,
annex). We call for a global approach in dealing with
those issues as an urgent step in order to resolve
conflicts, assist displaced persons to return to their
homes and help countries to overcome conflicts and
deal with such problems. We also call for the removal
of all obstacles that hinder national efforts, such as
the excessive debt burden and the unilateral sanctions
imposed on certain conflict affected countries.
Finally, I would like to inform this body that my
country is currently engaged in a significant national
dialogue process launched by the President of the
Republic, who has invited all sectors of Sudanese society
to discuss matters of great priority to the country in
order to achieve political stability in the entire country.
We hope that all the people, in particular women and
children, will benefit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): This debate marks the fourteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and provides an
important opportunity to address the persistent and
emerging gaps to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Last week, I read a story about Amsha, a Yazidi
woman from northern Iraq who was captured by Daesh
in August. Amsha watched in horror as jihadi fighters
separated the men. Her husband was ordered to lie face
down on the ground. One by one the jihadists passed
over the men and shot them in the head. The women
were taken to Mosul and held prisoner with hundreds of
other women and girls. Every day, men entered the room
to pick out a girl. They sold Amsha for $12. The man
who bought her viciously raped and beat her. Stories
such as that of Amsha are emerging every day. Their
testimonies — forced conversions, forced marriage,
sexual assault, displacement and slavery — are what
we would expect to read about in the Dark Ages, not in
the twenty-first century.
Daesh is just one of the radical extremist groups
that seek to subjugate women. There is Boko Haram
in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in Yemen, like-minded militias in
Libya, Al-Shabaab in the East Africa, and Hamas in
Gaza. They seek to control every area of a woman’s
life — how she dresses, where she goes, how she spends
her money, who she marries and how many children
she has. The Holy Bible tells us that there is a time

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

for everything and a season for every activity under
the heavens. It is therefore a great disappointment
that where we see those vast injustices and atrocities
towards women around the globe, as well as great
opportunities for the advancement of women, a leading
Arab country decided to use this forum to advance
narrow political goals by aattacking my country. The
issue is far too important for all of us and there should
be no politicization of the matter.
Around the world, women continue to be
marginalized and minimized. Today, the majority of the
world’s poor are women. They earn only three-quarters
as much as men and are frequently locked out of
leadership and decision-making positions. The tragedy
is that when women face barriers to achieving their
potential, entire societies suffer. The truth of the matter
is that women’s economic empowerment lies at the
heart of sustainable development. We know that, when
a woman generates her own income, she reinvests
90 per cent of it in her family and community, and
we know that eliminating gender gaps in labour force
participation can lead to big jumps in income per capita.
To put it more simply, when we boost the participation
of women, we boost the growth potential of an entire
nation. Supporting women’s economic empowerment
requires meaningful policy intervention, beginning
with the inclusion of women in the decision-making
process. Women bring unique ideas, priorities and
expertise to bear on challenging political problems.
Creating opportunities for women and girls advances
security and prosperity for everyone.
Take Rwanda, for example. Rwanda’s legal system
guarantees equal rights in terms of land ownership
and inheritance, and its Constitution enshrines gender
equality. Thanks to that strategy, Rwanda tops the
world for women in Parliament with 53 per cent in 2013,
and the nation has made impressive progress towards
reducing poverty and inequality.
Israel understands the tremendous benefits of
investing in every member of society. We celebrate
different ways of life, we value diversity, and we believe
that every person should choose how to live his or her
life. From the prophets Deborah to Miriam and Queen
Esther, Jewish history is rich with female leaders. More
recently, courageous women from Hannah Senesh
to Dorit Beinisch have left their mark on the Jewish
people and the Jewish State. In fact, our Declaration of
Independence was signed by two women, Golda Meir
and Rachel Cohen-Kagan, and Israel had a female Prime

S/PV.7289

Minister before many other countries granted women
the right to vote. In Israel, we understand that women’s
participation is a game changer. That is why two of the
past three chief justices of our Supreme Court have
been women, and the current Israeli Parliament has
more women than ever before. In recent years, Israel
has welcomed its first female Major General, elected a
female Governor to our central bank, and three women
were appointed to head our leading banks. Israeli
women are agents of change, drivers of progress and
makers of peace.
Given the chance, that could be true for all the
world’s women, but we have work to do. We must
persist in our efforts to advance gender equality until
all women can dress as they like, be educated as they
choose, work where they wish, marry the person they
love, raise their families as they see fit and make the
choices that will determine the course of their lives.
It is up to us to uphold those freedoms. So I urge
everyone — all women and men who wish to see a more
peaceful planet — to bet on women, invest in women,
ensure that they have opportunities, support their right
to be a part of the decision-making process. I promise
that we will not be disappointed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/693) and shares his concerns
regarding the situation of displaced populations, the
majority of whom are women and girls. In Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon and Jordan, women and girls have limited
access to the assistance and protection they need, which
contributes to making them all the more vulnerable to
sexual exploitation and sexual violence.
In that connection, Switzerland would like to make
three points.
First, it is important to develop sound, contextspecific policies to prevent the exploitation and
abuse of refugees and displaced women and girls.
Restrictive migration policies that limit opportunities
for women and girls fleeing conflict zones augment
their vulnerability. Through strengthened dialogue and
cooperation, we must find ways to adapt those policies
to ensure that women and girls from conflict-affected
areas are not subjected to human trafficking or sexual
exploitation and abuse. National troops, peacekeeping
forces, border police, immigration service officials

14-5920487/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

and humanitarian actors — all have a role to play in
fighting and preventing those crimes. Ultimately, we
must ensure that those responsible for such crimes are
prosecuted and brought to justice.
Secondly, Switzerland believes that more must
be done to prevent sexual violence committed
against displaced persons. We need to respond with
a coordinated and integrated approach and strive for
gender sensitivity throughout the system. That is
why Switzerland will host in Geneva the next donor
conference for United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict on 12 November 2014.
In addition, Switzerland is committed to
contributing to the fight against impunity. To that
end, Switzerland supports a mechanism for the rapid
administration of justice, an intergovernmental
structure that can be rapidly mobilized and provide
expertise to the international community. The rapid
deployment of specialists in sexual and genderbased violence helps support international or national
inquiries and contributes to the development of national
capacities.
Thirdly, we must do more to ensure access
by refugees and displaced women to political
decision-making, including peace processes. Their
concerns must be taken into account in all transitional
arrangements. In that regard, we should like to highlight
the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
on 18 March 2013 (A/HRC/23/44) and encourage all
Member States to put them into practice. Furthermore,
women’s participation in decision-making in refugee
camps must be enhanced. Those are the findings of a
study conducted by the Women’s Refugee Commission
in refugee camps in Jordan. That study, funded by
Switzerland, analyses the existing links between
women’s participation in decision-making and their
enjoyment of human rights. Finally, allow me to remind
the Council that equal participation in political life and
access to services and justice as well as the protection
of rights are ways of adding to women’s emancipation
and avoiding sexist practices.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I think we are
nearing the end of the debate.
I would like to welcome and give the floor to the
Ambassador of Fiji.

88/90

28/10/2014

Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Thank you for the welcome,
Madam President; it is an honour to share the
graveyard shift with you this evening. I believe I am
the last speaker. I join with others in thanking you for
convening this debate. Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), adopted 14 years ago, along with subsequent
resolutions affirm that women’s participation in conflict
prevention, mitigation and recovery is imperative for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) also highlights the focus of
our discussions today, notably that women and girls
in displaced groups are subject to violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse.
The Fiji delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) by the Council last October.
That important step builds on the previous momentum
by incorporating essential accountability checks that
aim to change the business-as-usual approach. We urge
the Council to continue such a progressive approach so
that women’s peace and security issues remain at the
forefront.
The exponential increase in the global number of
displaced people is a matter of great concern. Tragically,
over 50 million people are currently displaced, the
highest number since the Second World War. The
record shows that women and girls in such situations
are the most vulnerable groups, often becoming
victims of violence, sexual exploitation and abuse. In
the context of prolonged and repeated displacement,
effective mechanisms to prevent abuse and violence are
often absent or limited. Therefore, guaranteed access
to legal and justice systems for displaced women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict settings is crucial
in order to ensure that their vital needs are addressed.
We must redouble our efforts to implement the relevant
legislation, reinforce the rule of law and ensure the
protection of victims, witnesses and justice officials so
as to safeguard displaced victims, particularly the most
vulnerable women and girls.
Often, displaced women and girl survivors who
have experienced violence, sexual exploitation and
abuse suffer from stigmatization, social shunning and
reprisals from within their communities. Therefore,
the provision of critical support services, such as
psychological support, mental health support and the
provision of health care services, is essential for their
social rehabilitation.

14-59204

28/10/2014

Women and peace and security

In tandem with current efforts by the United
Nations to mainstream gender within the United
Nations system, Fiji is endeavouring to make its
contribution to that global effort. Fiji is committed
to the alignment of policies so as to provide its best
gender-sensitized peacekeepers in helping to rebuild
post conflict communities. We recognize that national
implementation will be crucial in meeting the objectives
of resolution 1325 (2000).
The involvement of women in peace and security
requires a multidimensional approach, and Fiji is
guided by the regional action plan on women and
peace and security, which supports our national efforts
to ensure that women are active participants at all
stages of national life, including conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding. In that respect, the Fiji
Constitution of 2013 encompasses a comprehensive
range of human rights, including the right to freedom
from unfair discrimination based on sex or gender. On
the eve of International Women’s Day this year, Fiji
launched its national gender policy, which has become
the guiding document for mainstreaming gender issues
across all sectors and within all spheres of national life.
Fiji is committed to increasing women’s participation
in decision-making in political, social and economic
processes at all levels.
In the context of the Pacific Islands, the issue of
climate change and the associated calamities of sealevel rise and the increasing frequency and severity of
natural disasters, has resulted in disproportionately high
financial, political and social costs for our developing
island States. It is widely accepted that the first to bear
the negative impacts of climate change are vulnerable
groups, particularly women and girls. Climate change
not only affects our land and food resources, but the
resulting sea-level rise also forces the displacement of
our coastal communities. We urge the Security Council
to accept that climate change is a security issue and
that vigilance must be applied to ensure that vulnerable
women and girls are safeguarded.
In conclusion, we acknowledge that progress has
been made by countries in the implementation of the
resolution; however, it is undeniable there is still so
much more to be achieved so as to ensure that the dignity,
peace and security of women is realized globally. The
Fiji delegation calls on the United Nations system and
its agencies, in partnership with Member States and
regional organizations, to support the development and

S/PV.7289

implementation of national action plans so that greater
progress can be achieved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to make a further
statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have been compelled to take the floor
again in connection with the statement made by the
representative of Ukraine. Once again, colleagues are
attempting to turn things around in order to put the
blame on Russia for the consequences resulting from
the unwillingness or incapacity of the Kyiv authorities
to resolve their problems in a civilized manner through
national dialogue.
It is not some kind of mythical Russian aggression
that has led to the hundreds of victims among the
civilian population, including women, and a large
number of refugees and internally displaced persons,
but rather a large-scale punitive operation that has
been launched by the authorities in the eastern part of
the country and is characterized by an arbitrary and
excessive use of force.
In its statements, the Ukrainian delegation likes to
quote various passages from the reports of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine.
In that connection, it may be recalled that the latest
report contained references to enforced disappearances,
murders, vandalism, arbitrary detentions and atrocities
carried out by both the Kyiv security forces and the
battalions under their command — the Aydar, Azov,
Dnipro-1, Kyiv-1 and Kyiv-2 battalions — and the
terrible number of victims among civilians resulting
from the indiscriminate artillery shelling of densely
populated civilian areas and the use of heavy artillery
and banned munitions. I could continue with that list.
With regard to Nadiya Savchenko, who was
mentioned by the Ukrainian colleague, in that
connection I would like to recall another topic that
has often been discussed by the Council, namely,
the protection of journalists. In fact, Savchenko is
being accused of abetting the killing of two Russian
journalists. As all are aware, in the various meetings,
including those of the Security Council, it has been
noted that a lack of accountability for such crimes is
unacceptable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

14-5920489/90

S/PV.7289

Women and peace and security

I would like to thank everyone present for having
participated in this debate on women and peace and
security. I would like to mention that this issue does not
always attract great numbers. However, it is excellent
that the debate this year has seen the greatest number of
participants among Member States. Indeed, 72 speakers
have come together in what has proved a respectful and

90/90

28/10/2014

diverse debate in promoting the protection of the rights
of women.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

14-59204
