S/PRST/2017/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 July 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8012th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 July 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “ The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses concern at the current political situation
in light of the challenges facing the implementation of the 31 December
agreement, the deterioration of the security situation, in particular in the Kasaï
region, as well as the increase in abuses and violations of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law in the country.
“The Security Council takes note of the appointment of a new Prime
Minister, the establishment of the transitional Government, and the signing of
the «Arrangements particuliers» for the implementation of the agreement by
some, but not all, of the signatories of the agreement. The Security Council
expresses concern at the slow implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement. It reiterates that effective, swift and ti mely implementation of the
Agreement is critical to a credible electoral process and the peace and stability
of the DRC, as well as in supporting the legitimacy of the transitional
institutions, as it represents a viable road map towards the holding of pea ceful
and democratic elections. The Security Council stresses the urgency of swift
implementation of the agreement, in good faith and in all its components, in
order to organize peaceful, credible, inclusive and timely elections, no later
than December 2017, as agreed in the 31 December 2016 agreement, and
leading to a peaceful transfer of power, in accordance with the Constitution
and Security Council resolution 2348 (2017), including through the full and
equal participation of women. The Security Council reiterates its call for the
full implementation of the confidence building measures agreed in chapter V
of the 31 December 2016 agreement, some of which are yet to be
implemented.
“The Security Council appeals to all Congolese actors to work for the
preservation of the still fragile gains in the path of peace and stability in the
DRC, it underscores the responsibility that all Congolese political stakeholders
bear, especially by overcoming their differences to reach consensus and
upholding the interests and well-being of their people above all other
considerations, and strongly urges all stakeholders to redouble their efforts to
ensure the inclusivity of all signatories of the Agreement in its
implementation, including the process leading to the appointment of the Chair
of Conseil National de Suivi de l’Accord. The Security Council expresses
concern that, unless political actors demonstrate renewed good faith and
political will to deliver on the promises they made to their people on New

17-12754 (E)

270717

*1712754*

S/PRST/2017/12

Year’s Eve 2016, the DRC and the wider region are set to face an increased
risk of insecurity and instability. The Security Council further calls upon all
political parties, their supporters, and other political actors to re main calm and
refrain from violence of any kind. The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to act accordingly regarding all Congolese actors whose actions
and statements impede the implementation of the agreement and the
organization of the elections.
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made in the voter
registration process, led by the National Electoral Commission, CENI, with
the active support of MONUSCO, and calls for the continuation of these
efforts in order to ensure that voters throughout the country, including in the
Kasaï provinces, are duly registered. The Security Council calls for the swift
publication of the electoral timetable, as called for by the African Union at its
29th Summit, which would provide clarity on both the timing and steps ahead
and allow partners, including the UN, whose technical and financial support
remains important for the holding of the elections, to better determine the type
of assistance they need to provide and to enable the effective preparation of
elections. The Security Council takes note of the repeated commitment by
DRC authorities to fund the upcoming electoral cycle, and underlines that,
despite the budgetary difficulties facing the Government, it remains crucial
that the promised funds are disbursed as scheduled to ensure that the electoral
process proceeds in a timely manner.
“The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of the violence
witnessed in the Kasaï region over recent months and expresses serious
concerns at violations and abuses of human rights committed in the region,
including cases of sexual violence in conflict, and at the recent reports of more
alleged mass graves. The Security Council takes note of statements by DRC
representatives claiming that some alleged mass graves were in fact burial
sites. The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at serious violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human rights committed by local
militia in that region, including those involving recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, attacks on civilians and civilian sites, as well as
attacks on DRC security forces and symbols of State authority. The Security
Council further expresses concern about attacks, in contravention of applicable
international law, against schools and hospitals and calls for respect to the
civilian character of schools, in accordance with international humanitarian
law. The Security Council further reiterates its serious concerns at the recent
reports of significant increase in violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights by members of the security forces of the DRC in the Kasai
region, including the disproportionate use of force and the killing of civilians.
The Security Council underlines that these violations and abuses migh t
constitute war crimes under international law. The Security Council
underscores the primary responsibility of the DRC Government for ensuring
security in its territory and protecting its population, with respect for the rule
of law, human rights and international humanitarian law, and calls on the
Government of DRC to desist from any excessive use of force and on all other
parties to immediately cease and reject any kind of violence, lay down their
arms and engage in a peaceful solution to the crisis.
“The Security Council further expresses concern over the humanitarian
crisis caused by the violence, which has displaced more than 1.4 million
people internally and forced more than 30,000 people to flee the country. The

2/3

17-12754

S/PRST/2017/12

Security Council underlines the urgent need for safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance and urgency of prompt
and transparent investigations into violations of international humanitarian law
and violations or abuses of human rights in the Kasaï region. It welcomes the
dispatch of a team of international experts to work in cooperation with the
Government of the DRC. The Security Council reiterates its intention to
closely monitor progress of the investigations into these violations and abuses,
including the joint investigations by the Government of the DRC, MONUSCO
and the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office in the DRC, in order to
bring to justice and hold accountable all those responsible, and it looks
forward to their report. The Security Council takes note of the recent
prosecution and conviction of several DRC armed forces soldiers and a
National Congolese Police agent as a first step towards countering impunity.
“The Security Council reiterates the need for the Government of the
DRC to swiftly and fully investigate the killing of the two members of the
Group of Experts and bring those responsible to justice, it calls upon the
Government of the DRC to cooperate with the United Nations enquiries, as
well as with law enforcement investigations that may be conducted by Sweden
or the United States, in accordance with DRC national legislation. The
Security Council looks forward to the results of the United Nations Board of
Inquiry established by the Secretary-General to investigate the deaths of the
two experts. The Security Council recalls its decision in paragraph 3 of
resolution 2360 (2017) that acts that undermine the peace, stability or security
of the DRC include planning, directing, sponsoring or participating in attacks
against MONUSCO peacekeepers or United Nations and associated personnel,
including members of the Group of Experts, and expresses its readiness to
designate individuals and groups responsible for such attac ks for sanctions.
“The Security Council notes with concern the continued activities of
armed groups in Eastern DRC, including a recent increase in violence against
local communities and the DRC armed forces, escalating ethnic tensions, and
an increase in internal displacement.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of the DRC.
“The Security Council reiterates its support to the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, MONUSCO, the African Union and
regional organizations in helping to ensure the full implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement, in accordance with its resolution 2348 (2017).
The Security Council calls on partners of the DRC to continue to support
genuine efforts by national stakeholders towards the full implementation of the
Agreement. The Security Council reiterates its call to countries of the region —
who four years ago signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region — to expedite efforts
towards fully implementing their national and regional commitments under the
PSC Framework, which remains essential for the achievement of lasting peace
and security in the Great Lakes region. The Security Council calls upon the
United Nations, the Guarantors of the Framework Agreement and the Member
countries of the ICGLR and SADC to provide all the necessary support to this
end.”

17-12754

3/3
