Th, General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions 65 (I) 22 of
14 December 1946, 141 (II) 23 of 1 November
1947 and 227 (III) 24 of 26 November 1948
concerning the Territory of South West Africa,
Considering that it is desirable that the General Assembly, for its further consideration of
the question, should obtain an advisory opinion
on its legal aspects,
l. Decides to submit the following questions
to the International Court of Justice with a request for an advisory opinion which shall be transmitted to the General Assembly before its fifth
regular session, if possible :
"What is the international status of the Territory of South West Africa and what are the
international obligations of the Union of South
Africa arising therefrom, in particular :
"(a) Does the Union of South Africa continue to have international obligations under the
Mandate for South West Africa and, if so, what
are those obligations?
" ( b) Are the provisions of Chapter XII of
the Charter applicable and, if so, in what manner,
to the Territory of South West Africa?

" ( c) Has the Union of South Africa the competence to modify the international status of the
Territory of South West Africa, or, in the event
of a negative reply, where does competence rest
to determine and modify the international status
of the Territory?"
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the present resolution to the International Court
of Justice, in accordance with Article 65 of the
Statute of the Court, accompanied by all documents likely to throw light upon the question.
The Secretary-General shall include among
these documents, the text of article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations; the text of
the Mandate26 for German South West Africa,
confirmed by the Council of the League on 17
December 1920; relevant documentation concerning the objectives and the- functions of the
Mandates System; the text of the resolution•
adopted by the League of Nations on the question of Mandates on 18 April 1946; the text of
Articles 77 and 80 of the Charter and data on
the discussion of these Articles in the San Francisco Conference and the General Assembly;
the report of the Fourth Committee and the
official records, including the annexes, of the
consideration of the question of South West
Africa at the fourth session of the General
Assembly.
269th plenary meeting,
6 December 1949.

22 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 123.
28 See Official Records of the second sessioii of the
General Asscm/Jlv, Resolutions, page 47.
24 See Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part I. Resolutions, page 89.

25 See Terms of League of Nations Mandates (document A/70).
_
26 See League of Nations Official Journal,
Special
Supplement No. 194, Records of the twentieth (conclusion) and twenty-first ordinary sessions of the Assembly,
page 58.

S38 (IV). Question of South West
Africa: request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court
of Justice

45
