S/PV.8659

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 November 2019
Original: English

Official communiqué of the 8659th (closed) meeting of the
Security Council
Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday,
5 November 2019, at 3 p.m.
In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in
place of a verbatim record:
“At its 8659th meeting, held in private on 5 November 2019, the Security
Council considered the item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”.
“The President invited the representatives of Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, Namibia, New Zealand,
Niger, North Macedonia, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and Viet Nam to participate in the meeting in
accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“The President invited the following briefers to participate in the meeting
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure:
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and
Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
“The President also invited the representative of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in the meeting in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“The President invited the representative of the Permanent Observer
Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations to participate in the meeting in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and the Council ’s previous
practice.
“The Council heard briefings by Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Arias.
“Statements were made by the representatives of the United States, the
Russian Federation, Kuwait, Poland, Côte d’Ivoire, Peru, China, South Africa,
Indonesia, France, Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Germa ny, Equatorial

19-19200 (E)

061119

*1919200*

S/PV.8659

Guinea and by the President, speaking in her capacity as the representative of
the United Kingdom.
“Mr. Arias and Ms. Nakamitsu responded to comments and questions
raised.
“The representative of the Russian Federation made a further stat ement.
“The Council heard a statement by the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic.”

2/2

19-19200
