IM

General Aaembl:,-Twenty-nintb Senion

Mauritania,3 8 in which the t~o countries acknowledged
that they were both interested in the future of the
Territory,
Having heard the statements of the representative
of Algeria, 311
Having heard the statements of the representative
of Spain,40
Noting that during the discussion a legal difficulty
arose over the status of the said Territory at the time
of its colonization by Spain,
Considering, therefore, that it is highly desirable
that the General Assembly, in order to continue the
discussion of this question at its thirtieth session, should
receive an advisory opinion on some important legal
aspects of the problem,
Bearing in mind Article 96 of the Charter of the
United Nations and Article 65 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,
1. Decides to request the International Court of
Justice, without prejudice to the application of the
principles embodied in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), to give an advisory opinion at an early
date on the following questions:
"I. Was Western Sahara (Rio de Oro and Sakiet
El Hamra) at the time of colonization by
Spain a territory belonging to no one (terra
nullius)?"
If the answer to the first question is in the negative,
"II. What were the legal ties between this territory
and the Kingdom of Morocco and the Mauritanian entity?";
2. Calls upon Spain, in its capacity as administering Power in particular, as well as Morocco and Mauritania, in their capacity as interested parties, to submit
to the International Court of Justice all such information and documents as may be needed to clarify those
questions;
3. Urges the administering Power to postpone the
referendum it contemplated holding in Western Sahara
until the General Assembly decides on the policy to be
followed in order to accelerate the decolonization process in the Territory, in accordance with resolution
1514 (XV), in the best possible conditions, in the
light of the advisory opinion to be given by the International Court of Justice;
4. Reiterates its invitation· to all States to observe
the resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the
activities of foreign economic and financial interests
in the Territory and to abstain from contributing by
their investments or immigration policy to the maintenance of a colonial situation in the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Jmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under review, including the sending of a visiting mission
to the Territory, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.

2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
38 Jbid., 2117th and 2130th meetings.
3 9 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 2265th meeting and ibid.,

Fourth
Committee, 2125th meeting.
40 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 2253rd meeting and ibid., Fourth
Committee, 2117th, 2125th, 2126th .1nd 2130th meetings.

3293 (XXIX). Information from Non-Self-Go~erning Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nation•

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Comn_iittee on the Situation with regard to the Implementat10n
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and
to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation
of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 3110 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, in which it requested the Special
Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with the procedures approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 5 of
resolution 3110 (XXVIII), in which it requested the
administering Powers concerned to transmit, . or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General the mformation prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well
as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter4 1 and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this item, 42
Noting with satisfaction that the Government of
Portugal has reaffirmed its obligations with regard to
Chapter XI of the Charter4 3 and declared its intention
to supply all the information requested under Article
73 e of the Charter, and to implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 ~ecember 196~ a~d
other relevant resolutions concernmg the Terntones
under Portuguese administration, 44
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples .relating to the information from Non-Self-Governmg
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations; 41
2. Deeply deplores that, despite, the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee some Member States having responsibilities for the' administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased or have failed to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter, have
41 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I), chap. XXIX.
42 A/9867 and Add.I.
43 A/9694.S/l 1419, annex, para. 2. For the printed text, ace
Official Records of tire Security Council, Twenty-ninth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1974.
H See Official Records of tire Security Council, Twentyninth Year, 1791st meeting; see also Official Records of the
Ge11eral Assembly, Twe11ty-11inth Session, Supplement No. 23
(A/9623/Rev.1 ), chap. XXIX. annex II.

'

Re1olutiom adopted on the reporb of the FOUl'lh Committee

transmitted insufficient information or have transmitted
information too late for its effective utilization by the
Special Committee;
3. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
4. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned;
5. Reiterates its request that the administering Powers concerned transmit such information as early as
possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
concerned;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance
with established procedures, and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3294 (XXIX). Question of Territories under
Portuguese domination

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 45
Having heard the statements made by the administering Power, 46 in particular the important statement
made by the Head of State of Portugal on 17 October
1974,47
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Movimento de Liberta~iio de Sao Tome e Principe, the Frente Nacional para a Liberta~iio de Angola,
the Frente de Liberta9iio de M~ambique, the Movimento Popular de Liberta9ao de Angola and the Partido
Africano da lndependencia de Guine e Caho Verde;"'
who participated in an observer capacity in the Fourth
Committee's consideration of the item,
Taking into account the important statement made
by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity before the General Assembly on 9 October 1974,
in which he referred to the present item, 49
4 ~ Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chaps. IV-Vil.
4 8 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2233rd,
2239th, 2269th and 2309th meetings and ibid., Fourth Committee, 2080th and 2092nd meetings.
47 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 2269th meeting.
48 Ibid., Fourth Committee, 2080th 2081st, 2084th and
2088th meetings.
'
40 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 2262nd meeting.

105

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to the item adopted by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Welcoming the declaration of the Government of
Portugal accepting to fulfH its obligations under the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and recognizing the right of the peoples to self-determination and independence, as well as Portugal's express readiness to co-operate in the work of the competent United · Nations bodies, as stated by the
Government of Portugal in its declarations before the
General Assembly on 23 September and 17 October
1974,50
Cognizant that the changes in the policy of Portugal
towards its colonial Territories were brought about
mainly as a consequence of the heroic struggle and
persistent resistance of the peoples of the Territories
concerned, led by their national liberation movements,
for the achievement of their independence and the
restoration of their human rights,
Cognizant also that the action carried out in Portugal
by the •movement of 25 April 197 4 represents a fundamental step in the process of decoloni7Ation occurring
in the Territories,
Reiterating that only total decolonization wili restore
peace in the Territories,
Deeply concerned at the activities of the fascist and
reactionary groups still in existence in Angola, Cape
Verde and Mozambique, which are trying to obstruct
the realization by the peoples of these Territories of
their aspirations for freedom and independence and
which are provoking racial confrontations that have
resulted on several occasions in deplorable incidents
causing death and injuries among the inhabitants,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to continue to render all moral and material aid to the
peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination and their national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity in their
efforts to consolidate national unity and to reconstruct
their countries,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
the Territories under Portuguese domination to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
the I>eclaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Welcomes with satisfaction the acceptance by the
new Government of Portugal of the sacred principle
of self-determination and independence and its unqualified applicability to all the. peoples under Portuguese colonial domination;
3. Notes with particular satisfaction that, as a result
of the consultations held between the Government of
Portugal and the national liberation movements of the
Territories concerned:
(a) Mozambique will accede to independence on
25 June I 975;ll 1
oo Ibid., 2239th and 2269th meetings.
111 A/9769, annex I.
