Geaeral Auembl)'-Twea17-thlrd Seealon

M

24,50 (XXID). Human rlp.t1 and aclendfic and
teehnologlcal developmentl

(a) Respcct for the privacy of individuala and tbe
integrity and sovercignty of nations in the light of
advances in recording and other techniqucs ;
( b) Protection of the human ¡,crsonality and ita
physical and intellectual integrity, tn the light of advanees in biology, medicine and biochemistry ;
(e) U ses of electronics which may affect the rights
of the person and the limits which should be plac~ on
such uses in a democratic society ;
(d) More generally, the balance which ahould be
established between scientific and technological progress
and the intellectual, spiritual, cultural and moral advancement of humanity;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare. oa a
preliminary basis, a report comprising a summary
aceount of studies already made or in progresa on the
aforementioned subjects, emanating in particular from
governmental and intergovernmental sources, the apecialized agencies and the competent non-govcrnmcntal
organizations, and a draft programme of work which
might be undertaken in fields in which subsequcnt surveys would be necessary for the attainment of the objcctives of the present resolution ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the said
report to the Commission on Human Rights at ita
twenty-sixth session for consideration and transmittal,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.
1748th plenary HNIMg,

The General Assembly,

HfJ'l/1,ng taken note of paragraph 18 of the Proclamation of Teheran adopted by the lnternational Confercnce on Human Rights"' and of resolution XI concerning human rights and scientific and technological
develorments adopted by the Conference on 12 May
1968,'
Sharing the concern expressed by the Conference
that recent scientific discoveries and technological advances, although they open up vast prospects for economic, social and cultural progress, may nevcrtheless
endanger the rights and frcedoms of individuals and
pcoples and consequently call far constant attention,
Endorsing the idea that these problems require
thorough and continuous interdisciplinary studies, both
national and international, which may serve as a basis
for drawing up appropriate standards to protect human
rights and funáamental freedoms,
1. Iwuites the Secretary-General to undertake, with
the assistancc, mter alia, of the Advisory Committee
on thc Application of Science and Technology to Devclopmcnt and in co-operation with the execut1ve heads
of the competent specialized agencies, a study of the
problems in conncx1on with human rights arising from
developments in science and technology, in particular
from the following standpoints :
'' Ibid., p. 3.

19 Decmww 1968.

411 Jbid,, p. 12.

•
Other

•

•

dechion•

Draft Declaratlon on Soclal Development
(llem 50)
At its 1735th plenary meeting, on 6 December 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,41 dccided to consider the draft
Declaration on Social Progress and Development47 at its twenty-fourth session, as
a matter of high priority, with a view to completing it at that session.
Boualng, building and plauulng
(llena 52)
Town twbming u a meam of internatlonal co-operatlon
(ltem 5!J)
EHminatlon of ali forma of religloua lntolerance
(ltem 54)
Statua of the In~donal Covmant on Eeonomlc, Soclal and Cultural
Rlghta, the lnternatlonal Co'fflUID.t on Cl'ril and Polldcal Blahta and
the Opdonal Protocol to the Internatlonal Covenant on Civil and
Political lllghta
(ltem 61)
At its 1748th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,'8 decided to postpone the
"Official RecrwtÜ of tht G,n,ral .r4.11nnbly, TWfflty-third Stsst01', Annex,.r, a¡enda
item SO, document A/'/3'14, para. 134.
" Ibid., para. 133.
4 8 lbid., agenda items 52, 53, 54 and 61, document A/'/452.
