A /72/PV.101

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

101st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 26 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 118
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/840)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.62)
The President: I would like to inform members that,
as mentioned in my letter dated 25 June 2018, action on
draft resolution A/72/L.62 will be taken immediately
after I deliver my statement, following which we will
have a debate on the agenda item.
This is the sixth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and the level
of activity and participation that we have seen over
the past few weeks shows that the Strategy is as
crucial as ever. I want to begin by thanking our two
committed facilitators, Ambassadors Kai Sauer of
Finland and Sima Sami Bahous of Jordan. I also want
to acknowledge all the work that Member States put
into this process — through both their diplomats here
in New York and their delegations that travelled from
their capitals. As we are about to adopt the latest draft
resolution on the Strategy, I wish to make three points.
First, I want to reiterate that the Global Strategy
is not a global solution. The document is not a magic
formula, and it is certainly not a rule book. This is so
because terrorism is very complex. It is not linked to
any country, religion or ethnicity. It changes depending
on the period, month or year, geographic location and
terrorist group. That is why a one-size-fits-all approach

will never work and why the Strategy does not attempt
to create one.
Every country and Government will respond to
terrorism in its own way, but no single country can ever
be immune to terrorism, nor can any single country
ever hold all the answers, which is why international
cooperation is vital. We will be stronger if we work
together, and the Strategy provides us with an
opportunity to do so. It sets our common goals, allows
us to prioritize and gives us an overarching vision for
the future. The Secretary-General’s report (A/72/840)
and today’s General Assembly debate are also valuable
tools. They allow us to keep our finger on the pulse of
the issue, learn from national experiences and hear one
another’s views and concerns.
My second point today concerns the relationship
between the United Nations and counter-terrorism. We
cannot skirt the issue; we need to address it head on.
Frankly, the United Nations role with regard to counterterrorism is a tricky one. The phenomenon did not exist
when the Charter of the United Nations was signed. The
Organization has therefore had to adapt — and quickly.
Nearly 17 years ago, a few miles from here, something
happened that changed the course of our history. The
events of 11 September were not the beginning of
terrorism, but they marked, I believe, the first time the
world really understood the scale of the threat. Since
then, we have been working to find the appropriate role
for the United Nations and achieve the right balance in
the steps it takes.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19746 (E)

*1819746*

A/72/PV.101

We need to keep working on this effort. But the
simple fact is that the need is there. Many Member
States are actively seeking United Nations support. The
United Nations counter-terrorism framework is doing
some very valuable work, from building the capacity
of youth groups to preventing violent extremism and
developing practical guidelines for national authorities.
In addition, work has been done within our own system
to streamline and evolve. Thanks to the reform initiative
of the Secretary-General, we have a new United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Office, which means that there is
now one address for people to turn to, and it has taken
on the much-needed coordination tasks.
My third point is more of a warning. We cannot
afford to underestimate the threat facing us. We all
have read the reports. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) has lost a great deal of territory. It is in
a much weaker position now than it was when we last
reviewed the Strategy (see A/71/PV.94). If this were a
traditional battle, therefore, we could say that ISIL was
losing it. But this is the thing: terrorism is nothing like
regular warfare. ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates have
shown that they do not represent a traditional security
threat. They use methods that we could have imagined
only in our worst nightmares. They have broken all the
laws of humankind. They have proved themselves to be
able to adapt to new contexts and situations.
We therefore cannot afford to become complacent.
The danger will persist, and, as before, it will change
with time. There will be new dynamics, technology and
threats, but also new opportunities for solutions. We
need to stay on top of all of that. We need to work with
one another. We need to compare and contrast. We need
to pool our capacities and experiences. And we need
to deliver a strong message that we do not and will not
accept international terrorism.
What better place to deliver that message than
this Hall? In the General Assembly, every member
State has a voice, which sometimes makes for lengthy
processes — experts here know exactly what I am
talking about — but our outcomes are legitimate, and
our voice loud. I therefore thank everyone for being
here today. Let us make sure that the Strategy is
implemented on the ground, and let us continue to raise
our voices together against terrorism.
The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/72/L.62, entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”. In order to
2/27

26/06/2018

ensure the smooth conduct of proceedings and seize the
momentum of consensus on the draft resolution, any
delegation wishing to make an explanation of position
is kindly encouraged to do so in his or her statement
to be delivered in the debate. We shall now proceed to
consider the draft resolution.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before taking action on the draft resolution, may I
remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The draft
resolution on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy Review (A/72/L.62) should guide
global efforts to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism, not become yet another vehicle to unjustly
criticize Israel at the United Nations. The United
States cannot accept the divisive reference to foreign
occupation in the thirty-sixth preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution. This reference to foreign
occupation serves to justify terrorist acts, which are
categorically unacceptable under any circumstances,
and undermines Member States’ legitimate right to
self-defence. Accordingly, the United States dissociates
itself from consensus on the thirty-sixth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution. We must reject all
terrorist acts, not pick and choose which forms and
manifestations are criminal or unjustifiable. There is
no excuse for terrorism.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
facilitators and their dedicated teams and express
my appreciation for the hard work invested in draft
resolution A/72/L.62. Israel understands the enormous
efforts that were put into this process and recognizes
the extremely difficult negotiations that have gone
on for the past few weeks. We participated in all the
negotiation sessions and meetings just as we did two
years ago, when we negotiated the previous review of
the Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would like to remind the Assembly that, two years
ago, resolution 70/291 took into consideration the red
lines of all delegations, except one — the red line of
my delegation. Two years ago, we made it clear that we
could not accept the thirty-third preambular paragraph
as it serves as a justification of terrorism and singles out
one country (see A/70/PV.110). We therefore dissociated
ourselves from the thirty-third preambular paragraph of
resolution 70/291 two years ago, and put on the official
18-19746

26/06/2018

A/72/PV.101

record that we today disassociate ourselves once again
from the analogous thirty-sixth preambular paragraph
of this year’s draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
A/72/L.62, entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/72/L.62
(resolution 72/284).

was

adopted

The President: I would like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassadors Sima Sami Bahous of Jordan
and Kai Sauer of Finland, who, in co-facilitating the
informal consultations, demonstrated great ability
and patience in the conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on the draft resolution. I also
thank Member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on the draft resolution.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for entrusting me and
my fellow co-facilitator, Ambassador Sima Sami
Bahous, Permanent Representative of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, with the important responsibility
of facilitating the sixth review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy on your behalf. This has been a
long, challenging, but also exciting and important
process that highlighted the General Assembly’s
crucial role in uniting the international community
against the international threat of terrorism. As
co-facilitators, Ambassador Bahous and I would like
to thank all delegations for their invaluable efforts,
flexibility and dedication to this crucial subject. This
has been a common effort. The cooperation, joint
determination, unity and solidarity of the Assembly
and the United Nations are the only ways to work in
order to defeat the scourge of terrorism. This was the
first review to be conducted after the establishment of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and we would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism for their strong technical support to
our facilitation.

As the Secretary-General stated this spring in his
report on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/72/840),
terrorism is now one of the most profound challenges
of our time. No country is immune to its threat, and no
country can address the challenge alone. The SecretaryGeneral also highlighted the fact that terrorism, and
the need to find effective ways to counter it, is indeed
one issue that truly brings the entire international
community together. As co-facilitators, we fully share
the Secretary-General’s view. During the facilitation,
we were encouraged to note that despite the differences
in their views, all Member States worked towards a
common goal. A consensus outcome of the review of
the Global Strategy is critically important and very
valuable. I would like to highlight a few key features of
the consultative process.
After our appointment last year, we began to consult
delegations on their general positions. In February,
March and April we held numerous bilateral meetings
with missions and regional groups in order to better
understand their priorities, concerns and positions. We
held our first informal meeting on 15 May, after which
intensive negotiations took place at the expert level.
The text of resolution 72/284, which we have in front of
us today, was finalized and submitted to you on Friday
last week, Mr. President.
Our first step in the process focused on restructuring
the draft resolution in order to make it more coherent
and logical. We appreciate the fact that this technical
change was well received by Member States, and that
the draft resolution now better reflects the structure of
the initial Global Strategy and its four pillars. We hope
that this practical modification will help future review
processes in making the draft resolution a relevant
guide for Member States in their international efforts
to counter terrorism.
As this has been a shared endeavour, I would now
like to hand things over to my co-facilitator, Ambassador
Bahous, to complete our shared statement. I would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate her and
wish her a happy birthday.
The President: I join the representative of Finland
in congratulating the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan): I would like to join
my colleague Ambassador Sauer, the Permanent
Representative of Finland, in thanking you,
Mr. President, for having entrusted us with the

18-197463/27

A/72/PV.101

important task of facilitating the sixth review of the
United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy. As
facilitators, and always cognizant of the complexity and
urgency of the threat of terrorism and the dire need to
come together as an international community to combat
it, we tried to steer the negotiations so as to reflect the
most urgent threats and trends in international counterterrorism. During our first reading, we identified a
number of topics that required deeper discussions than
others. Those discussions were conducted in small
groups led by different delegations. All delegations
showed great dedication to the discussions and an
unrelenting commitment to reaching common ground,
despite certain differences and very short timelines.
We believe that the work in small groups enhanced
the transparency and inclusiveness of the process.
We would like to express our deep appreciation to all
delegations that led or participated in the small-group
discussions and to thank them heartily for their efforts.
The small groups discussed and streamlined
language related to the issues of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture and capacity-building;
civil society and gender; countering the financing
of terrorism; victims of terrorism; information and
communications technology and counter-narratives;
and threats and trends related to foreign terrorist
fighters. One of the key discussions focused on the
prevention of violent extremism as and when it is
conducive to terrorism. Member States spent long hours
in good-faith negotiations in an effort to make progress
on the language of the fifth review (resolution 70/291).
No compromise, however, was reached on updating the
language related to the prevention of violent extremism.
The important compromise reached two years ago was
therefore reverted to and maintained. We also reached
compromises on many important issues, including on
the relocation of foreign terrorist fighters, countering
the financing of terrorism, supporting the victims of
terrorism and countering terrorist narratives.
As all member States agree that the United Nations
is the only global platform for enhancing our multilateral
response to the phenomenon of terrorism, it was
essential to ensure that resolution 72/284 recognized
the establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
As facilitators and member States, we share the same
conviction that its establishment represents a timely
opportunity to streamline and coordinate our work in
the most efficient and effective manner possible. The
overall process, I must say, was intense and seemed
4/27

26/06/2018

endless, but Member States ultimately succeeded in
introducing significant updates to the draft resolution.
We included 29 new paragraphs, made amendments to
15 and deleted five.
The threat of terrorism and violent extremism is a
direct assault on the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Indeed,
it is an assault on humankind, and it undermines our
collective efforts to maintain peace and security, foster
sustainable development, promote respect for human
rights and deliver vital humanitarian aid. Protecting
human rights and respecting the rule of law while
countering terrorism is not just a matter of principle.
It is essential to the legitimacy and efficacy of counterterrorism measures. When we fail to uphold the values
that unite us, we fuel the grievances that can lead to
terrorism. We would like to thank all the delegations for
their invaluable efforts and dedication to this essential
issue. A consensus on countering terrorism sends a
resounding message about the unity and solidarity of
the General Assembly and demonstrates that we can
overcome whatever differences we may have in our
concerted efforts to defeat the scourge of terrorism in
all its forms and shapes.
As co-facilitators, we realize that the sixth review
is not perfect, but we have collectively taken steps
that bring us closer to realizing our ultimate goal of
effectively countering terrorism. Our collective drive
must continue, and our focus must remain on what
brings us together, not on what sets us apart. That is
the only way to ensure a better, safer world free of
terrorism. I am sure everyone here agrees.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
120 States members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM) during this plenary meeting, at
which we have adopted by consensus resolution
72/284, renewing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
At the outset, on behalf of the States members of
the Movement, I would like to express our gratitude
and appreciation to the Permanent Representatives of
Finland and Jordan and their teams, in their capacity
as co-facilitators of the sixth review process, for the
transparency and inclusiveness with which they
conducted the long and complex rounds of negotiations.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
18-19746

26/06/2018

his report (A/72/840) on the activities of the United
Nations system in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we have
duly noted.
The Non-Aligned Movement is fully committed
to the fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and considers that scourge to be one of
the most serious dangers and threats to international
peace and security facing us now. We should emphasize
that any act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of motive and wherever, whenever and by
whomever it is committed. Terrorist acts are some
of the most flagrant violations of international law
today, including international humanitarian and human
rights law, and in particular of the right to life, as they
deprive people of the full enjoyment of their human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Such acts endanger
the territorial integrity and stability of States, as well
as national, regional and international security, and
they destabilize legitimately constituted Governments
and States’ prevailing constitutional order and
political unity.
However, we cannot overemphasize how important
it is to keep in mind that terrorism cannot and
should not be associated with any particular religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and that such
attributions should not be used to justify terrorism or
counter-terrorism measures. Nor should terrorism be
equated with the legitimate struggle of peoples under
colonial or foreign domination or occupation for selfdetermination and national liberation. We should
continue to denounce the brutal treatment of people
under foreign occupation, since that is the gravest form
of terrorism, and to condemn the use of State power
for repressing or brutalizing people who are fighting
foreign occupation in exercise of their inalienable right
to self-determination. In that regard, and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the struggle of peoples under colonial or foreign
domination or occupation for self-determination and
national liberation does not constitute terrorism.
During the eighteenth Ministerial Conference of
the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Baku in April,
ministers affirmed and underscored the validity and
relevance of the Movement’s principled position on
terrorism and reiterated their respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
States, in accordance with the Charter of the United

A/72/PV.101

Nations. In that regard, the States members of the
Movement would like to take this opportunity to note
that while 12 years have passed since the General
Assembly’s adoption of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, in 2006, there is still much to do in our shared
duty to fight terrorism as responsible members of the
international community and to establish a peaceful
and prosperous world in the interest of our nations and
peoples, especially in today’s context when, among
other things, we are dealing with the threat of foreign
terrorist fighters who are returning or relocating from
conflict zones to their countries of origin or residence,
or who are deploying to a third country.
We therefore believe it is particularly important
to comprehensively address conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism. Experience shows us that
terrorist groups are inspired by, among other things,
despair, injustice, frustration, a lack of opportunity and
the denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in promoting their criminal agenda, which is based
on hatred, intolerance, sectarianism and extremism.
Poverty, social and economic inequalities, political,
ethnic and religious intolerance and conflicts, as well as
the imposition of unilateral coercive measures, colonial
or foreign domination or occupation, and violations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of peoples and
nations, are some of the so-called drivers of terrorism.
They must be addressed comprehensively if we want to
totally eliminate the scourge of terrorism in both the
short and the long term. NAM member States therefore
call for transparent, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and support every
initiative aimed at enhancing the Strategy’s full and
effective implementation.
The Non-Aligned Movement is determined to take
speedy and effective measures to eliminate international
terrorism, and in that context we urge all States, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
fulfil their obligations in the fight against terrorism
under international law and international humanitarian
law by prosecuting or, where appropriate, extraditing
the perpetrators of terrorist acts, and preventing the
organization, instigation or financing of terrorist
acts against other States from within or outside their
territories or by organizations based in their territories.
They should also refrain from organizing, instigating,
assisting, financing or participating in terrorist acts on

18-197465/27

A/72/PV.101

the territories of other States, encouraging activities
within their territories directed at the commission
of such acts, allowing their territories to be used for
planning, training or financing such acts or supplying
arms or other weapons that could be used for terrorist
acts in other States.
The States members of the Movement also
categorically condemn and refrain from extending any
form of political, diplomatic, moral or material support
for terrorism. In that context, we urge all States, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
their obligations under international law, to ensure that
refugee status or any other legal status is not abused by
the perpetrators, organizers or facilitators of terrorist
acts and that their claims to political motives are not
recognized as grounds for refusing requests for their
extradition. The NAM member States also urge all
States, in accordance with their obligations under
applicable international law and the Charter, to deny
safe haven and bring to justice — or, where appropriate,
extradite, based on the principle of extradition or
prosecution — the perpetrators of terrorist acts or anyone
who supports, facilitates, participates or attempts to
participate in the financing, planning or preparation
of terrorist acts, while stressing the importance of
holding accountable those responsible for or involved
in carrying out or facilitating terrorist activities.
The financing of terrorism is also a matter for serious
concern that must be fought with determination. In that
regard, we emphasize the obligation of member States to
prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts and
to criminalize the purposeful provision or collection
of funds by their nationals or in their territories by
any means, direct or indirect, with the intention or
knowledge that they will be used in order to carry out
terrorist acts. We also want to note the increasing and
acknowledged potential links between transnational
organized crime and the financing of terrorism,
including money-laundering, and therefore stress the
importance of promoting cooperation and coordinating
efforts in combating such criminal activities.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes that
it is essential to address the threat posed by terrorist
narratives and that in that regard, the international
community should work on developing a better
understanding of how terrorists motivate others to
commit terrorist acts or recruit them, and devise
more effective ways to counter terrorist propaganda,
incitement and recruitment, including through the
6/27

26/06/2018

Internet, in compliance with the relevant provisions
of international law, international human rights
law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. The States members of the Movement
take this opportunity to stress the importance of
a preventive approach in this important fight. We
underscore the significance of not only addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, but
also of developing effective and innovative initiatives
aimed at undermining the strategy of extremist groups
and ideologies that promote violence and intolerance,
with a view to countering terrorist narratives and
encouraging critical thinking in our societies so as to
prevent radicalization, recruitment and the mobilization
of resources, including through the improper use of
information and communication technologies.
For all those reasons, we look forward to the
contributions of the Office of Counter-Terrorism in
bringing greater coherence and effectiveness to the
counter-terrorism activities of the United Nations,
including in relation to the assistance it can provide in
addressing Member States’ capacity-building needs at
their request, while underscoring that such assistance
must be tailored to the specific needs and realities of
the States concerned and should take into account the
importance of national ownership.
In conclusion, the 120 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement would like to express their
full solidarity with those countries that have most
recently suffered from acts of terrorism and reiterate
the importance of concluding a comprehensive
convention for combating international terrorism that
would complement the existing legal instruments in
this field. Let us work together decisively, hand in
hand and in coordination, to eliminate this terrible
scourge, including through the full and effective
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Mr. Ababtain (Saudi Arabia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
While the international community is making
tremendous strides in its ongoing battle, we believe that
terrorism continues to undermine our shared vision of
a peaceful and prosperous world. The sixth review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy offers us the
opportunity to renew our collective and unwavering
resolve to combat that scourge. In that spirit, the OIC
18-19746

26/06/2018

welcomes the adoption by consensus of resolution
72/284 as yet another step forward in promoting the
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy at the national, regional and international
levels. We thank the co-facilitators, Ambassador
Bahous of Jordan and Ambassador Sauer of Finland,
and their able teams for their tireless work in arriving
at a consensus text.
Today’s resolution captures our concerns about
some emerging threats and suggests appropriate
remedial measures. It underscores the need to address
all local and external drivers of terrorism without taking
a selective approach. The OIC reaffirms that we must
make concerted and determined efforts to effectively
address the root causes and drivers of terrorism and the
conditions conducive to its spread, including preventing
the unlawful use of force or aggression and ending
foreign occupation, unilateral coercion and political,
economic and social injustice.
The resolution underlines the need for enhanced
synergy and effectiveness in various United Nations
entities’ work on counter-terrorism. In that context, the
OIC stresses that we should enhance the transparency
and coordination of the activities of United Nations
counter-terrorism entities and that duplication should
be avoided. While the OIC supports institutional
coherence in United Nations counter-terrorism efforts,
we also emphasize the importance of conforming to
the mandates of the various United Nations organs and
entities. The OIC recognizes the work of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and strongly encourages it to
continue working with the same diligence and to keep
Member States updated on its work. The Group also
notes with appreciation the important work carried
out by the Counter-Terrorism Centre and its role in
building Member States’ capacity to counter terrorism
and in that regard calls on Member States to continue to
support the Centre and to contribute to its growth into
a centre of excellence.
The OIC member States encourage the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and its Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact to enhance
their consultations with Member States when planning
and preparing their activities. The OIC particularly
stresses the need for more analytical information in
the reports of the Secretary-General on the resources
required for providing capacity-building support to
Member States in compliance with the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We want to see concrete proposals

A/72/PV.101

on mobilizing resources for capacity-building projects
aimed at countering terrorism.
The OIC recognizes the resolution’s added emphasis
on addressing particular aspects and dimensions of
terrorist threats. They include the need for enhanced
international cooperation on the issues of the
recruitment, movement, prosecution and repatriation
of foreign terrorist fighters; effective, multipronged
action to combat terrorist financing and its nexus
with transnational organized crimes; informed and
pragmatic measures to counter terrorist propaganda
and narratives; ways of addressing emerging threats
through the Internet and new technologies, and
specifically an international legal framework that deals
with information and communications technologies;
and heightened surveillance and measures to prevent
terrorists’ access to small arms and light weapons, as
well as weapons of mass destruction. The OIC member
States remain committed to working with the United
Nations and other relevant partners to address those
real and potential threats in a focused and resultsoriented manner.
The OIC also recognizes the threats that terrorism
poses to women, young people and children, and
that resolution 72/284 highlights the importance of
effectively addressing those threats. In that regard, we
stress that sustained engagement is required to enable
women and youth to act as potential agents of change
and resilience in order to prevent radicalization within
their respective communities. The OIC member States
underscore that the rights of migrants and asylumseekers must be protected and preserved, while ensuring
that internationally agreed norms and standards in their
favour are not abused by terrorists.
The OIC reiterates its principled position against
acts of terrorism in all their forms and manifestations,
regardless of where they are committed, by whom or for
what reason. In that regard, we affirm our unequivocal
rejection of all attempts to associate any particular
country, race, religion, culture or nationality with
terrorism. The group also underlines the importance of
upholding international law, international humanitarian
law, the rule of law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism. In that context,
we remain concerned about the growing intolerance
and discrimination shown to Muslims around the
world, which we believe represent an affront to their
human rights and dignity. Here we should recall Human
Rights Council resolution 16/18, entitled “Combating

18-197467/27

A/72/PV.101

intolerance, negative stereotyping and stigmatization
of, and discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against, persons based on religion or belief”,
as an important tool for countering radicalization,
marginalization and alienation. We call for its effective
implementation by the international community as
a way to deprive terrorist groups of any justification
for radicalization on the grounds of ethnic or religious
stigmatization and discrimination. We underscore the
importance of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
as an effective mechanism for combating extremism
and incitement to hatred based on religion.
The OIC member States affirm the importance
that we attach to the sustained, effective and
comprehensive implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the need to have a robust
follow-up mechanism in place in order to ensure a
balanced approach to its four pillars. We stress that the
implementation of the Strategy lies first and foremost
in the hands of Member States, while the General
Assembly has a central role to play in following up
its implementation.
In conclusion, the OIC reiterates that the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is a living document that
should be examined and reviewed regularly. We will
continue to remain involved in that endeavour as a
matter of priority, including at the highest political level.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the MIKTA
countries — Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia. MIKTA represents a diverse
group of countries with different cultural, historical and
religious backgrounds, located in different corners of
the world. Yet our shared values and interests transcend
our diversity and enable us to take similar approaches to
the many challenges that the international community
is facing today.
Of those challenges, terrorism, and the violent
extremism that can lead to terrorism, presents a global
threat from which no country or region is immune. As
a result, MIKTA has identified counter-terrorism and
security as one of its seven core areas of collaboration
in order to contribute to greater global peace and
stability. Preventing and combating terrorism is one of
our priorities. Bearing that in mind in their most recent
communiqué, adopted at their eleventh meeting in
Istanbul last December, the MIKTA Foreign Ministers
reiterated their strong condemnation of terrorism in
8/27

26/06/2018

all its forms and manifestations and emphasized the
importance of effective international cooperation to
counter terrorism.
As a follow-up, under Indonesia’s chairship, the
MIKTA nations will hold an initiative on counterterrorism cooperation, with a focus on prevention, to be
held in Indonesia later this year. The MIKTA Foreign
Ministers also reaffirmed the importance of taking a
more comprehensive approach encompassing not only
ongoing, essential, security-based counter-terrorism
measures but also systematic preventive measures
and respect for human rights. They also stressed that
violent extremists come from every stratum of society,
including many different ethnic, religious, ideological
and non-religious groups. Our efforts must recognize
that terrorism and violent extremism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group.
The continuing recent terrorist attacks across
the world, including in some MIKTA countries, have
shown the urgent need for increased and effective
international cooperation and solidarity to address
this threat. The MIKTA countries are convinced that
only through concerted action at the global, regional
and national levels and by fulfilling our obligations
under international law can we succeed in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. Against that
background, we strongly support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its balanced
implementation across all four of its pillars. We therefore
welcome the Assembly’s adoption by consensus of
resolution 72/284, on the sixth review of the Strategy.
We thank the facilitators, Ambassador Bahous of Jordan
and Ambassador Sauer of Finland, and their teams for
their able facilitation of the negotiations.
We welcome the fact that the Strategy has been
updated to include references to new challenges that
have arisen and ways to address them, such as halting
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, including those
returning or relocating, particularly from conflict zones
to their countries of origin or nationality or to third
countries, and countering the financing of terrorism,
terrorist narratives and the misuse of new information
and communication technologies to spread them. We
believe that it is important to continue our joint efforts
to prevent and counter terrorism, including through the
relevant national action plans.
18-19746

26/06/2018

Countering terrorism and preventing the violent
extremism that can be conducive to it require a whole-ofsociety approach as well as a whole-of-Government
approach. Adding further references to the fundamental
role that civil society, young people and local actors play
in the matter is therefore a positive step. We believe that
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law are complementary and mutually reinforcing with
effective counter-terrorism measures, and an essential
part of any successful counter-terrorism effort.
The MIKTA countries believe that an effectively
functioning United Nations system is an essential key
to addressing terrorism and the violent extremism that
can be conducive to it, as with other global challenges
we face today. In that regard, following the adoption
last June of resolution 71/291 to establish the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the MIKTA countries, which
support the pivotal role of the United Nations in global
counter-terrorism efforts, made a joint statement (see
A/71/PV.87) in which we expressed our hope that
the reform would enhance the strategic coordination
and coherence of United Nations counter-terrorism
activities, both within the United Nations system
and with relevant external actors, in order to create
synergies and avoid duplication. In that regard, we note
with appreciation the signing of the Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact and look forward
to its effective implementation. We want to highlight
the importance of the timely, adequate and effective
delivery and facilitation by the United Nations of
counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance to
Member States at their request and would like to take
this opportunity to express our support to the Office
and to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his
efforts in operationalizing it.
Lastly, we look forward to the first-ever United
Nations high-level conference of heads of counterterrorism agencies of Member States, to be convened
by the Secretary-General on 28 and 29 June. We thank
the Secretary-General for placing countering and
preventing terrorism at the top of the United Nations
agenda and hope that the conference can contribute to
strengthening the United Nations in order to enable it to
better address the global threat of terrorism.
I will now make some additional remarks in my
capacity as the representative of Turkey.
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to all
victims of terrorism. As a country fighting three

A/72/PV.101

different terrorist groups at once — the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/Democratic Union Party, Da’esh and
the Fethullah Terrorist Organization — we know all
too well the heavy toll that terrorism takes on societies.
Terrorism remains one of the world’s most acute threats
to international peace and security and no country is
immune to it. Nor can it be associated with any country,
race, religion, culture or nationality.
Despite some positive developments, the global
terrorist threat has not diminished since the last review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
As recent attacks have shown, terrorism continues to
spread, geographically and ideologically, and terrorists
manage to adapt to new conditions. Mindful of that
situation, Turkey has continued to contribute to global
counter-terrorism efforts since the last review by
further enhancing border security, information-sharing
and preventive measures. With the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
2006, Member States expressed their resolve to enhance
national, regional and international efforts to counter
terrorism. The Strategy reflects a unique consensus,
based on its four pillars, and it is therefore crucial to
maintain the consensus around that unique global
instrument by updating it to face the evolving threats.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the Assembly’s
adoption by consensus of resolution 72/284, on the
sixth review of the Strategy, and I would like to express
our appreciation to Finland and Jordan for successfully
co-facilitating the negotiations on the draft.
Respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law is an essential part of a successful
counter-terrorism effort. While rule-of-law-based
security measures remain the fundamental pillar
of counter-terrorism efforts, a broader approach
is needed to make our societies more resilient to
violent extremism, all forms and manifestations of
which should be addressed with equal determination,
while recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all
approach. Preventive measures should also focus on
combating intolerance, social exclusion and all forms
of xenophobia. We should be vigilant against populist,
anti-Islam and far-right rhetoric.
Mr. Brown
the Chair.

(Liberia),

Vice-President,

took

The United Nations has a central role to play in
combating this scourge by ensuring the balanced
implementation of the Strategy and supporting the

18-197469/27

A/72/PV.101

efforts of Member States at their request. Strengthening
the role of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
in building the capacity of Member States is essential
to achieving that objective. I would like to take this
opportunity to once again thank the Secretary-General
for his commitment to putting counter-terrorism efforts
at the top of our agenda. We appreciate the initiative to
develop the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact and hope that the new framework
will contribute to achieving stronger coordination and
coherence. We also reiterate our support to the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and its Head, Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov, for their ongoing efforts. We also
welcome the initiative to hold the first-ever United
Nations high-level conference of heads of counterterrorism agencies of Member States. We look forward
to the event, which will help to enhance the visibility of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
Despite the global impact of terrorism, our
cooperation, information and intelligence-sharing
are still insufficient. We cannot succeed in our
counter-terrorism efforts unless we engage in genuine
international cooperation. As the Secretary-General has
emphasized, no cause or grievance justifies terrorism.
There can be no good or bad terrorists. We should
maintain a resolute and principled stance and avoid
selective approaches. Turkey remains ready to engage
in further discussions aimed at improving the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review.
Mr. Tabajara de Oliveira (Brazil): I would like to
begin by congratulating the facilitators, Ambassadors
Bahous and Sauer, the Permanent Representatives of
Jordan and Finland, as well as their teams, for their
tireless work during the sixth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Just since 12 May, when the Secretary-General’s
report (A/72/840) was circulated and consultations
started on the draft of resolution 72/284, terrorist attacks
in various regions of the world have claimed more than
800 lives and wounded more than 1,000 people. The
most recent attack occurred just yesterday in Meskel
Square in Addis Ababa. It is a reminder of why we
cannot afford to fail. Brazil would like to express its
condolences to all affected by such attacks and reiterates
that there can be no justification for terrorism.
Terrorism is an evolving threat. As a strong advocate
of the centrality of the United Nations in our fight
against terrorism, Brazil attaches great importance to
10/27

26/06/2018

maintaining an up-to-date Strategy that can address
current challenges. We also deem it crucial to preserve
its consensual basis, which reflects the galvanized
voice of all States members of the Organization’s
most inclusive and democratic body. The creation of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism has emerged as an
example where the General Assembly has risen to the
challenge of promoting coherence and consistency in
the Organization’s efforts. The signing of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact represents another positive step towards
an all-of-United Nations approach. But the reform of
the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture
remains an unfinished task. We look forward to the
report to be issued in May 2019, which should provide
meaningful input for a discussion on the issue at the
next Strategy review.
The absence of a universally agreed-on definition
of terrorism is detrimental to our shared goal of
eliminating it. We must overcome the stalemate
preventing the adoption of a comprehensive convention
against international terrorism. The convening of a
high-level conference under the auspices of the United
Nations could provide much of the political push needed
to attain that goal. A comprehensive convention against
international terrorism could help to harmonize the
legal framework, facilitate mutual legal assistance and
cooperation and create improved conditions for ensuring
due process and compliance with human rights. It is also
important to clarify the relationship among concepts
such as terrorism, radicalism and violent extremism.
They may be linked in certain contexts, but they are
not intrinsically correlated. Conflating such notions
could lead to justifying an overly broad application of
counter-terrorism measures, including against acts that
do not qualify as acts of terrorism. It is also important to
stress that terrorism and transnational organized crime
are not automatically or universally linked. Even in
circumstances in which there is a relationship, various
areas of responsibility are involved. While terrorism
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
transnational organized crime remains an issue within
the realm of public security.
Terrorism can be countered only through
approaches that address its root causes, in particular
those associated with protracted conflicts and social,
political, economic and cultural exclusion. Terrorist
groups have been attracting recruits by offering
them a sense of purpose, belonging and identity that
18-19746

26/06/2018

they probably failed to find elsewhere. Appropriate
responses to the refugee and migrant crises decrease
rather than increase the risks associated with terrorism.
Let us also not lose sight of the protracted conflicts
that may fuel terrorist agendas. The failure to deal with
the ongoing crises in the Middle East and strategies that
privilege the use of force and unilateral interpretations
in the Security Council are cases in point. Counterterrorism efforts will be effective to the extent that they
are consistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
including the rules governing the use of force, as well
as with international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law. Some have argued that self-defence could
be applied as a response to non-State actors, sometimes
adding as a condition the criterion of a State’s
unwillingness or inability to act. Brazil does not agree
with attempts to reinterpret the scope of self-defence.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Terrorism continues to wreak havoc, spreading
destruction, fear and hate throughout the world.
The growing number of victims on every continent
is a constant reminder that the scourge concerns us
all. Switzerland condemns in the strongest terms
the horrendous and unacceptable acts of violence
committed as a result of this murderous madness,
and expresses its deepest sympathy to the victims of
terrorism and their loved ones.
In the light of the current threat and given the fact
that terrorists utterly reject our values, it is crucial that
we continue our joint efforts against terrorism. If those
efforts are to be effective and sustainable, they must
be consistent with international law and the principles
of the rule of law. Switzerland believes firmly that the
United Nations has a vital role to play in combating
terrorism and preventing violent extremism. We are
fully committed to implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which remains
our principal frame of reference and, as we all know,
is based on four mutually reinforcing, interdependent
pillars: prevention, law enforcement, capacity-building
and respect for human rights.
Switzerland would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for the
latest report (A/72/840) on the activities undertaken
by the United Nations system to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
and for organizing the sixth Strategy review and

A/72/PV.101

the forthcoming high-level conference for heads of
counter-terrorism agencies of Member States. The
conference will enable us to discuss specific aspects of
the Strategy in greater depth. Switzerland would also
like to thank the Permanent Representatives of Jordan
and Finland for their leadership and efforts, which have
enabled us to adopt the sixth review by consensus as
resolution 72/284.
Since the Strategy’s adoption in 2006,
Switzerland has worked to ensure its full and balanced
implementation, nationally and internationally. To
cite some examples of our achievements since 2016,
in order to strengthen the first pillar, Switzerland,
together with the United Nations, organized the Geneva
Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism in April
2016, which helped to promote and implement the
Strategy on the basis of the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
prompted Switzerland, and several other countries,
to adopt a national action plan for the prevention of
violent extremism.
In order to build Switzerland’s own capacity, as
envisaged in the Strategy’s second pillar, we have
initiated legislative processes to adapt our criminal
legislation and designed a number of administrative
measures. Under the third pillar, Switzerland has
undertaken numerous capacity-building projects with
our United Nations partners and others, including
the Global Community Engagement and Resilience
Fund. Switzerland has also committed to meeting
State obligations under the fourth pillar. Within the
framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
whose Criminal Justice and Rule of Law Working Group
we co-chair with Nigeria, Switzerland has continued
to emphasize the implementation of the Neuchâtel
Memorandum on Good Practices for Juvenile Justice in
a Counterterrorism Context, which clarifies obligations
relating to children’s rights in the context of the fight
against terrorism.
In the light of the extensive discussions on the
review of the Strategy over the past few weeks, we
would like to note the following points. First, we
welcome the fact that we have been able to maintain
our previous achievements with regard to preventing
violent extremism, respecting human rights and the
rule of law and safeguarding the humanitarian space.
Secondly, Switzerland welcomes the introduction in
the review of two paragraphs aimed at strengthening
respect for international humanitarian law by recalling

18-1974611/27

A/72/PV.101

the obligation of parties to conflict to protect the
civilian population.
Thirdly, we regret that the fourth pillar continues to
be the weakest and worst-funded in the United Nations
architecture, despite the fact that an approach based
on the international legal framework, including with
regard to gender aspects, is essential if we genuinely
want to succeed in eradicating terrorism over the long
term. My country is honoured to contribute to the
fourth pillar by supporting the launch of a guide for
Member States with details on how to comply with
United Nations resolutions and meet their human rights
obligations. The guide, which was prepared by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
will be presented to Member States on Thursday.
Fourthly, Switzerland welcomes the request to the
Secretary-General to present a new report in May
2019 that will assess the Strategy’s impact and enable
us to take stock of the reform process initiated by the
Secretary-General through the establishment of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism.
I would like to say a few words about the links
between counter-terrorism efforts and other United
Nations areas of action. On 23 February, the SecretaryGeneral signed the new United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact as an agreed
framework between the Secretary-General, the Heads of
the United Nations entities, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization for strengthening coordination,
consistency and monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
and mobilizing shared resources. That commitment
meets the need for a holistic approach that emphasizes
prevention and addresses the conditions that lead to
the spread of conflict by integrating peace, sustainable
development and human rights. In order to ensure that
the United Nations can continue to respond effectively
to the multiple challenges facing the world, it is vital
to maintain a balanced approach so that all entities can
remain faithful to their mandates, while contributing to
broader counter-terrorism efforts.
My country will continue to work with determination
to prevent and combat terrorism while respecting
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Through our efforts we can help to prevent conflicts
and build lasting peace.
Mr. Bell (Canada): Today, for the sixth time, we
are reviewing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy together and taking stock of the
12/27

26/06/2018

developments that have occurred in the two years since
the last review. Some progress has been made, but
there have also been setbacks. Terrorism in its evolving
forms remains a constant threat for us all, despite our
collective efforts and best attempts at coordination and
cooperation. What do we therefore need to do better?
For Canada, effectively addressing terrorism and
violent extremism means working with communities
and civil society to build resilient societies. The
complex issue underlying the terrorist threat requires
a whole-of-society approach. There is no long-term
military solution to the threat. The role of civilian
actors and civil society is essential for such efforts
and cannot be overstated, which is why we are deeply
disappointed with the exclusion of civil society from
the full inaugural high-level conference to be held later
this week.
At the foundation of those efforts is ensuring
inclusive and accountable governance that respects
diversity and the human rights of all members of society.
Prevention is enhanced when we build on resilient
societies in which every member feels invested in his or
her society. It is Canada’s conviction and our experience
that terrorism and violent extremism are not particular
to any specific religion, nationality, culture or ethnic
group. Terrorism can assume any form and demands
that we set aside our biases for evidence-based analysis.
(spoke in French)
As the terrorist threat evolves, new challenges
require new solutions. When we consider the issue
of the return of foreign terrorist fighters and their
families, or their resettlement in a third country, it
is clear that we cannot solve the problem by arrests
alone. By themselves, police actions and those of the
criminal justice system are inadequate in addressing
the phenomenon, and a solution will require the efforts
of more than one generation. How should we reintegrate
them into society? How can we prevent them from
resorting to violent extremism? How should we deal
with children who have undergone profound and violent
traumatic experiences and have been indoctrinated into
violent ideologies since a tender age? This question has
forced us to better understand the impact of gender and
gender-based roles and consider age and gender during
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration. If we dig
deeper, we cannot but see gender as a factor used by
terrorist groups, while exploiting and manipulating
gender dynamics in a sophisticated manner so as to
18-19746

26/06/2018

gain support and recruit followers. It is not a matter
of checking off a box, or a side or soft issue. It is a
fundamental factor enabling us to understand the threat
and develop effective ways to act.
Canada continues to view the United Nations as
an important partner in responding to that threat. We
are pleased to work with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime to confront a wide range of issues,
such as foreign terrorist fighters, border security and
domestic radicalization taking place within prisons.
We also fund projects led by the Office of CounterTerrorism, which focus on the prevention of violent
extremism through engagement with young people and
law-enforcement training personnel in issues related
to human rights, the rule of law and the prevention of
terrorism. We continue to work together in adapting our
methods to confront new challenges generated by the
evolving nature of terrorism. I believe, nevertheless,
that we are all aware that many disagreements remain
with regard to the best approach to be used within the
United Nations. Such differences were made apparent
over the past several weeks and months.
(spoke in English)
With that in mind, I would like to extend my most
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representatives of
Jordan and Finland and their teams for their tireless
efforts and resolve in seeking a consensus document,
when, at times, it looked as thought it might not be
possible. We would like to express our satisfaction
at the adoption by consensus earlier this morning of
resolution 72/284. A consensus resolution, however,
is by its very nature the result of finely balanced
negotiations. For Canada, the most notable aspects of
the resolution are not necessarily what we can find in
it, but rather what was left out. We would have liked
to see stronger language on gender, human rights and
civil society included in its text. We are particularly
disappointed that the resolution does not tie a closer link
to the women and peace and security agenda, nor does
it recognize the importance of gender dimensions in
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
In addition, the resolution, like its previous iteration
(resolution 70/291), in 2016, falls short of providing
greater clarity and balance among the four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Canada welcomed the creation of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism almost a year ago and the
appointment
of
its
Under-Secretary-General,

A/72/PV.101

Mr. Vladimir Voronkov. At the same time, we believe
that the resolution could have been more ambitious
in furthering the reform of the counter-terrorism
architecture of the United Nations and in tying it more
closely to the overall reform of the peace and security
and development pillars of the United Nations as a
whole. The creation of the Office was a first step in a
process with many more steps.
We hope that the request for a report on the
impact and progress in assessing the implementation
of the Strategy by the United Nations will serve as an
important opportunity to discuss these issues, including
increasing the transparency and governance of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre. We have
also seen member States question the notion of violent
extremism and try to impose a more vague wording
for extremism in its place. Canada reiterates in the
strongest terms possible that so-called extreme ideas
can be a force for good and social progress and that
the use of violence to promote extreme ideas is the real
issue that needs to be tackled. In this regard, Canada
is pleased that its efforts, together with those of many
other member States, have prevented this departure
from the agreed language.
Canada will continue to advocate internationally,
in the United Nations and elsewhere, for the critical
actions needed in this global effort. The United
Nations must remain a key forum for unifying the
international community and addressing this critical
issue, despite our differences, and Canada will remain
fully engaged in ensuring that resolution 72/284 is
effectively implemented.
Ms. Bird (Australia): As others have done from this
rostrum, I would like to begin by warmly thanking the
Permanent Representatives of Finland and Jordan for
successfully co-facilitating this year’s review process.
After four weeks of intense negotiations, we commend
them and their teams on their patience and dedication
to this difficult task.
Australia regards the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as a valuable element of the United Nations
framework for combating terrorism. It continues to be
a practical tool for Member States — a compass for our
ongoing national, regional and international counterterrorism efforts. Australia supports a balanced
implementation of the Strategy across its four pillars.
We note in particular the importance of prevention as
part of a comprehensive counter-terrorism approach, as

18-1974613/27

A/72/PV.101

well as ensuring the protection of human rights and the
rule of law.
A comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
and preventing violent extremism is one that involves
the whole of our society, which means drawing upon
the skills, resources and expertise of all stakeholders,
including leveraging the important roles of civil society
in engaging local communities to halt recruitment and
radicalization leading to terrorism, particularly among
our young people. It means supporting victims of
terrorism and addressing the disproportionate impact
on women. We are pleased that this year’s resolution
72/284 recognizes these complex dimensions. Australia
continues to encourage member States to develop and
maintain national plans of action for preventing violent
extremism consistent with national circumstances
and an assessment of the diverse drivers of violent
extremism at local levels.
I would like to affirm Australia’s ongoing support
for the Strategy by drawing on three important themes
in the resolution. First, we have seen the foreignterrorist-fighter threat continue to evolve in the wake
of the failed so-called caliphate of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Australian agencies are working
closely with their international counterparts to detect
and disrupt the outflow of foreign fighters from the
Middle East through effective intelligence and lawenforcement measures. We know that the international
aviation sector continues to be a target for terrorist
groups. We support enhanced efforts in this area,
including the resolution’s call for the use of advanced
passenger information, passenger name record and
biometric data, where appropriate. Such measures
should be implemented in accordance with domestic
law and international obligations.
Secondly, we note the resolutions’s call on the
international community to ensure that terrorists
do not find safe haven online, including through the
exploitation of social media. Australia supports an
open, free and secure Internet, but cyberspace is not
an ungoverned space. We need to cooperate to ensure
that terrorists cannot operate beyond the reach of the
law online.
Thirdly, the resolution calls for ambitious activities
from Member States to counter terrorist financing so
as to prevent terrorists from abusing new technologies
to fund and support terrorism. The text recognizes the
importance of information-sharing within and among
14/27

26/06/2018

Governments with regard to financing matters. In tandem
with this approach, countries must maintain strong
and responsive national counter-terrorism financing
regimes consistent with international standards.
In conclusion, Australia remains steadfast in
its resolve to combat terrorism and prevent violent
extremism through whole-of-society efforts at the local
and national levels and through effective international
collaboration. Enduring and genuine partnerships
across all these levels are necessary if we are to be
successful in the fight.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba firmly supports the collective efforts of the
United Nations in its fight against terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
a milestone in confronting the scourge of terrorism
internationally and respects the central role played
by the General Assembly in this task. We would like
to express our gratitude for the work done by the
delegations of Finland and Jordan in coordinating the
negotiations process and by those delegations that
showed a political will to move forward in achieving
our common goal.
We reiterate our steadfast will to combat terrorism,
as well as our unequivocal rejection and condemnation
of all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all
their forms and manifestations by whomever, against
whomever, wherever committed and whatever their
motivations, including such acts in which States are
directly or indirectly involved. The international
community must not accept that, under the banner of
the supposed fight against terrorism, certain States are
allowed to commit acts of aggression, interfere in the
internal affairs of other States or violate human rights
and international humanitarian law, through acts such as
torture, kidnapping, illegal detentions, disappearances
and extrajudicial executions.
Cuba rejects double standards and unilateral actions
that run contrary to the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles and norms of international law. The
violation of legal and ethical principles undermines
the legitimacy of our struggle against international
terrorism. Hatred, revenge and terror have no place in
the fair and equitable international order for which we
are striving.
Resolution 72/284, adopted today, incorporates
significant advances in consolidating international
cooperation in combating terrorism. Issues of
18-19746

26/06/2018

particular importance were addressed, such as
respect for the principle of sovereignty in combating
that scourge; the primacy of State ownership in the
implementation of the Strategy; the need to take
measures that foster cooperation among States for
the extradition of terrorists; countering the abusive
exploitation of information and communication
technologies for terrorist purposes; promoting the use
of such technologies in accordance with international
law; respect for privacy; and the rejection of the use of
all practices that contravene international law under the
pretext of combating terrorism.
Other matters will require further consideration
in the near future, in particular so-called soft coups
or soft coups d’état — covert operations that favour
supposedly non-violent protests, and which, by virtue
of their goals, concepts, financing and the practice of
fomenting social terror, in reality constitute modern
forms of State terrorism. In addition, certain States’
destructive practice of financing and disseminating
messages fostering hatred and intolerance of other
peoples, cultures and political systems via the Internet,
radio and television, in clear violation of the most basic
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, warrants our total condemnation.
Although it appreciates the progress made during
the reviews of the Strategy within the Organization,
Cuba stresses that much remains to be done in
combating terrorism. The international community
must take concrete steps towards the adoption of a
general convention on terrorism that identifies the
scourge in its entirety. It is unacceptable to associate
any religion, race or ethnicity with terrorism. We must
not allow politicization and double standards to impede
overcoming the causes and conditions that can fuel it.
Poverty, inequality, ill health, illiteracy, discrimination
and hegemonic appetites for domination, among
multiple other factors, are root causes underlying
the proliferation of terrorism. It is also necessary to
foster international understanding of ambiguous and
politicized terms that do not enjoy international legal
backing or a broad consensus so as to avoid double
standards in their interpretation and use.
The issue of the protection of the victims of
terrorism is a priority. States must comply with their
obligation to try to extradite all terrorists without
exception. For more than 40 years, the Cuban people
demanded an end to the impunity enjoyed by the
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who was responsible

A/72/PV.101

for the mid-flight explosion of a Cubana de Aviación
aeroplane on 6 October 1976, which resulted in the
deaths of the 73 people on board. Posada Carriles died
this year, while at liberty, without ever having been
brought to justice for his crimes.
Cuba supports multilateral efforts aimed at
consolidating the role of the General Assembly in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Member States can count on our
full participation in the fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by aligning the United Kingdom with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
and I thank the Ambassadors of Finland and Jordan
and their experts for their tireless efforts over the
past month.
The United Kingdom is pleased that we, the States
members of the General Assembly, have achieved
international consensus while reviewing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is important that, as the
global terrorism threat evolves, the Strategy reflect the
progress that we member States have made and that it
continues to build upon this progress.
The journey to reach a consensus has been fraught
with contentious debates. It has not been easy, but it is
important that, in this forum, we all have an opportunity
to share our views and perspectives and that we come
together in the end to face a common and global
threat. The United Kingdom is particularly pleased to
see the reaffirmation of the importance of preventing
violent extremism and of addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. Prevention is a
core component of our counter-terrorism approach,
and we see an important role for the United Nations to
play in furthering national and international efforts in
this regard.
For the United Kingdom, preventing violent
extremism is fundamentally about safeguarding people
from becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism
by reducing their intent to act. The United Kingdom
champions a whole-of-Government and whole-ofsociety approach to prevention, which is reflected
in the United Kingdom’s newly revamped counterterrorism strategy, CONTEST. We recognize that
national and local forms of buy-in for programming
and measures are critical ingredients for effectiveness
and sustainability. Preventing violent extremism must

18-1974615/27

A/72/PV.101

be owned by a State’s national or local authorities. It
cannot be imposed from the outside. That would be
wrong, and it would be ineffective. Let us therefore end
our disagreement over labels and get on with action.
As the global threat posed by terrorism evolves
and spans political borders, the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and those returning or relocating from
conflict zones is a serious concern to many of us. We
were pleased to see that international commitments
to address this issue, including through tools such as
advance passenger information and passenger name
record, are reflected in resolution 72/284. We recognize
that many States have called for technical assistance in
meeting these obligations, and we support the efforts
of the United Nations system and partners to provide
the requested technical assistance. But we would also
stress that Member States have the responsibility to
meet all their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2396 (2017)
and 2309 (2016).
We welcome the strengthened cooperation between
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), as
embodied by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx, and we welcome
their joint report (A/72/840, annex IV), which was
shared with all Member States. The unique assessments
and analyses provided by CTED provide an important
basis for the capacity-building support provided by
the Global Compact entities. These recommendations
reflect the priorities and approval of Member States
and the support of the Council through the CounterTerrorism Committee. The United Kingdom is therefore
keen that the General Assembly bodies work closely
with those of the Security Council to ensure that the
United Nations counter-terrorism architecture remains
fit for purpose and positioned to respond in a rapidly
evolving threat landscape.
Conversations among Member States will and
rightfully should continue in the months to come to
build on what we have achieved during the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review and discuss frankly
and openly those topics on which we may disagree.
The United Kingdom wants to move forward. As we
look ahead to the high-level conference on counterterrorism to be held later this week, we hope that it will
provide an opportunity for constructive exchange and
insight. The United Kingdom hopes that, through the
full contribution and involvement of both Government
16/27

26/06/2018

and civil-society organizations, we the international
community can build on the consensus achieved on
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review so as to
make progress as a unified voice in our fight against
global terrorism, because that fight is too important for
us to be divided. That is the goal of the terrorists, so let
us stand together.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico wishes to acknowledge the work of
the delegations of Jordan and Finland in facilitating
the consultation process leading to the sixth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mexico believes that this process serves to advance an
open and constructive dialogue that enables formulating
a more effective and comprehensive response to the
phenomenon of international terrorism.
Over the past two years, since the previous review
of the Strategy, terrorism and violent extremism leading
to terrorism have evolved significantly and become an
increasingly complex threat to international peace and
security. The increased use of the Internet as a means
to spread extremist and violent messages originating
from terrorist organizations, numerous acts of lowbudget terrorism directed against soft targets and the
rise in xenophobic and racist narratives seeking to
equate groups, religions and regions with international
terrorism all underscore the importance of redoubling
and coordinating our national, regional and multilateral
efforts. In this context, Mexico welcomed the
establishment, in June 2017, of the post of the UnderSecretary-General of the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and we reiterate our support for the work conducted
by the Office during the past year to improve the
effectiveness and coordination of the United Nations in
its efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and violent
extremism leading to terrorism.
Despite joint efforts in recent years, international
terrorism continues to affect thousands of innocent
people without distinction as to their country or region
of origin, age, gender, religion or politics. Mexico
reiterates its support for and solidarity with the victims
of terrorism. For this reason, we regret the absence of
language in resolution 72/284 — the draft of which
was presented within the framework of the sixth
review — relating to the important role that victims,
especially women and girls, can play in combating
and preventing terrorism and in countering extremist
narratives leading to terrorism. For Mexico, not only is
it a priority to work at all levels to ensure that victims
18-19746

26/06/2018

of terrorism have access to the justice system, but it
is also extremely important to help in their recovery
consequent to such events and in empowering them
to join multilateral efforts aimed at preventing and
combating international terrorism.
While developing effective and comprehensive
responses to the threat is urgent in the short and
medium term, we must also ensure the creation of
sustainable strategies for the long term that not only
respond to terrorism and mitigate its impact on civilian
populations, but also address the underlying causes of
social, political and economic grievances that make the
extremist and violent message of those organizations
attractive to the most vulnerable populations.
Hate speech has no place in any circumstance. It
is irresponsible for Government actors, rather than to
encourage social inclusion, to fuel various forms of
extremism with racist and xenophobic language that
damage our communities and prospects for a peaceful
and harmonious life to which our citizens aspire.
Prevention means not fuelling hate. Mexico
calls on all member States to take advantage of this
review process to ensure that multilateral efforts to
prevent terrorism always respect human rights and
comply, without exception, with the international
legal framework, including the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law and the law
of refugees. Today more than ever, the international
community must rise to the challenges posed by terrorist
threats and demonstrate that multilateralism, based
on cooperation and collaboration among countries,
mutually strengthened by their diversity, continues to
be valid and has a real impact on the life and security
of our people.
Ms. Werdaningtyas (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by expressing my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/72/840). I would also thank the Permanent
Representatives of Finland and the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan for facilitating the discussion on the outcome
of the sixth review of the Strategy.
Despite the progress that has been made since we
adopted the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006,
we are facing an evolving threat. Terrorists continue
to adapt their methods, organization, networks and
manifestations. In this regard, the sixth review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will provide us

A/72/PV.101

with an opportunity to strengthen our common efforts.
The report of the Secretary-General clearly indicates
that the threat of terrorism persists and that the United
Nations must continue to play its strategic global role.
Along these lines, I would like to emphasize several
pertinent points from the Secretary-General’s report.
First, with respect to the new United Nations counterterrorism architecture, including the creation of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, Indonesia
welcomes the new arrangement, which aims to create
synergies in and streamline the work and responsibilities
of 38 United Nations entities in the areas of analysis
and assessment, capacity-building, coordination and
coherence. From Indonesia’s perspective, the new
structure will also ease collaboration with international
and regional organizations beyond the United Nations
system itself, as well as with other relevant forums
and initiatives.
Secondly, we acknowledge that there are still
different levels of capacities of States in implementing
the Global Strategy. The United Nations is therefore
expected to continue assisting Member States in
strengthening their ability to combat terrorism by
providing them with capacity-building assistance. We
commit to supporting these efforts by sharing valuable
experience and expertise. We also encourage further
work to be focused on action-based activities, with a
view to avoiding duplication and producing a significant
impact on the ground.
I would like to share with the Assembly a recent
update on our domestic situation, as well as relevant
efforts in addressing the threat of terrorism. Recently,
Indonesia experienced a horrific terrorist attack in
Surabaya involving foreign-terrorist-fighter returnees.
This occurrence showed that foreign terrorist fighters
had linked up with local militant groups and effectively
brought terrorists to our region. In response, Indonesia
continued to emphasize the importance of the rule
of law and the capacity of States to implement their
laws, in line with the principle of national ownership.
Accordingly, on 25 May, Indonesia amended its counterterrorism law. The amended law broadened the authority
of the State to deal with current manifestations of
terrorism, including by criminalizing foreign-terroristfighter offences, if necessary, including returnees
and relocators.
that

The current counter-terrorism law ensures
deradicalization and counter-radicalization

18-1974617/27

A/72/PV.101

programmes are part of our comprehensive approach
to fighting terrorism. The deradicalization programme
targets radicals in detention or a prison environment
and aims to prepare them for reintegration into society,
while the counter-radicalization programme is intended
to protect society from the spread of radical and
extremist narratives that lead to terrorism, especially
by strengthening its resilience.
To support the implementation of rules and
regulations, our Government is preparing a national
action plan on countering violent extremism that will
incorporate in part the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Our plan of
action will focus on prevention, law enforcement,
deradicalization and counter-radicalization, as well as
partnership and international cooperation. The plan of
action is set to be ready this year.
Preventing and suppressing terrorist financing is
also a critical part of combating terrorism. To this end,
Indonesia has enacted a law that lays the foundation
for criminalizing terrorist financing and freezing the
assets of terrorists and terrorist organizations.
Indonesia has also taken several innovative
measures to tackle the threat of terrorism at the national
level. To disrupt the cycle of radicalism, especially
within terrorist families, several individuals formerly
convicted of terrorism crimes established a foundation
in East Java and an Islamic boarding school in North
Sumatra. The foundation and boarding school have
the following aims: first, recruiting and embracing
former terrorist convicts; secondly, turning them into
agents for combating and preventing radicalism and
extremism in multi-generational families of terrorists;
and thirdly, and most importantly, stopping the cycle
of the intergenerational propagation of terrorists by
targeting our young people.
To expedite the healing process and mutual
forgiveness between ex-terrorist convicts and their
victims, on 26 February the Government facilitated a
reconciliation meeting to bridge peace and harmony
between the two groups. The event was attended by 124
convicted former terrorists and 51 victims.
With regard to international cooperation, Indonesia
welcomes the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism’s initiative to organize a consultative
meeting in South-East Asia on the human-rights-based
treatment of children accompanying foreign terrorist
fighters, to be held in Jakarta on 30 and 31 July.
18/27

26/06/2018

In conclusion, since 2006, the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy has provided us with a
comprehensive and internationally accepted strategy
for combating terrorism. Considering the rapid changes
in the development of terrorism itself, it is important to
always keep the Strategy updated in order for all nations
to be able to successfully deal with the threat together.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank the delegations of Jordan
and Finland for co-facilitating the review process that
led to the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
72/284, on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, by consensus. While the adoption
of the resolution is by consensus, all of us are conscious
that the text is primarily only a technical update on the
previous Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy resolution
adopted two years ago (resolution 70/291), marking the
end of the first decade of the formulation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy at the United Nations.
While any multilateral resolution has to strike a balance
and reach a compromise, we are disappointed that the
resolution does not reflect substantive modifications
from its previous version. We say that since in the
intervening period of two years terrorist networks have
continued to terrorize peoples across different parts
of the world, expanding their reach, propagating their
ideologies of hate, recruiting across borders, raising
funds and improving their use of modern technologies.
While most of the membership represented here
has experienced terror attacks, we at the United Nations
continue to struggle to advance meaningful multilateral
cooperation on countering terrorism, often owing to
narrow political considerations. It is disappointing to
see the lack of meaningful progress even in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy resolution language, which
continues to reflect the inability of Member States to act
collectively to tackle threats from non-State actors. That
clearly does not augur well for our collective security.
The establishment of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism last year has been a positive
development that, we hope, will contribute to the
consolidation of efforts by the United Nations system in
that context. We also welcome the hosting by the Office
of Counter-Terrorism of the first-ever summit of heads of
counter-terrorism agencies, which is scheduled for later
this week. As part of India’s continuing commitment
to strengthen multilateral efforts to counter terrorism
and support the work of the newly established Office of
Counter-Terrorism, our Government has announced a
voluntary contribution of $550,000 to the Office.
18-19746

26/06/2018

On the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy itself,
we had hoped for a more honest appraisal of the
functioning of the counter-terrorism architecture of the
United Nations, including the work on that universal
challenge in the Security Council. We had also hoped
that member States could agree on focusing on the
need to collectively discern the emerging threats and
challenges posed by terrorist networks in terms of their
use of modern technologies, recruitment strategies and
striking targets across countries.
The message is clear. We remain far from being
able to develop a common understanding and resolve to
tackle that global threat with the seriousness and unity
of purpose that it requires. We can allow that only at
our own peril. The threat from terrorist networks is real
and growing. A far more determined and non-partisan
approach will be necessary for that multilateral process
to be meaningful.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank the
President for having convened this General Assembly
meeting on the biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also sincerely
thank Ambassador Sauer of Finland and Ambassador
Bahous of Jordan and their teams for co-facilitating this
difficult but important negotiation. The Strategy was
adopted by consensus 12 years ago and was a major
step forward in international peace and security. We
came together to coordinate a unified global framework
to address the evolving threat of terrorism.
Looking back, we have strengthened our efforts
after each and every review, whether it is through the
endorsement of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism or by grounding our
counter-terrorism and counter-violent-extremism work
in human rights and fundamental freedoms. The 2016
review of the Strategy was a high-water mark, and we
are pleased to see that despite the determined efforts of
a small group of Member States to walk back important
progress, key elements from 2016 endured, especially
on the prevention of violent extremism. Prevention is
integral to a comprehensive approach to tackling the
underlying causes of violent extremism. That is why
we welcome the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
It is critical that Member States develop tailored
national action plans that take a whole-of-society
approach to fortify the social compact and address the
local drivers of violent extremism. We may be defeating

A/72/PV.101

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
on the battlefield, but terrorist organizations are still
able to radicalize and recruit people to commit acts of
violence around the world. The goal of our efforts is
not simply to react to those attacks, but also to prevent
violent extremism by working with communities to
stop radicalization in the first place. That requires
Governments to partner with local actors, especially
civil society, and go well beyond law enforcement.
Grass-roots organizations understand the challenges
and nuances on the ground and often have more access
to local communities. Family members, teachers,
community organizers and religious authorities all can
serve as early-warning mechanisms, as they are often
in a position to spot initial signs of violent extremism
before Government officials can. To win that fight,
we must work with all of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, think tanks, educators
and religious and cultural leaders to build resilience in
our societies.
We call upon the United Nations and all Member
States to strengthen their counter-terrorism and
prevention of violent extremism work by increasing
their engagement with local communities, especially
women and youth, who are too often on the sidelines.
We wish that resolution 72/284 could have better
reflected the important role that civil society plays in
effective counter-terrorism strategies.
Counter-terrorism efforts must not be abused
for other political ends. We condemn the misuse of
counter-terrorism laws by some Member States to
criminalize ideas and punish so-called extremists who
have not resorted to any form of violence. We must
stay focused on real threats to international peace and
security. Counter-terrorism should not be an excuse to
undermine respect for human rights.
We also reiterate that successful counter-terrorism
and prevention-of-violent-extremism efforts must
respect human rights and be rooted in the rule of law.
We regret that some Member States have demanded
that donors step up to increase counter-terrorism
capacity-building while using State sovereignty to
shield themselves from accountability. When it comes
to donor funding, the United States will not subsidize
political crackdowns in the name of counter-terrorism.
Again, the United States will focus on supporting
counter-terrorism measures that we know yield results.

18-1974619/27

A/72/PV.101

We are pleased that this year’s resolution
strengthens the global call to counter the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters addressed in the Security Council’s
unanimously adopted resolution 2396 (2017). We must
strengthen border security and law-enforcement efforts
against foreign terrorist fighters through the increased
collection, analysis and sharing of traveller data such
as advanced passenger information, passenger name
record and biometrics. We must develop and implement
gender- and age-sensitive prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies. For the first time in the
General Assembly, we condemned the use of civilians
to shield military objectives from attack. Terrorists,
with their disregard for the welfare of civilians, are
among the worst abusers, as we have seen with Hamas,
among many examples. We applaud our consensus on
this important issue: that civilians, including children,
should not be used to shield terrorists.
Finally, despite those achievements this year, we
remain deeply concerned about the references to a socalled principle to extradite or prosecute, which is a
misstatement of international law. While extradition
and prosecution are vital elements of law enforcement’s
response to terrorism, the obligation to extradite or
prosecute arises under specific multilateral treaties.
It is not a free-standing principle of law. Attempting
to advance incorrect and ambiguous legal provisions
harms the legal cooperation it purports to advance. We
also reject the generic call in paragraph 79 on Member
States to ensure that counter-terrorism legislation does
not impede humanitarian aid, even if terrorists benefit
from such activities. Member States are obligated to
prohibit their nationals, or those within their territories,
from providing assets to terror organizations or
individual terrorists for any purpose.
The 2018 Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
stronger than the last one, and that is why we joined
consensus today on all but one paragraph, despite
our concerns. We are committed to working harder
to protect our future generations from terrorism and
violent extremism, and overall the resolution is a step
in the right direction.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (A/72/840), as well as the President for having
convened this sixth review. I would also like to commend
the Permanent Representatives of Jordan and Finland,
20/27

26/06/2018

Ambassadors Sima Sami Bahous and Kai Sauer, and
their respective teams of experts for facilitating the
adoption of resolution 72/284.
The Republic of Argentina has twice been a victim
of international terrorism: the Israeli embassy in Buenos
Aires was attacked in 1992 and the headquarters of
the Argentine Israelite Mutual Association in 1994.
For that reason, our country was one of the first to
draw attention to the need for the establishment by the
international community of clear definitions in order
to establish the basis for a policy of cooperation and
coordination in the fight against terrorism.
Much progress has been made since the last
Strategy review. Argentina welcomes the establishment
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system
to assist Member States in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov as Under-Secretary-General in charge of
that Office.
In that regard, we wish to express the support
of the Republic of Argentina for the Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact, which represents an
important step towards establishing a set of guidelines
to improve coordination and cohesion within the
United Nations system, together with INTERPOL and
the World Customs Organization. We hope that through
the consistent application of those guidelines, Member
States will be able to benefit directly from the specific
knowledge and skills that the international community
has accumulated over decades in the fight against the
scourge of terrorism.
Since the last review of the Strategy, in 2016,
Argentina has sought to implement the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in a balanced manner. Within
the framework of Pillar I of the Global Strategy, the
Argentine Republic has strengthened its legislation on
rights and guarantees aimed at protecting the victims of
all crimes, including terrorism, in order to ensure that
they receive advice, assistance, legal representation,
protection and access to justice.
Within the framework of Pillar II of the Global
Strategy, Argentina has strengthened its national
capacities to prevent and combat terrorism. To that end,
more than 100 million migratory movements at our land
and river borders, seaports and international airports
are checked annually against INTERPOL’s database
18-19746

26/06/2018

A/72/PV.101

through coordinated efforts by federal authorities and
agencies to prevent the cross-border movement of
terrorists, weapons and explosives.

review was carried out, in June 2016, a review that
my delegation had the honour to co-facilitate with the
Permanent Mission of Iceland.

Under the leadership of Argentina’s Ministry of
Justice, we have begun a review process of Argentine
penal law with the aim of ensuring that national
punitive regulations are in line with our international
commitments. The preliminary draft reform of the
penal code, which is expected to be discussed soon in
our National Congress, includes improved wording on
the criminal definition of the crime of terrorism and
its financing, and includes a new criminal definition
of the crime of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we welcome
the spirit of the resolution and the efforts that it seeks to
spur in Member States, in particular by strengthening
action within the framework of multilateral bodies,
especially on the part of the United Nations, the
Secretary-General, the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, as well as
specialized organizations and regional and subregional
organizations. Argentina believes that those are the
areas that are most appropriate for coordinating the
cooperation among States that is necessary for the
prevention and eradication of terrorism.

In the same vein, our country is carrying out its
first national risk assessment on terrorism financing
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
within the framework of the Financial Action Task
Force recommendations. This is a national effort that
includes private-sector actors with direct and indirect
competence in the prevention of and fight against
financial crime. It should also be noted that the Ministry
of Justice of Argentina is making progress on training
plans for judges, prosecutors and public-administration
officials in the area of property investigations in the
context of money laundering, terrorism financing and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation this morning.
We join others in congratulating the Ambassadors
of Finland and Jordan, and their respective delegations,
for their diligent work in guiding the adoption by
consensus of resolution 72/284, on the sixth review
of the implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

With respect to the framework of Pillar IV, Argentina
reiterates its unequivocal position of unconditional
respect for international law, international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law in the fight against the scourge of terrorism,
a view it has expressed in all international forums and
bilateral meetings with Member States.

Bangladesh believes that the comprehensive
and balanced implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy through context-specific responses
at the national and regional levels can make a real
difference in defeating this global scourge and
its growing nexus with organized crime. We feel
encouraged by the unity of purpose demonstrated once
again by Member States in combating terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. We draw assurance from
the renewed commitment not to associate terrorism
with any particular nationality, ethnic group or
religion. We take note of Member States’ sensitization
to the emerging threats posed by terrorist groups, often
taking advantage of new technologies.

I wish to express my country’s firm commitment
to resolution 72/284, which we have just adopted, given
that it reflects both the values and principles of the
United Nations, which underpin Argentina’s position
in the fight against terrorism. It also includes the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
which have been established since the most recent

The resolution adopted today has made some
progress on addressing the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters, emphasizing the need to enhance international
cooperation for border and aviation security. Our
delegation would have welcomed further substantive
progress on issues concerning terrorist activities in
cyberspace, the gender dimension of terrorism and
combating the financing of terrorism.

With regard to Pillar III, the visit by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate authorities
to Argentina last year was extremely positive, and
we hope to see reflected in its report on the visit the
progress made by Argentina in the implementation of
relevant resolutions on the subject.

18-1974621/27

A/72/PV.101

We have been particularly concerned over the
difference of views we witnessed this time on the
issue of preventing violent extremism. Our delegation
strongly feels that there should not be any scope for
reinterpreting the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism, of which we had
collectively taken note of during the fifth review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Plan of
Action underscores the primacy of national strategies
developed and implemented through a whole-of-society
approach, and that should remain the guiding principle
going forward.
We would consider it counter-productive to
question or redefine the notion of violent extremism
itself when a number of Member States, including ours,
have acknowledged the threats it poses as conducive
to terrorism. The Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism can be deemed to be a useful instrument
to further facilitate the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular in addressing
the underlying drivers and factors of terrorism at the
community level.
The sixth review exercise has made it evident that
despite the shared commitment of Member States to
combat terrorism, there are still wide divergences
about effective ways and means of doing so in a
concerted manner. The issues at stake are more or
less familiar to all delegations and perhaps cannot be
addressed through biannual review exercises alone.
Our delegation would encourage a group of interested
Member States, together with the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, to facilitate a series of informal
conversations in the interim to help advance informed
and frank deliberations on some of those critical issues
in an inclusive manner. The forthcoming United Nations
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies
of Member States could be a good starting point for
initiating such a dialogue.
The issue of upholding the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
combating terrorism need not be overemphasized.
We in Bangladesh are struggling with the Rohingya
humanitarian crisis, which has been the egregious
and disproportionate fallout from a so-called counterterrorism drive that amounted to nothing short of
ethnic cleansing by the Myanmar authorities. It is
critical that double standards in combating terrorism be
discarded so that no Member State can forgo its primary
responsibility to protect the civilian population on its
22/27

26/06/2018

territory in the name of counter-terrorism operations.
We urge Myanmar and Member States with influence
on it not to use the counter-terrorism issue as a pretext
to refuse or hinder the return and rehabilitation of the
Rohingya who are languishing along the border between
our two countries, as well as the nearly 1 million
of them now camped in Bangladesh. For our part,
Bangladesh remains committed to denying sanctuary
to any terrorist elements from our neighbouring
countries, in adherence to our Government’s vision for
regional security.
Today we woke up to yet another piece of sad
news, about the death of one of our military observers
deployed in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
in Juba, reportedly as a result of an ambush by a militia
group. We would stress the paramount importance of
strategic communication with all parties to conflict
about the non-combative engagement of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in counter-terrorism efforts, so
that our peacekeepers are not targeted indiscriminately
in attacks by militia and terrorist groups.
We would conclude by once again putting on record
our appreciation for the sound working relations our
delegation has developed with the newly formed Office
of Counter-Terrorism. We also recognize the critical
technical assistance and capacity-building support that
we continue to receive from the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre and other United Nations entities,
primarily in areas aligned with our national priorities.
Bangladesh will continue to encourage and support all
constructive initiatives aimed at enhancing coherence
and coordination across the counter-terrorism efforts of
the United Nations.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to thank Ambassador Bahous
of Jordan and Ambassador Sauer of Finland, as well
as their teams, for their hard work during the sixth
review process of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
My delegation thanks the representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the representative
of Venezuela for their statements on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively.
The adoption by the General Assembly of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
2006 constituted a major stride in our counter-terrorism
efforts. After many years, the Strategy has become
18-19746

26/06/2018

a reference point for cooperation and coordination
among the United Nations and its Member States in
countering terrorism. It should be comprehensively and
consistently implemented, ensuring a balance among
its four pillars.
The sixth review, held 12 years after the adoption
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, is the first
review to be conducted following the establishment
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 71/291,
adopted by consensus. My delegation joined the
consensus at that time because we believed in the new
role of the Office, which represents an important step
in our collective efforts to successfully implement the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and enhance the
role of the United Nations in countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism.
In spite of the military advances made by various
Iraqi national forces against the terrorist organization
Da’esh and the liberation of all Iraqi territories last
year — those occupied by Da’esh since 2014 — that
organization continues to commit the most horrendous
acts of violence and murder throughout the world in the
name of Islam, although Islam has nothing to do with
it. It poses a threat to international peace and security,
as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/840), which contains important information on
the implementation of the Strategy, the contributions
made by Member States to such implementation and the
need to address existing threats.
The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate has evaluated the priority issues
facing my country, Iraq, at the legal, institutional
and operational levels in the fight against terrorism
and has compiled a list of the 16 issues of the highest
priority to the Iraqi Government. In this regard, we
express our deep gratitude to Mr. Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, for their joint visit to Iraq early last March.
That visit gave rise to several important projects aimed
at addressing four priority issues as a first step, in
particular in the areas of capacity-building to counter
the financing of terrorism; providing young people
with employment opportunities and upgrading their
skills and capacities to counter violent extremism;
improving national capacities to prevent and address

A/72/PV.101

biological and chemical attacks in Iraq; and preventing
violent extremism through strategic communications.
Once again, we stress the importance of enhancing
international cooperation. We urge Member States to
uphold their commitments pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions on countering terrorism,
particularly resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015), with regard to preventing the
financing of Da’esh terrorist groups and cross-border
trafficking in oil, arms and Iraqi and Syrian monuments
by these groups.
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
72/284, pertaining to the sixth review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with a view to standing
together in combating terrorism pursuant to its
important provisions, particularly those related to
taking measures against foreign terrorist fighters,
preventing access to illegal arms and the financing of
terrorism, addressing terrorist discourse, enhancing the
role of young people, women and civil society, focusing
on capacity-building, and the provision of assistance
to Member States upon their request by the United
Nations system, especially the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation welcomes
the United Nations High-level Conference of Heads of
Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, to be
held on 28 and 29 June. We consider the conference
and its side events to be an important opportunity and
a prelude to further developments with respect to the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We should work
from now with the aim of reaching an agreement during
the consideration of a draft resolution on the seventh
review of the Strategy in 2020.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Allow me to express
my sincere gratitude to the President for convening
today’s important plenary meeting on the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. My
appreciation also goes to Finland and Jordan for their
tremendous efforts in facilitating the review discussion.
The threat of terrorism has been evolving and
spreading globally. The adoption by consensus today of
resolution 72/284, on the sixth review of the Strategy,
reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to
combating terrorism and preventing violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. We discussed through the
review the threat of foreign terrorist fighters, including
returning and relocating fighters. To detect such fighters

18-1974623/27

A/72/PV.101

and uncover their networks, it is vitally important to
take collective measures to use advance passenger
information, passenger name record and biometric data,
as well as to connect INTERPOL databases to lawenforcement, border security and customs agencies.
Complementing Security Council resolution 2396
(2017), resolution 72/284 reaffirms the importance
of advance passenger information, passenger name
record and biometric data and INTERPOL databases
connected to border checkpoints. We believe that this is
one of the most significant added-value elements of the
resolution, and we must therefore redouble our efforts
to implement it. Japan underscored the importance
of these measures through the review discussion and
provides technical assistance and capacity-building to
Member States that need it.
Let me also stress the importance of the role of
civil society, community leaders, women and youth in
tackling terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
For example, the role of women includes shaping
communities and family values, identifying the first
signs of radicalization and intervening at an early stage,
and using various forms of media to promote counternarratives.
I should like to introduce one of the successful
projects that Japan has contributed to women’s
empowerment through UN-Women. This project was
aimed identifying former hostages of Boko Haram
and empowering those women by providing training
in small-business management skills and economic
kits that enable the women to start small businesses.
In fact, our projects have provided several examples of
how protecting and empowering women contributes to
counter-terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
In that regard, we should have wanted to see stronger
language in resolution 72/284 to recognize the role of
these actors.
The adoption of the sixth review resolution today
by consensus was a landmark event for renewing our
commitment to counter-terrorism. But this is not the
end. Now we must implement what we have adopted,
and I urge all member States to take concrete actions on
the basis of the Strategy and resolution 72/284.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank Ambassador Bahous, Permanent
Representative of Jordan, and Ambassador Sauer,
Permanent Representative of Finland, for their efforts
24/27

26/06/2018

to facilitate the sixth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Egypt, along with other like-minded countries,
proposed solutions and compromises in order to arrive at
a consensus on the term “violent extremism conducive
to terrorism”. This term remains ambiguous, and there
is confusion between the terms “terrorism” and “violent
extremism conducive to terrorism”, given that there
is no international definition of the latter. Regarding
terrorism, there is an international consensus on the
meaning of the crime of terrorism, although there is
no United Nations definition of terrorism, for known
political reasons.
Egypt and other like-minded countries have
made suggestions on this topic and underscored the
non-existence of a link between violent extremism
conducive to terrorism and any religion, nationality,
region, culture or social and economic level,
especially given that some members have a tendency
to characterize criminal acts as terrorism when their
perpetrators are groups such as Da’esh or Al-Qaida,
which claim to represent Islam, but to characterize
those same criminal acts as violent extremism when
perpetrated by other religious groups or by groups with
ties to the extreme right. Hence, the same criminal acts
are characterized differently, and terrorism and Islam
are incorrectly linked.
Egypt and like-minded countries have a sincere
desire to reach a real consensus rather than an informal
one on the term “violent extremism conducive to
terrorism”. This consensus would help the General
Assembly to understand the term violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. Had we arrived at a consensus,
we would have benefited the common interest and the
United Nations, especially that avoiding extremism
conducive to terrorism and avoiding terrorism are top
priorities for us because we are a country that faces
terrorism on the ground every day. However, some States
insist on this non-constructive ambiguity regarding the
term “violent extremism conducive to terrorism”.
Given that we wished to not break the consensus
on resolution 72/284, on the sixth review of the United
National Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we agreed
to retain the same paragraphs contained in the fifth
review resolution (resolution 71/291) regarding violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, without adding
any new paragraphs in this regard. Nevertheless, new
positive and important paragraphs were added to the
18-19746

26/06/2018

resolution regarding foreign terrorist fighters and the
need to counter the terrorist discourse, implement
Security Council resolution 2354 (2017) and the
international comprehensive framework to combat
terrorist discourse, deny terrorists a safe haven on the
Internet, extradite criminals with ties to terrorism, and
prevent the financing of terrorism.
We have also preserved several other important
paragraphs that others had sought to delete or amend
in way that would have rendered them meaningless,
including paragraphs on the established principle of
extradition and prosecution; the need to put an end to
foreign occupation; building the capacities of States and
providing them with technical assistance in preventing
and combating terrorism; the need to quickly arrive at
a comprehensive convention to combat terrorism; and
the role of the international community in combating
terrorism. In that regard, I note the role of Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif and the Egyptian House of Fatwa in addressing
ideologies and terrorist discourse and extremism at the
national, regional and international levels.
We have concluded the sixth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In order
to make resolution 72/284 as effective as possible,
like other General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions related to combating terrorism, we must all
be committed to it while respecting its provisions and
fully and effectively implementing it; otherwise our
efforts will have been in vain. It is even more important
to fully implement what we agree upon.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight two points.
First, we stress the importance of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and other United Nations
entities in terms of the assistance they provide to
Member States to combat and eradicate terrorism. I
would also like to reaffirm the principle of respecting
State sovereignty and the importance of national
ownership. It is also important to provide States, upon
their request, with projects that have a tangible impact
at the national level.
Secondly, it is inconceivable, as we adopt resolutions
to counter terrorism, that some countries publicly
violating those resolutions by providing funding, safe
haven and weapons to terrorists. They know beforehand
that they will not be held accountable. If we are to be
serious, we must hold all those who support terrorism

A/72/PV.101

accountable without exception, particularly any parties
that provide support to terrorists.
In conclusion, I underscore that Egypt will always
be at the forefront of the fight against terrorism.
I reaffirm our serious commitment to continue
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
and all friendly countries in combating this dangerous
phenomenon, which threatens the present and the future
of our nations.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to the two co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Finland and Jordan, as well as the
legal experts and Secretariat staff. Over the course
of more than a month of negotiations and formal
and informal dialogue, they were able to achieve the
traditional outcome, one that is equally unsatisfactory
to all. That is the usual result of the political and
financial polarization among some in our international
Organization, according to which no United Nations
text or resolution can meet the needs of all.
I would like to make a few comments that I believe
will lead to the development of new strategic approaches
when we come to the next review, in 2020.
First, the Syrian Arab Republic is directly exposed
to the dangers of terrorism, given the suffering of the
Syrian people in recent years in the wake of the rise of
new forms of terrorism, including international crossborder terrorism. Such new forms of terrorism evolve
between the reviews of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy every two years. We all
know about cross-border terrorism, about Médecins
Sans Frontières, pharmacists without borders, armies
without borders and even clowns without borders.
Although we understand the reasons that led to
certain proposals for paragraphs about the dangers
accompanied by the return of so-called foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries or to third countries, we cannot
accept the motives that led the delegations of certain
States to deliberately reject our paragraphs calling for
recognition by all Member States of the real causes and
circumstances that led to the evolution and exacerbation
of this dangerous phenomenon, and for the recognition
of the collusive responsibility of some parties in the
international community and the tort liability of others
for this bloody, unprecedented phenomenon.

18-1974625/27

A/72/PV.101

We are not repeating ourselves when we state
that, if the international community had shouldered
its responsibilities from the very outset; if the earlywarning system had been applied by the Governments of
Member States; if information on counter-terrorism had
been exchanged rather than denied; if the international
community had heard our pleas over the course of seven
years; if it had seen the collusion between certain States
and intelligence services that allowed the flows of tens
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters from more than
101 States Members of this international Organization
towards Syria and Iraq; if all our pleas had been heard,
we would have completely eliminated this phenomenon
and we would not be here today discussing the danger
of the return of such fighters to their countries or to a
third country.
But that was the inevitable result of the collusion of
some and the indifference of others. In this regard, we
believe that the crisis is related not to the legal texts and
instruments on combating terrorism, but rather to the
lack of political will of certain States and Governments
to combat terrorism, to the extent of using terrorism
as a tool for military and political intervention against
other States.
Secondly, with regard to preventing violent
extremism, my country, Syria, reiterates its firm
position pertaining to this concept and still believes
that it is impossible to draw clear lines between
extremism when it is linked to religious and political
motives, and the violent extremism conducive to
terrorism. We have provided various examples of that
on several occasions. Those present are aware that
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters were classified
by the security services of their countries as dangerous
but not violent and had been placed under continuous
surveillance. Nonetheless, their non-violent extremism
led them to become foreign terrorist fighters, and their
Governments allowed them to go to Syria and Iraq.
Some returned to carry out terrorist attacks in their
homeland or country of residence, as happened in
Great Britain, Belgium, France and the United States
of America. Some United Nations Members have called
those foreign terrorist fighters — including European
terrorists, Australian terrorists, Arab terrorists and
Muslim terrorists — members of Syria’s moderate
opposition. All, in fact, have been labelled members
of Syria’s moderate opposition or jihadists. When
they shed blood in Syria they were called jihadists,
26/27

26/06/2018

and when they returned to their countries they were
called terrorists.
I recall that the former French Foreign Minister,
Mr. Laurent Fabius, said in Morocco on 12 December
2012 that French jihadists had done a good job in Syria.
The French Prime Minister, who was Minister of the
Interior before becoming Prime Minister, had already
made a statement that was even more dangerous when
he said that nothing could be done to prevent French
jihadists from going to Syria. A Prime Minister and a
Minister for Foreign Affairs of a permanent member of
the Security Council made those statements in 2012,
but the jihadists whom they sent to us in Syria and Iraq
were called terrorists when they returned to France.
Our partners in the United Nations should
acknowledge, during the course of the review, that
there are differences of opinion regarding the definition
and explanation of the concept of violent extremism
conducive to terrorism, and that there are national
considerations that govern the approach adopted by
every State to combating extremism. We would like
to express our deep regret at the approach adopted
by some delegations that involved cutting financing
for United Nations projects and programmes aimed
at State capacity-building in counter-terrorism and
counter-extremism. We would remind those States
that the Charter of the United Nations is based on the
principles of justice, equality and mutual respect, and
not on immoral values. We believe that the restriction
of funding by a donor gives that donor the power to
impose its political position on others.
Thirdly, my country expresses its appreciation for
the support and positive approach of many delegations
regarding the Syrian and Iranian joint proposal for
reforms to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
in order to ensure transparency and participation. The
Centre belongs to Member States, not to those who fund
it. We therefore recognize the political motives that
allowed certain delegations to refuse to allow the main
shortcomings in the work of the Centre to be addressed.
We have clearly highlighted those shortcomings, and
many delegations, including Member States in its
consultative body, have supported us.
The Syrian Arab Republic will dissociate itself
from the Centre and will henceforth refuse to recognize
its activities because it lacks transparency, integrity
and inclusivity. My country will continue to oppose all
proposals to fund the Centre from the United Nations
18-19746

26/06/2018

regular budget unless the serious problems regarding
its working methods are resolved. We emphatically
reject the domination by one country in particular of
the affairs and activities of the Centre so as to turn
it into a private enterprise operating from within the
United Nations.
Fourthly, from the outset of the informal
negotiations my Government had expected certain
States to object to any paragraph that included new
proposals for combating terrorist hate discourse on
the Internet and social media. We were convinced that
those same delegations would oppose any international
convention or United Nations mechanism to monitor
narratives supporting extremism, terrorist incitement,
recruiting operations or the funding and planning of
terrorist attacks. I referred to all of those points in the
statement I made yesterday, when I said that the United
States delegation was opposed to a reference being
made to the incitement of terrorism on the Internet
under the pretext that this would be a violation of
freedom of expression (see A/72/PV.100). This is the
latest joke we have heard.
It is the peak of political and moral hypocrisy
when certain Governments believe that freedom of
expression and Internet communication are nobler than
the fundamental right of each individual to live safely
and in peace away from the danger of terrorism. I do
not believe that we and most member States in this Hall
are naive. We are aware that the motives behind the
rejection by certain Governments of any United Nations
role in monitoring violent discourse on the Internet has
to do with narrow political goals and economic interests
that seek to dominate Internet technology and the
global market and continue, of course, to manipulate
the recruitment of combatants in order to send them
to our region. The States that planned for terrorism
then send their armies to our region under the pretext
of combating the terrorists whom they themselves sent
to us.

A/72/PV.101

In conclusion, we believe that the traditional
approach of reviewing the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy every two years should be reconsidered,
given that the mounting dangers of terrorism and its
new patterns require a serious, collective response
that transcends the narrow political motives of certain
Governments, which sometimes rise to the level of
supporting terrorism and threatening international
peace and security. We are talking not about conclusions
or hypotheses, but about a database of information
and confessions that my Government hs obtained on
terrorist armed groups and foreign terrorist fighters.
We are also talking about realities and facts within
the United Nations. Some permanent members of the
Security Council have refused requests to include
individuals, entities and groups on the sanctions lists
related to the organizations Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
for the sole reason that these requests come from the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. More than
a year ago we requested the inclusion of the terrorist
organization Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham on the terrorist
list, but the American, British and French delegations
rejected our request because the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic had made it. Recently, both the United
States and the Security Council added this entity to
their terrorist lists. When we made the request we were
turned down, but when the United States included that
entity on its terrorist list, so did the Security Council.
Today we join the consensus based on our belief
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is important despite our serious concerns over
certain paragraphs and the fact that some delegations
have tried to include concepts that have nothing to do
with either counter-terrorism or its pillars. This would
negate our collective efforts on counter-terrorism,
thereby making the Strategy irrelevant.
The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.

18-1974627/27
