S/PV.7071

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7071st meeting

Wednesday, 27 November 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Poroli
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

13-58432 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1358432*

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Austria,
Croatia, Israel, Japan and the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Gilles
Marhic, Head of the Legal Section of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassador Gary Quinlan will
make a joint statement on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Following
that joint statement, the Council will hear briefings by
the Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): On behalf of the Chairs
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, I have
the honour to brief the Council on the continuing
cooperation among those three Committees and their
respective expert groups.
On 18 November, the Chairs of the three Committees
joined the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, resolution
1737 (2006), which concerns the Islamic Republic of

2/32

27/11/2013

Iran, and resolution 1988 (2011), which concerns the
Taliban, and the President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) in an open briefing for Member
States on the respective roles of the Security Council
and the FATF in combating the financing of terrorism
and proliferation. It was the first such meeting and
aimed to increase awareness among Member States
of the measures imposed by the Council, the related
recommendations and guidance developed by the
FATF and the assistance that the Council’s sanctions
committees and their expert groups and the FATF can
provide to Member States.
Further to that open briefing, the three Committees,
through their panels of experts, have continued
their practice of sharing relevant information and
of meeting, where appropriate, in order to discuss
common issues and to coordinate actions and exchange
points of view on particular issues. The three panels
of experts participate actively in the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
have continued their close cooperation on issues, in
particular, related to combating money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism and proliferation,
All three panels of experts coordinate their
outreach activities and country visits on a regular
basis. Where appropriate, they consult each other when
planning country visits or similar trips so as to allow
the participation of the experts of the other groups
in a particular visit or to enable the other groups to
communicate the specific needs for information of
the countries to be visited. The three panels of experts
continue to explore the further strengthening of the
current coordination and cooperation.
Allow me now to turn to my statement on behalf
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. A major lesson learned from
2012-13 is that Al-Qaida and its affiliates have already
evolved in several regions. The threat is no longer
anchored primarily in a global Al-Qaida organization but
revolves around a range of increasingly heterogeneous
franchises that are themselves continually evolving
with the recruitment of younger fighters and increased
mobility across borders. Al-Qaida has effectively
adapted to local conflicts and mobilized local affiliates
that, despite their differences, support the broader
Al-Qaida ideology.
Some States that have not yet been the victims
of terrorism face many of the same risk factors as
13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

countries that have. As the 1267 Monitoring Team
found in its fourteenth report (S/2013/467), terrorist
propaganda on the Internet continues to grow in
sophistication and reach and contributes to the problem
of self-radicalization. That, in turn, inspires acts of
expressive terrorist violence committed by individuals
or small groups, such as the recent attacks in Boston,
London and Paris. Asymmetric tactics and complex
and simultaneous multipronged attacks used by small
but highly mobile Al-Qaida units draw strength from
a close understanding of regional weaknesses, such as
long and porous borders.
In today’s briefing, I will focus on three principal
areas of work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, as
it continues to monitor the implementation of resolution
2083 (2012).
Those areas are, first, effectively addressing the
evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates, with a particular
focus on the work of the Committee to address recent
threats to peace, stability and security in Mali and
the Sahel region, including through engagement with
the States in the region; secondly, ensuring that the
regime’s application remains relevant and effective;
and, thirdly, ensuring that the sanctions regime has fair
and clear procedures.
A more detailed version of this statement will be
distributed in hard copy today and made available on
the Committee’s website
With regard to the evolving threat, in its fourteenth
report, the Monitoring Team highlighted the Sahel
and the Middle East as the two most visible arenas
for Al-Qaida affiliate activity during 2013. That is
reflected in the Committee’s activities for that period.
In May, I reported that the Committee had
held a special meeting on 9 April on threats to Mali
stemming from the activities of Al-Qaida affiliates in
the region, including Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM), the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa (MUJAO) and Ansar Eddine (see S/PV.6964),
That meeting highlighted the need for the continued
monitoring of the role of the Al-Qaida affiliates in Mali
and the Sahel, with a more central role for capacitybuilding efforts in the area of counter-terrorism. That
followed the Committee’s action earlier in the year to
list Ansar Eddine and its founder and leader, Iyad ag
Ghali, as well as the leadership of the already listed

S/PV.7071

MUJAO and AQIM, Hamada Ould Mohamed El Khairy
and Abderrahmane Ould El Amar, respectively.
Although the French-led Operation Serval
dislodged AQIM, Ansar Eddine and MUJAO from the
main towns in northern Mali, restoring governmental
authority and significantly degrading those groups,
pockets of resistance remain and the risk of attacks by
Al-Qaida affiliates across the Sahel persists. Operation
Serval also demonstrated the high level of the training
and equipment of terrorist groups in the region and
the close link between organized crime and terrorism,
highlighting the need to strengthen regional and
subregional cooperation, both within and between the
Maghreb and the Sahel.
Similarly, the Monitoring Team’s fourteenth report
also describes operational contacts between terrorist
entities in eastern Libya and Al-Qaida affiliates in the
Sahel, the Maghreb, the Middle East and South Asia
and the presence of training camps in Libya, to which
many foreign fighters travel before heading elsewhere
to fight. The Committee has responded through the
listing of Muhammad Jamal Abd-Al Rahim Ahmad
Al-Kashif and his Muhammad Jamal Network, which
is responsible for establishing terrorist training camps
in Egypt and Libya and was reportedly involved in the
attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi. Libya,
on 11 September 2012.
In response to those ongoing and evolving threats,
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has invited Member
States of the Sahel and Maghreb regions to a special
meeting to discuss the threat posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliates to consider ways in which the sanctions
regime could support affected States and to discuss how
best such measures may be integrated into the national
and regional responses to the Al-Qaida threat.
This special meeting represents an important
innovation in Committee engagement with States of
regions on the front lines. If the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime is to constitute a useful tool in efforts to counter
the destabilising activities of Al-Qaida affiliates in
these regions, it must be placed in the hands of affected
countries and regional groups. This will ensure that the
sanctions list accurately reflects the dynamic nature
of the threat and will enhance the implementation of
measures on the ground.
Meanwhile, the continuing civil war in the Syrian
Arab Republic has seen the emergence of a strong
Al-Qaida presence, drawing from Al-Qaida in Iraq

13-584323/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

under the name Jabhat al-Nusra and attracting hundreds
of recruits from outside the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Committee has responded through the listing in May of
Jabhat al-Nusrah as an alias of Al-Qaida in Iraq, as well
as its leader Abu Mohammed Al-Jawlani in July.
On the third point of ensuring the regime’s
application remains relevant and effective, the
Committee has also continued in its efforts ensure
that the regime’s application remains relevant and
effective. It has recently concluded its consideration
of the recommendations contained in the fourteenth
report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. In its report, the Team made
19 recommendations, primarily focused on advancing a
more effective, evidence-based United Nations targeted
sanctions regime and improving the implementation
and effectiveness of the Sanctions measures.
Notably, based on the Team’s recommendation, the
Committee has requested the Team to provide an annual
confidential briefing to the Committee of how the list
reflects the current threat picture, in recognition that
the sanctions will have most impact if the individuals
and entities targeted by the regime are those currently
involved in influential roles in or supporting Al-Qaida
and its affiliates. In addition, so as to preserve the
element of surprise with new listings and prevent
asset flight, the Committee encourages Member
States to make every effort to reduce delays between
the Committee’s notification of new listings and the
domestic implementation of the measures. Finally, the
Committee has asked the Team to engage with Member
States to better understand the impediments to full
compliance with the measures and to present their
findings to the Committee.
The Committee has continued to review the entries
on the Al-Qaida sanctions list, focusing particular
attention on entries that lack identifiers necessary to
ensure the effective implementation of the sanctions
measures, entries corresponding to reportedly deceased
individuals and to entities that are reported or confirmed
to have ceased to exist, and entries that have not been
reviewed in three or more years. The responsiveness
of Member States remains crucial to the successful
implementation of these reviews, and I want to thank
those Member States that have actively participated
in these review processes by providing detailed and
updated information. The Committee has bolstered the
way that it interacts with Member States in the context
of these reviews, aiming to encourage greater and

4/32

27/11/2013

more precise information-sharing on listed individuals
and entities, and to increase the attentiveness of the
Committee to Member States’ views and concerns.
Since the last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.6964), the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
has continued to operationalise the procedural
enhancements of resolution 2083 (2012), supporting the
Committee’s mandate to clearly and effectively respond
to the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. In
November, the Committee considered a request from
a listed individual for an exemption to the travel ban.
This request was the first of its kind to be received
through the focal point mechanism established in
resolution 1730 (2006). The Security Council expanded
the mandate of the focal point to receive exemption
requests in paragraph 8 of resolution 2083 (2012), and
this development affords listed individuals and entities
broader access to Committee procedures.
In 2013, several listed individuals were informed
of the identity of the State that suggested their name
for designation. This disclosure was streamlined
last year in paragraph 12 of resolution 2083 (2012),
which reverses the presumption that a State proposing
an individual or entity for listing wishes to have its
status as a designating State kept confidential. This
development, together with the provision of reasons
for the Committee’s decision in Ombudsperson cases,
means that listed individuals and entities are afforded
greater scope to understand their designation.
The Office of the Ombudsperson continues to play
an integral role in guaranteeing that the Committee’s
procedures are clear and the list dynamically reflects
the current threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
The Office of the Ombudsperson has a significant,
ever-increasing caseload. Since the last briefing to the
Council in May, the Committee has de-listed five names
following its consideration of reports submitted by the
Ombudsperson. There are currently 15 open petitions
received through the Office of the Ombudsperson at
various stages of consideration.
Going forward, the Committee will continue to
pay heed to due process principles in the context of the
Security Council so as to ensure that its procedures
are clear and that the regime adheres to fundamental
principles of fairness.
In the past six months, the Committee has remained
actively engaged on the situation in Mali, the Sahel,
the Maghreb and the Middle East, given the common

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

threat from Al-Qaida affiliates in these regions. The
second special meeting of the Committee will stress the
complementarity between the United Nations broader
Sahel strategy and the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
measures, particularly on the issues of countering
terrorism and creating a security environment
conducive to economic and social development.
Ensuring that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
remains an effective tool to address the continued
threat from Al-Qaida and its affiliates is a shared
undertaking, in which the participation of all Member
States is crucial. Member States on the front lines are
in a unique position to assess the nature of the Al-Qaida
threat in their regions, as well as the main challenges to
implementation of the measures, and they are therefore
strongly encouraged to share their views with the
Committee.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Loulichki.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) since the previous briefing, held in May (see
S/PV.6964). The Committee continues to be guided
in its work by the relevant resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.
The Committee has benefitted from the valuable
assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTD), under the leadership of
Mr. Mike Smith and Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, its recently
appointed Executive Director.
Monitoring and promoting Member States’
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2004) is one of the core components of the Committee’s
mandate. Among the vehicles and tools to achieve those
objectives are two new assessment tools introduced
in May, the overview of implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey, developed
by CTED to replace the preliminary implementation
assessment and to assist the Committee to continue
its constructive dialogue with Member States. The
Committee has adopted nine files, and it is expected
that another five will be completed before the end of
2013.

S/PV.7071

Another tool is the country visit, which is a critical
part of the direct interaction and engagement between
the Committee and Member States. Conducted on
the Committee’s behalf by the Executive Directorate,
such visits provide an opportunity to discuss, inter
alia, terrorism-related trends and challenges; States’
counter-terrorism efforts, strengths, weaknesses,
and technical assistance needs; and good practices in
implementing the two resolutions. During the review
cycle, the Committee conducted visits to six States,
bringing the total number of States visited since 2005
to 88. The Committee expects to conduct two further
visits before the end the year.
The facilitation of technical-assistance delivery is
another core function assigned by the Council to the
Committee. A number of steps have been undertaken to
strengthen the facilitation efforts of the Committee and
its CTED, which include,first, giving priority to States
visited by the Committee and focusing on followup requests; secondly, working with traditional and
new donor States and organizations and on a regional
and thematic approach to facilitate the provision of
assistance; thirdly, increasing its focus on prevention
and implementation; fourthly, participating actively
in the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
Initiative of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF); fifthly, integrating an approach
based on human rights and rule of law into its activities;
and finally, establishing working relations with the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.
In that regard, CTED, acting in cooperation with
partner organizations and entities, also facilitated a
number of regional and thematic workshops and events
within the framework of global, multi-year projects on
a variety of topics, including the freezing of terrorists’
assets, misuse of the non-profit sector for terrorist
purposes, the regulation of alternative remittances
against misuse for terrorist financing purposes, joint
investigations, community policing, the prosecution
of terrorism cases,strengthening the capacity of
central authorities, countering the illegal cross-border
movement of cash, the protection of witnesses and
victims of terrorism, and countering violent extremism
and implementing resolution 1624 (2005).
On 20 September 2013, the Committee held
a special meeting on enhancing cooperation and
technical assistance to States in the Sahel region to
strengthen their capacity in the global fight against
terrorism. The meeting highlighted the importance

13-584325/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of the prevention and capacity-building approach and
international cooperation. The Committee, with the
assistance of CTED, also arranged a number of special
events and open meetings with Member States and
international and regional organizations on issues of
common and current concern, including countering
terrorism through the use of new communications
and information technologies and countering violent
extremism through education.
The special meetings and events of the Committee,
which are open to Member States and international
and regional organizations, help raise the international
community’s awareness of counter-terrorism issues.
They provide a useful forum for States and organizations
to discuss new threats and capacity-building initiatives
to address terrorism challenges.
The Chair of the Committee also arranged a
number of public briefings for the wider membership
by CTED on regional and thematic topics regarding
various aspects for the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Those arrangements and
discussions helped the Committee to not only raise
awareness of its strategic and transparent approaches,
but also to make known its work and maintain links and
dialogue with the wider membership.
CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics. Important workshops
organized during the reporting period include two
regional workshops, in Jeddah in May and in Algiers in
June, on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
as part of a series on enhancing the implementation of
that resolution; the 4th workshop on the links between
terrorism and organized crime, co-arranged by CTED,
the Regional Cooperation Council, the Centre for
Security Cooperation and the Southeast European Law
Enforcement Center; the 7th regional workshop for
judges, prosecutors and police officers on effectively
countering terrorism in South Asia, held in Pakistan in
October; and four subregional workshops on freezing
mechanisms, held in Tanzania, Thailand, the Bahamas
and Turkmenistan.
Resolution 1963 (2010) encourages CTED to work
with Member States on developing comprehensive
and integrated national counter-terrorism strategies.
During the Committee’s visits to Member States, CTED
discusses with the visited States the potential benefits
of putting in place a comprehensive and integrated
national counter-terrorism strategy that employs a

6/32

27/11/2013

multidisciplinary approach that includes civil society.
Based on that constructive dialogue, and with the
consent of the State in question, the Committee has on
several occasions recommended in its visit report that
the State adopt a national comprehensive and integrated
strategy. CTED has conveyed its readiness to provide
expert advice in that regard or to facilitate the delivery
of the necessary and required technical assistance.
CTED, working in close cooperation with the
CTITF Office and its constituent entities, also engaged
with regional organizations on the development of
comprehensive regional counter-terrorism strategies.
CTED and the CTITF Office co-led a Working Group
of the Whole on National and Regional CounterTerrorism Strategies. The Working Group also
facilitated and co-chaired an international conference
on national and regional counterterrorism strategies, at
which participants identified a set of principles to be
considered by Member States and regional organizations
when developing their respective strategies.
Effective counter-terrorism measures and respect
for human rights are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. That is an understatement. They are an
essential part of any successful counter-terrorism effort.
In accordance with the Committee’s policy guidance on
human rights, CTED continued to take into account the
relevant human rights concerns, including in preparing
the overview of implementation assessments and the
detailed implementation survey, in its dialogue with
States on behalf of the Committee and within the
framework of country visits, regional workshops and
other events.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights came to brief the Committee on 24 October
2013. The discussions were useful. The Committee and
the Office of the High Commissioner will continue to
work together to ensure that Member States’ counterterrorism legislation and practices complied with their
obligations under international human rights law.
In closing, I would like to say that terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. There are various emerging threats
and challenges in our common endeavours to combat
terrorism.
The Committee is now considering the renewal
of the mandate of CTED, which will expire at the end
of December this year. The Committee will consider
strategic and practical recommendations to the Security

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.7071

Council for the future work of the Committee and its
CTED to better meet these threats and challenges.

able to draw upon the lessons learned from that new
initiative.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank His
Excellency Ambassador Loulichki for his briefing.

In July, the Committee approached 16 non-reporting
States in an effort to attain universal reporting. To date,
two additional States have provided their initial reports,
bring the number of non-reporting States down to 22.
Also, Committee members and experts have used other
opportunities at outreach events and during meetings
of the First Committee to engage non-reporting States.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Joon Oh,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I am privileged
to report to the Security Council as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I would like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat for the support extended to
the 1540 Committee.
Guided by the 12th programme of work, submitted
to the Council on 31 May, I am pleased to note steady
progress in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) since our most recent joint meeting, held on
10 May 2013 (see S/PV.6964). Since then, the 1540
Committee and its experts participated in 46 outreach
events organized by various entities and on the main
thematic areas related to resolution 1540 (2004). Those
events provided opportunities to enhance the awareness
of resolution 1540 (2004) globally and, in many cases, to
facilitate assistance aimed at helping States strengthen
their national capacities to implement the resolution.
The value of direct interaction with States was
demonstrated in the visits to Grenada, Burkina Faso
and the Republic of Korea. Furthermore, bilateral
discussions have been conducted specifically to
develop voluntary national implementation action plans
for Armenia, Montenegro and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, which were organized by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and supported by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. That has shown, once again, the
importance of the role played by regional organizations
in implementing the resolution.
Croatia and Poland have conducted a novel peer
review process that has enabled the States concerned
to analyse their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in a rigorous and frank manner, identify areas
where improvements were needed and close gaps. It
also facilitated the direct sharing of experience and
effective practices. I look forward to hearing a briefing
from the representatives of Croatia and Poland in that
regard. The Committee and all Member States will be

Facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and offers remains a priority for the
Committee. Assistance requests and related matters are
discussed at almost all our outreach events, including
the Global Partnership working group meetings. Since
the last meeting, Japan and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) have offered Kyrgyzstan
assistance in the legislative and export control areas
in response to a request from that country. The United
States continues its financial support to the regional
coordinator position of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). The UNODC offered legislative
assistance and the training of criminal justice officials
for CARICOM. The 1540 Committee’s Group of Experts
has improved the compilation of assistance requests
and offers, enabling a more systematic approach to
assistance matchmaking.
Just days after I took over the chairmanship of
the Committee, I gave a keynote speech on 7 October
at a special session of the 2013 Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) held in Geneva. That
direct interaction with legislators from around the
world contributed to raising awareness and to opening a
new stage for high-level cooperation between the 1540
Committee and the IPU.
Since 10 May, we have received new notifications
of 24 points of contact, bringing the total to 65 States
and 15 international and regional organizations. In
particular, INTERPOL, the World Health Organization
and the World Organization for Animal Health have
recently registered as assistance providers.
One of the key tasks that the Security Council
requested of the Committee in resolution 1977 (2011)
was to compile various effective practices that States
have employed to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of
delivery, in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004).
On 6 November, I wrote to all Member States and
international and regional organizations seeking

13-584327/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

27/11/2013

advice about their effective practices in implementing
the resolution. I would like to appeal to Member States
and international and regional organizations to be
forthcoming in sharing their effective practices, so that
we can develop a useful online resource to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

be done to prevent and combat that scourge. The full
and faithful implementation of international legal
obligations by all States is critical. The role and work
of the Security Council Committees with counterterrorism mandates in the prevention and response to
terrorist threats remain vitally important.

On 29 September, the importance of resolution 1540
(2004) as a key non-proliferation instrument was once
again demonstrated with the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013) on chemical weapons in Syria. That resolution,
while determining the use of the chemical weapons as
a threat to international peace and security, declared
that Member States should inform the Security Council
of any violation of resolution 1540 (2004), so that the
necessary measures could be taken. That decision adds
to the importance of the efforts directed towards the
universal and full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Azerbaijan strongly supports close cooperation and
effective coordination among the Committees and their
Groups of Experts. We take positive note of the efforts
undertaken by the Committees to that end during the
reporting period.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Committee’s commitment to seeking the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As we
approach the tenth anniversary of the resolution next
year, there is a substantial agenda before us. I look
forward to the continued active cooperation of all
stakeholders in addressing every aspect of the resolution
with a view to preventing the proliferation of WMDs to
and by non-State actors.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Oh Joon for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Oh Joon for their briefings and updates
on actions taken over the past six months. We are
grateful for their efforts and leadership of the Security
Council Committees with counter-terrorism mandates.
Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace and
security and to the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and social and economic
development of all States.
The international community has achieved
remarkable progress in countering terrorism.
Significant efforts have been undertaken by the
United Nations and other international, regional and
subregional organizations to promote cooperation and
coordination and to enhance the capacities of Member
States to tackle terrorism. Nevertheless, more should

8/32

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) continued to play a critical role in
promoting and facilitating the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We note
the introduction of new assessment tools, namely,
the overview for implementation assessment and the
detailed implementation survey, which were developed
to assist the Committee in continuing its constructive
dialogue with Member States. The special meetings
and events organized by the Committee have also
made an important contribution to raising awareness
on counter-terrorism issues, encouraging discussions
on new terrorist threats and challenges, and revealing
shortcomings in the fight against terrorism.
We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) for its close interaction
with Member States, its capacity-building activities
and its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which continue to contribute to the
effectiveness of both the Committee’s work and the full
implementation of counter-terrorism commitments.
The statement just made by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities clearly outlined
the evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. Over the past
six months, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has
remained actively engaged on the situations in Mali,
the Sahel, the Maghreb and the Middle East. We
commend the Committee for its efforts to ensure the
relevance and effectiveness of the sanctions regime
and to operationalize the procedural enhancements of
resolution 2083 (2012). We reiterate the importance of
the Office of the Ombudsperson as an essential element
of fairness in the application of the sanctions regime.

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Azerbaijan greatly appreciates the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
Member States. We welcome steady progress in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
reporting period. We take positive note of a number
of important events held in various countries, which
provided opportunities for enhancing the awareness
of the resolution globally and facilitating capacitybuilding assistance to States.
Areas of armed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorists, separatists
and other non-State actors. The accumulation of great
quantities of armaments and munitions in places
beyond the reach of international control and the risk of
the spread of weapons of mass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. That requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and stronger cooperation among them in
order to effectively address such challenges.
Last but not least, the war on terrorism cannot
and must not be used to target any religion or culture.
That principle must be part of any counter-terrorism
strategy. It is also important to continue to work
together to ensure that counter-terrorism measures by
Member States comply with their obligations under
international human rights law.
Since this is the last public meeting of the Council
this month, I would also like to express our appreciation
to you, Mr. President, and to your delegation for your
excellent leadership of the Council’s work in November.
We also wish the delegation of France a successful
presidency in December.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): The work of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction ,has never been as important to
the maintenance of international peace and security
as it is today. We have all witnessed the historic
turn of events in the second half of this year, mainly
resolution 2118 (2013), on the destruction of the Syrian
chemical stockpiles, and now the agreement reached
last Sunday by Iran and the Permanent Five countries
and Germany on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Rwanda congratulates all the stakeholders for those
achievements.

S/PV.7071

The contribution of the Sanctions Committee in all
of these and other positive developments is indelible.
Therefore, I would like to commend Ambassador Joon
Oh of the Republic of Korea, Ambassador Gary Francis
Quinlan of Australia and Ambassador Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for their efforts and activities
undertaken by their respective Committees under their
able leadership, as well as for the statements they made
today.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
on Al-Qaida, we commend the transparent work of the
Ombudsperson and support the regular review of the
Al-Qaida Sanctions List as essential to maintaining
accuracy and reponding to the changing nature of
terrorism threats. Therefore, we remain interested in
getting more information on the interaction between
the Office of the Ombudsperson and the Committee, as
well as on the cases that are under investigation.
Rwanda remains strongly concerned with the
evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
across North Africa, the Sahel region and the Horn of
Africa. In that context we look forward to the special
meeting on the Sahel region to be held in December
and to the Committee’s efforts to increase engagement
with States in the Sahel and the Magreb and to consider
ways to utilize the sanctions regime as an integral part
of their national and regional responses to the threat
of Al-Qaida. We believe that such initiatives by the
Committee will increase the ability of States to propose
listings and the capacity of monitoring teams to assist
countries in managing the listing process.
We should all remain resolute not to give room for
these terrorist groups to make entire regions of our
continent their stronghold. We therefore encourage
greater engagement between the Committee and
all States across the Sahel to utilize 1267 sanctions
regime in order to be even more responsive in terms
of anticipating the threat, adapting and updating the
regime to reflect challenges on the ground.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, Rwanda recognizes that
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remains
a global challenge to this day. It is firmly committed to
the non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery by non-State
actors. There is no doubt that the new developments in

13-584329/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Syria and now Iran regarding their chemical weapons
and nuclear programmes, respectively, may be a turn
of trends. This will require close follow-through by
the Committee, and we will be ready to support, where
necessary, any modifications to the sanctions regimes
to push forward the agenda of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. However, we need to
remain vigilant and take seriously the observations and
warnings by countries of the region, which are the first
potential targets of these deadly weapons.
Rwanda looks forward to the African Union’s
scheduled workshop for States Members of the United
Nations on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), to be held in Addis Ababa next month. We
are told Ambassador Oh Joon will attend as Chair of
the Committee for resolution 1540 (2004), along with
experts of the panel. We believe that the practice of
workshops on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), especially those organized for African States
must be pursued in order to assist the remaining
non-reporting African countries in the preparation of
their reports.
We are encouraged that more countries are
submitting their national reports, as Rwanda did, and
we call on all remaining countries to do so with the
support of the Committee, if required. We hope that
all countries will be on board by the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004), in April next year. Rwanda
takes this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
1540 Committee in raising global awareness on that
resolution, in strengthening the capacity of States
to improve mechanisms for sharing best practices,
and in increasing efforts to address the issue of
proliferation-financing, including through the provision
of relevant technical assistance.
Much has been achieved by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in destroying or weakening terrorist
networks since the beginning of the war on terror.
However, given the current trend in global terror acts,
the war is not yet over. The terrorists are changing their
modus operandi and the recruitment nets are widely
set. The war on terror is complicated by continued arms
supplies by some States Members of the United Nations
to non-State actors. If we do not change the way we do
our business, we can expect a prolonged campaign. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the donor community should provide tangible
technical and financial support to States affected by
terrorists. That support should focus on youth, education,

10/32

27/11/2013

job creation and development projects. In that regard,
Rwanda welcomes Mr. Tony Blair’s briefing to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
on the role of education in fighting extremists.
With regard to the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), Rwanda welcomes the collaboration of the
United Nations and such specialized agencies as
the FATF in advancing the United Nations mandate
on combating terrorism. We therefore welcome
the strategies adopted by the two organs aimed at
streamlining and strengthening their cooperation in
fighting against the financing of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We also welcome the
FATF recommendations in support of countries in
their implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
In conclusion, it is encouraging that the three
Committees are closely cooperating on key thematic
areas of interest to all by coordinating project
implementation, regularly exchanging information
on best practices, and improving collaboration with
regional and subregional organizations. We encourage
them to strengthen such cooperation, particularly
by implementing the specific recommendations
Ambassador Oh Joon presented in the joint statement
of the Chairs of the three Committees. We once again
commend the Committees’ efforts in enhancing the
visibility of the United Nations counter-terrorism
activities, the fight against weapons of mass destruction,
and cooperation with global and regional organizations
aimed at making this world a safer and better place.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Two months after the deadly attacks in Nairobi, where
Al-Shabaab slaughtered over 60 civilians and wounded
hundreds more, and over a month since the suicide
bombing in Volgograd that took the lives of six innocent
people and injured more than 30, we are again and
again reminded that terrorism remains one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security. As
we adapt to the evolving terrorist landscape, we must
continue to work as one United Nations to respond to
those challenges and threats.
The Security Council’s three counter-terrorism
Committees play a crucial role in stemming the
growth of Al-Qaida, boosting the capacities of States
to counter-terrorism, and ensuring that weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) stay out of terrorists’ hands.
We commend the Council’s continued commitment

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to promoting the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which have helped
to build policy, legal and institutional frameworks for
Member States and regional organizations to counter
terrorism. As always, we are grateful to the Chairs of
these committees — the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea — for
their excellent work.
The Security Council sanctions against Al-Qaida
are today preventing terrorists from travelling
internationally and from raising money to fund acts
of terror. But those sanctions are effective only when
they are implemented fully. That is why bolstering
implementation must be the Committee’s first priority.
We are encouraged that the Committee has endorsed
the Monitoring Team’s recommendation to engage with
States, in confidence, to understand situations where
sanctions are not being implemented. If necessary, the
Monitoring Team can then work with Member States
to rectify any issues and provide the Committee with
recommendations to tighten enforcement in such
instances. We hope that the Monitoring Team and
the Committee will continue to explore ways to deal
with these cases of non-compliance. We also support
a focused effort to strengthen Member States’ legal
and technical capacities to implement the assets freeze,
travel ban and arms embargo.
The United States recently contributed $400,000 to
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) to provide technical assistance to
help countries develop national capacities, to propose
listings and to implement the sanctions. We encourage
others to support these and other initiatives. We also
continue to support the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We welcome
Assistant Secretary-General Laborde’s appointment
and look forward to working with him and his team.
Almost a decade after its creation, CTED has
become an indispensable player in the United Nations
efforts to identify trends in terrorism, diagnose
the capacity gaps of Member States, and facilitate
funding for capacity-building projects. These will
allow countries to develop the capacities to deal with
terrorism and related threats within their borders and
regions. The United States supports CTED’s work
on issues as diverse as strengthening border security
in the Sahel, boosting the capacity of civilian courts
to prosecute terrorists, and training judges and law
enforcement officials in South Asia. Since 2011, we

S/PV.7071

have funded $8.4 million in capacity-building projects
to support the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and the wider United Nations counter-terrorism legal
and policy framework.
We continue to believe that greater interdependence
and collaboration between CTED, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and CTITF, as well as
non-United Nations actors, such as the Global CounterTerrorism Forum, can better insure a more effective
whole-of-United-Nations approach to countering
terrorism and the violent ideology that underpins it.
To prevent and respond to terrorist threats around
the globe, over the long term our collective efforts must
be comprehensive and address the political, social and
economic drivers of the instability that can create the
space for terrorists and violent extremists to operate
and recruit. In many cases, the most effective way to
address terrorist threats over the long term will be not
through training and equipping the military or security
services, but through non-counter-terrorism tools and
programmes designed to build the basic capacities of
civilian institutions in particular countries to provide
justice, education, jobs and liberty to local citizens.
That is why we must continue to encourage CTED
to work closely with development actors, such as the
United Nations Development Programme and others, as
it carries out its work.
The efforts of non-State actors to gain access to
weapons of mass destruction or help others to do so
remain among the greatest challenges to international
security. We applaud the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for its adoption of a
more forward-looking strategic approach in its twelfth
programme of work, which will help the international
community to better address those threats. A few
examples of how that has been put into action include
an increase in the number of official country visits,
unprecedented work with parliamentarians via the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, and the Committee’s recent
request to States and international organizations to
submit information on effective practices and lessons
learned.
The United States believes that effective monitoring
constitutes an essential element in fostering the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, the United States recently submitted additional
information on the steps it has taken and continues to
take to meet its obligation. In particular, for the first

13-5843211/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

time we included information that shows the United
States has put in place measures to implement all of our
200-plus obligations.
Next year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption resolution 1540 (2004). We look forward
to working with the Committee, the United Nations
Office on Disarmament Affairs and other bodies to
use this milestone to reinvigorate efforts to implement
the resolution fully and reduce the threat posed by the
nexus of non-State actors and WMD.
The United Nations has created a plethora of
committees and entities that are dedicated to responding
to the changing threats terrorism poses. The measure of
our success, however, will be determined not by how
many committees we create or how many projects we
implement, but by how many lives we save. We must
continue to coordinate our efforts and work as one
United Nations to rid the world of that pervasive threat.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed Loulichki
and Oh Joon — Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), respectively — for their comprehensive
briefings today. We appreciate the coordination
between the three Committees and the efforts being
made by them to promote dialogue and transparency
with Member States.
Pakistan’s comprehensive approach to counterterrorism is based on three D’s — deterrence,
development and dialogue. Deterrence is necessary
to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate terrorists
and their outfits. Development helps meet basic
human needs, build community resilience and prevent
terrorism. Dialogue is equally important, and it must
be allowed to continue according to national priorities.
Those who are willing to renounce violence should be
brought back to societal and national mainstreams.
Terrorists adapt to new conditions. Their tactics
continue to take more sinister forms. Terrorists use
new technologies and the Internet to store, transmit and
manipulate information for recruitment and incitement.
They use information technology to plan and finance
their activities. Counter-terrorism efforts also need to

12/32

27/11/2013

adapt to those challenges and to develop strategies for
real-time responses.
We should address the root causes of terrorism.
Deprivation, unresolved conflicts, marginalization,
exclusion and stereotyping often create conditions for a
drift towards terrorism. Terrorism and extremism should
not be associated with any religion, race, ethnicity,
faith, value system, culture or society. That said, the
universal norm of zero tolerance for terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations should be strengthened.
We agree with the Chairman of the Al-Qaida
Committee that Al-Qaida has evolved in various
regions with diverse franchises. The second special
meeting of the 1989 (2011) Committee, with its focus
on the complementarity between the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, created new synergies for holistic
solutions. Al-Qaida has changed in many ways. The
phenomenon of individuals radicalized by extremist
websites is rampant. Terrorists now use electronic safe
havens to host websites for inspiration and training.
The Al-Qaida sanctions regime should continue to be
made more effective, targeted and evidence-based by
using clear, fair and transparent procedures.
We support the efforts being made to strengthen the
role of the Ombudsperson by expanding her mandate to
the listing issues and by extending it to other sanctions
regimes. A large number of recommendations made by
the Ombudsperson has led to the delisting of individuals
and entities. That requires the Committee to improve
and refine the quality of the listing process. The biggest
challenge to the sanctions regime comes from court
cases. Questions of due process and effective remedy
are at the heart of courts’ deliberations. A number of
listings have been challenged in Pakistan courts.
The 18 July judgement of the European Union
Court of Justice in the case of Commission, Council,
United Kingdom v. Yassin Abdullah Kadi, established
a new precedent in the implementation of the United
Nations sanctions regime for a judicial review of listing
procedures for a fair balance between the maintenance
of international peace and security and the protection
of fundamental rights and freedoms of the person
concerned. It also prescribes concrete and detailed, not
abstract and superficial verification of the allegations.
While acknowledging improvements in the listing and
delisting procedures, the judgement underlines that the
guarantee of effective judicial protection has not been

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

fully provided to the listed individual. The judgement
may well set new standards for the judicial review of
Security Council decisions in other areas whenever a
balance needs to be struck between the protection of
human rights and the maintenance of international
peace and security.
We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
efforts to build the capacities of States to implement
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We welcome
the appointment of Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde as Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). We are confident that
his experience and outstanding leadership will be
helpful in the effective implementation of the CTED
mandate. CTED’s work in devising new assessment
tools, such the overview of implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey, will help
establish a meaningful dialogue on technical assistance
to Member States. We also appreciate CTED’s focus on
the assets freeze, the prosecution of terrorism cases, the
strengthening of the capacity of central authorities, and
the protection of witnesses of terrorist incidents.
CTED seminars and workshops on specific themes
in various regions have been useful. In Islamabad last
month, Pakistan hosted the seventh regional workshop
for judges, prosecutors and police officers in South
Asia on effectively countering terrorism. The workshop
was aimed at strengthening cooperation among
professionals working in the field of counter-terrorism.
The war against terrorism must be prosecuted
within the framework of international law. The use
of armed drones in the border areas of Pakistan is a
continued violation of our sovereignty, international
law, international human rights and humanitarian law.
In that context, the Secretary-General has called for
adherence to the recognized principles of distinction
and proportionality. The use of armed drones results in
casualties among innocent men, women and children,
and leads to disaffection, violence, alienation and
psychosocial trauma among the population centres hit
by drones. It is also detrimental to our efforts to conduct
dialogue and eliminate extremism and terrorism. The
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Nawaz Sharif, has
called for the immediate cessation of drone strikes
against Pakistan’s territory.
Pakistan fully supports the shared goal of preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee and

S/PV.7071

its Group of Experts play a complementary role to the
treaty-based regimes and international organizations
on non-proliferation issues. The full implementation
by States parties of their respective obligations,
arising from relevant WMD treaties, including the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States,
is essential and urgent. Pakistan will continue to be an
active partner of the international community in that
effort. Pakistan supports the measures undertaken
by the 1540 Committee and its experts in such areas
as awareness-raising, outreach, implementation,
assistance and capacity-building.
The long-term impact and success of the 1540
Committee depends, in our view, on the role that
the Committee can play in mobilizing assistance for
Member States. As the Committee promotes universal
reporting and implementation, assistance and capacitybuilding will serve as anchors for such activities.
Pakistan supports efforts to promote cooperation
and coordination between the subsidiary bodies of
the Council and their respective groups of experts.
That objective is best advanced when joint activities
are conducted in close consultation with all Council
members and are consistent with the mandate and
nature of the work of each subsidiary body and its
group of experts.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassadors
Gary Quinlan, Mohammed Loulichki and Oh Joon
for their informative briefings and for the capability
and dynamism with which they have been leading the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council under their
respective terms. We also appreciate the collaborative
spirit that they embody in making a joint presentation
covering their respective spheres of action. I would like
to make a few brief remarks on each of Committees,
beginning with the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
The sanctions against Al-Qaida play an important
role in the fight against terrorism by targeting the
operatives of the various factions or chapters of
Al-Qaida, depriving them of weapons and restricting
their ability to travel, which limits their ability to carry
out terrorist acts. In order for that regime to work
effectively, the process of including names on the list
and of removing them must be guided by the principles
of equality, due process, credibility and transparency.

13-5843213/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Likewise, sanctions should be applied in a diligent
manner.
We believe that the Office of the Ombudsperson
is of fundamental importance as an element of
impartiality in the implementation of the sanctions
regime. Further improvements to the authority of
the Ombudsperson and reforms to the procedures for
removing names from the list are important measures
in that regard. The Ombudsperson is now better placed
to assist persons in the process of having their cases
reviewed. We need to ensure that that is done in a way
that strengthens counter-terrorism capacity. We hope
that the positive contribution of the Ombudsperson
will create an example for other sanctions regimes,
and we congratulate Kimberly Prost for the degree of
independence, professionalism and courage with which
she has carried out her work.
We also believe that the list of persons and
entities subject to sanctions should keep pace with
the changing nature of the threat. In that regard, we
would like to applaud the role of the Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to address the need to express the changing
nature of the threat; the Team has recommended
ways for us to update the sanctions established under
that resolution. That sanctions regime is one of the
international community’s most important multilateral
tools in the fight against terrorism. Mr. Evans and his
team have our full support for effective discharge of
their mandate.
With respect to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, also known as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, we support the efforts
of that Committee to enhance the capabilities of
States to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), and that includes its activities of dissemination
and outreach. We appreciate the Committee’s focus
on the use of new communications technologies and
technical assistance in the Sahel region during its
special meetings earlier this year. We also found useful
the recent presentation by former Prime Minister Tony
Blair on the role of education in combating extremism.
We take note of the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on its work and that of its Executive
Directorate. We are in the midst of carefully reviewing
that report. We await with interest the forthcoming
negotiations to renew the mandate of the Committee,

14/32

27/11/2013

which will also provide an opportunity to strengthen
it. We salute Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde for his leadership
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which deserves special recognition for
keeping States apprised of developments in the risks
and threats posed by terrorist acts. The close interaction
between the Executive Directorate and Member States
is a prerequisite condition for the effectiveness of the
Committee’s work and for the full implementation of
commitments made in the fight to combat terrorism.
In that light, we encourage the Executive Directorate
to continue to promote capacity-building activities and
to propose technical assistance mechanisms to countries
that request it. We are particularly interested in seeing
greater emphasis placed on addressing the conditions
that favour the existence and spread of terrorism. We
believe that the effectiveness of our counter-terrorism
efforts is closely linked to our ability to successfully
confront the economic, social and political conditions
that often give rise to that phenomenon.
Finally, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the terrorist threat
is accompanied by the risk that weapons of mass
destruction might fall into the hands of terrorists. In
the current context of international peace and security,
it is more urgent than ever to make concrete progress in
our fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Guatemala is committed to the complete
elimination of such weapons, and we believe that that
should also be the goal of the international community.
In that context, resolution 1540 (2004) is an important
complementary tool in that fight.
The excellent work of the Group of Experts of
the 1540 Committee deserves mention at this point,
along with its efforts in the area of dissemination and,
in particular, its country visits. Without the support
that the Experts give Member States, particularly
developing countries, it would be difficult for many of
them to comply with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). The Group of Experts also provides essential
support to the Committee’s four Working Groups, to
which we can testify directly, since we have the honour
of coordinating the Working Group on Monitoring and
National Implementation.
My delegation considers the two elements that are
key to full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
are assistance and information exchange. In that regard,
we urge the Committee to continue to seek ways to

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

facilitate communication between donor countries and
Member States that request assistance. Beyond that,
transparency and information exchange are equally
crucial. We consider it essential that the recently begun
work on effective practices within the Committee
be continued and intensified with the aim of posting
compilations of them on the Committee’s website and
eventually producing a technical reference guide on the
subject. In that regard, we welcome such initiatives as
the recent peer review exercise undertaken by Croatia
and Poland, which, in our view, could serve as an
exemplar of effective practices and urge all Member
States who are interested to share with the Committee
other examples of experiences and practices that could
be useful.
As others have done, Guatemala welcomes the
interim agreement reached in Geneva on 24 November
between the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European
Union and the E3+3 countries on Iran’s nuclear
programme. It is an encouraging development and we
urge the international community to redouble efforts to
take advantage of that first step.
Lastly, we reaffirm our unequivocal commitment
to the cause of a safer world in which weapons of mass
destruction no longer exist, and our determination to
continue to work constructively and positively with
the Committee, both now and after our two years as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council are
over.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their
reports on the Committees they head. What they do is
an important contribution to strengthening the central
coordinating role of the United Nations and its Security
Council in the area of international cooperation on
anti-terrorism.
Unfortunately, despite all our efforts, terrorism
remains one of the chief threats to international peace
and security. We are reminded of this by the unceasing
terrorist attacks in various regions of the world that
claim the lives of innocent people, including children,
day after day. It is clear that terrorism is rapidly
adapting to new realities. Terrorists are making active
use of the latest advances in the field of information
and communications technologies. They recruit new
extremists in cyberspace, move freely across porous
borders and take advantage of gaps in criminal law.

S/PV.7071

One extremely dangerous trend today is how
terrorism has become woven into the fabric of regional
conflicts, a phenomenon that continues to have serious
explosive potential in North Africa, the Sahel, the
Middle East and the Afghanistan-Pakistan region.
Terrorist methods are widely used by anti-Government
groups in Syria. Eradicating the threat of terrorism can
only be achieved by intensifying the collective efforts
of all members of the international community, focused
around the United Nations, and in strict compliance
with international law.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism (CTC)
remains the cornerstone at the base of the entire
counter-terrorism architecture of the United Nations.
Ambassador Loulichki’s skilful chairmanship has
contributed in no small measure to its effective
functioning during the reporting period. In our view,
that the recent reforms improving the Committee’s
procedures and changing the format of its evaluation
documents, together with continuing the important
practice of sending visiting missions, are helping the
CTC fulfil its mandate under resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1963 (2010).
There is growing attention being paid, including
in the Security Council, to an integrated approach to
counter-terrorism with an emphasis on preventive
measures for combating this evil. In that connection, a
hugely important task is preventing the radicalization
of social attitudes and incitement to religious and
sectarian confrontations collisions all over the world.
It is therefore vital that States continue efforts, under
the auspices of the United Nations, to reduce the
attractiveness of terrorist activity and to combat the
production of terrorist ideology and violent extremism,
as well as terrorists’ use of the media and the Internet.
We believe it is important to strengthen the CTC’s
contacts with other structures and organizations in
order to expand the network of antiterrorist cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that regard,
we note the collaboration of the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) at the Conference on Terrorism
Issues for chiefs of special services and security and
law enforcement bodies held by the Federal Security
Service of the Russian Federation. We intend to continue

13-5843215/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the practice of holding briefings for representatives
from the Conference and the CTC.
We value the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) in assisting the CTC and
commend the energetic efforts of the new Executive
Director, Mr. Laborde, aimed at tackling the major
tasks facing CTED under his mandate. We hope that
the concerns we voice today will be taken into account
in the preparation of the draft resolution extending
CTED’s mandate, scheduled to be adopted next month.
The 1267/1989 Committee is one of the Security
Council’s most effective mechanisms in the field
of combating terrorism, and we would like to note
the active efforts of Ambassador Quinlan in his
capacity as its Chair. The Committee’s sanctions list
should adequately reflect the terrorist threat posed by
Al-Qaida, and we support proposals by Member States
for the inclusion of new entities on the list. We also
believe it is essential that the Committee react rapidly
to the changing nature of the threat of terrorism and
without unnecessary red tape when considering relevant
requests. In that context, it is regrettable that the
Committee has still not listed Storsjö, Djabrailov and
the non-governmental organization Imkander, whose
links to an Al-Qaida entity on the list, the terrorist
organization Imarat Kavkaz, are more than compelling.
The powers of the Ombudsman and the procedure
for considering delisting requests laid down in
resolution 2083 (2012) ensure an optimal level of
transparency in the Committee’s work. A more
important task, however, is improving the effectiveness
of the sanctions mechanisms, which are entirely
dependent on States’ implementing their obligations in
that area. Unfortunately, as practice has shown, there
are still unresolved problems here. Thus, for example,
despite paragraph 4 of resolution 2083 (2012), the
Kavkaz Centre website, the information arm of Imarat
Kavkaz, is still active.
The task established in resolution 1540 (2004)
of preventing weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery from falling into the hands of
terrorists remains relevant. Russia has consistently
pushed for the resolution’s implementation by every
State and with full recognition of the complexity and
long-term nature of its requirements. We are grateful
to Ambassador Joon Oh and his predecessor Kim Sook
for their effective leadership of the 1540 Committee,
and we note the useful work of Committee’s Group of

16/32

27/11/2013

Experts in giving them substantive support. Among
the Committee’s activities over the past six months,
we would highlight the efforts to help build States’
capacities to meet the requirements of resolution 1540
(2004).
The Committee continues to develop cooperation
with States and specialized international and regional
organizations. One of the outcomes of that work has
been the reduction in the number of States with reports
still pending, now that both Liberia and South Sudan
have submitted their first reports in implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We hope that further progress
in that area will take place next year, when we are due
to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution.
The adoption in September of resolution 2118 (2013)
on the destruction of the Syrian chemical-weapons
arsenal has again reaffirmed the role of resolution 1540
(2004) as a key non-proliferation instrument. We should
remember that States are now committed to briefing the
Security Council on any violations, so that the Council
can take appropriate steps. In the light of reports of the
use in Syria of chemical weapons by opposition armed
groups, a number of which are linked to Al-Qaida, that
point is particularly pertinent.
With regard to the further work of the Committee,
we believe that it is necessary to continue prioritizing
the provision of assistance to States. The coordinating
role of the Committee in the efforts of the international
community to comply with the resolution is extremely
important. For its part, Russia will continue to actively
participate in those activities, including in the context
of our cooperation with the member States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States on issues relating
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
set up pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
namely, the Ambassadors of Australia, Morocco and
the Republic of Korea, for introducing the reports on the
activities of their respective Committees and for their
significant contributions to the fight against terrorism.
I would also like to commend the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, for her delicate investigative work,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Group, which have
been carrying out their tasks in an exemplary manner.

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I wish to focus my statement on two main points:
the financing of terrorism and combating moneylaundering; and technical cooperation and assistance
aimed at countering those scourges. In the institutional
framework established by the United Nations for
combating terrorism, the three aforementioned
Committees are key elements. Cooperation among
those bodies not only contributes to the best possible
implementation of the relevant legal instruments in
that area, but also plays a major role in improving the
effectiveness of Security Council action.
In that regard, the growing synergy that exists
among those various bodies, on the one hand, and
between them and States, on the other, has been
extremely useful in enabling coherence in the efforts
of the various stakeholders and in the utilization of the
very limited resources at their disposal.
Togo welcomes in particular the ongoing
cooperation among the Committees when it comes to
outreach, country visits and cooperation with other
regional and subregional institutions, all of which
enable the Committees to grasp the specific needs of
States and institutions and to provide them with the
appropriate assistance.
One of the most effective means of fighting
terrorism is to prevent terrorist groups and actors from
accessing funds that allow them to perpetrate such acts.
Unfortunately, national authorities are ill-equipped to
detect such funds at their origin, for the simple reason
that they shift and mutate, flowing through both formal
and informal financial channels. One solution that
we believe would help rectify that situation is greater
cooperation among States, since many States continue
to act alone on that front, and, worse still, encounter
major difficulties in implementing Security Council
resolutions, which call for appropriate measures to
be taken, such as the freezing of assets and stopping
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and
travel bans. A number of reasons can explain those
shortcomings, including fear of the threat posed by
terrorism, the lack of financial resources, the lack of
appropriate infrastructure, porous borders, the absence
of appropriate human resources and insufficient
inter-institutional cooperation.
With regard to States’ efforts to combat moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism, despite
the multifaceted assistance States receive from the
specialized bodies, including the three Security
Council Committees, shortcomings persist, not owing

S/PV.7071

to a lack of will, but because it is often difficult for such
States, especially the least wealthy ones, to incorporate
in a comprehensive approach both national priorities
and international requirements. In that regard, it is
important that the three Committees continue to provide
all the aid and assistance required by States and fragile
regional institutions, which are nevertheless thoroughly
committed to the fight against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. Nonetheless, we believe
that the approach used by the Committees to build the
capacities of States should go further and engage civil
society and, in particular, private financial institutions
in the countries concerned, which participate on a
daily basis with States in the regulation and control of
financial flows.
If we want all States to develop mechanisms to
prevent and combat acts of terrorism in a way that
meets United Nations standards, such institutions and
States must be provided adequate support.
Given that the world is plagued by a proliferation of
terrorist acts and abductions for ransom, in particular
in Africa, it is important to take stock of the actions
already taken, so as to determine the actions and
initiatives that should be focused on how to strengthen
the fight against terrorism.
The celebration next year of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) provides an
excellent opportunity to evaluate the actions taken.
However, that cannot be done without collaboration
among the Committees, between the Committees and
States, among States themselves and between States
and financial institutions. It goes without saying that
the struggle must be pursued with full respect for
the rule of law and human rights, without which the
participation of all of us in the struggle to preserve
human life will be difficult to achieve.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish to join other
speakers in thanking the Chairs of the Committees,
Ambassadors Quinlan, Loulichki and Oh, for their
comprehensive briefings today but, above all, for their
strong leadership of the three important Committees.
Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat
to international peace and security. Since those
Committees last briefed the Security Council (see
S/PV.6964), we have seen many attacks by terrorist
groups, including the tragic attack against the Westgate
shopping mall in Nairobi that killed 67 civilians. The
work of those Committees is vital.

13-5843217/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

As was highlighted in Ambassador Quinlan’s
briefing, the threat from terrorism is evolving.
Terrorist propaganda is becoming more sophisticated.
It has now grown so sophisticated that we see the selfradicalization of individuals and small groups. We
know that in the United Kingdom, and we have seen the
effects of self-radicalization, most recently in London
with the killing of an off-duty soldier by individuals in
May 2013, an act that produced revulsion at home.
Terrorism is an international threat. It transcends
geographic borders and requires an international
response. But it can be disrupted with the right tools
and with a united effort. I believe we have seen evidence
of that here today. The Council must make the best
possible use of the tools available in order to counter
the threat.
Al-Qaida sanctions are vital for disrupting the
activities of terrorist actors. We support the Committee’s
effort to improve the implementation of Al-Qaida
sanctions, as outlined by the Chair, and urge Member
States to implement the regimes that we have agreed.
As terrorism evolves, sanctions must also evolve to
counter the threat. The United Kingdom commends the
agreement of the 1267 Committee to engage Member
States of the Sahel and Mahgreb regions next month.
The global reach of United Nations sanctions can be
a powerful tool to strengthen States’ own domestic
counter-terrorism efforts.
We think that Ambassador Quinlan is right to
hightlight the importance of clear and fair procedures
within the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. As others have
said, the Ombudsperson process is important to the
relevance and robustness of the regime and it deserves
the support of Member States. I think that there has
been a clear signal here today of the importance of that
role from members of the Security Council.
Next year is the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). There is much to celebrate. All
but 22 States have reported on their obligations to stem
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons to non-State actors. However, global fears that
terrorists may acquire weapons of mass destruction
persist. Countering that remains a strategic priority.
For States to comply with their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) and for that compliance to be
effectively implemented and monitored, all States
must comply with both the letter and the spirit of the
resolution. Evasive answers, such as those given by

18/32

27/11/2013

Syria on chemical weapons before September this year,
can cast doubt on a State’s commitment to effectively
account for and to protect its nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons. We have witnessed the destruction
and suffering inflicted by such weapons. Prohibiting
their use is the responsibility of all. Measurable and
sustained progress in that reagrd is the only way to
establish enduring global confidence.
The last time that we met to discuss counterterrorism, the United Kingdom stressed the need
for all relevant components of the United Nations
counter-terrorism system to work together and avoid
duplication (see S/PV.6964). Others have referred to
that today. We welcome the appointment of Jean-Paul
Laborde as Head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) earlier this year and
of Jehangir Khan as Head of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF). As others have
said, that new leadership must bring with it a new level
of coordination, with a clear allocation of activities
and responsibilities for assistance, reporting and
capacity-building. CTED should focus on conducting
assessments and on facilitating assistance. CTITF
should focus on its role in convening United Nations
entities to deliver capacity-building. There should
also be a more comprehensive and forward-looking
information-sharing matrix for United Nations counterterrorism activities. That would assist Member States
in planning their coordination with and support for
such activities.
We support Ambassador Loulichki’s statement
that effective counter-terrorism measures and respect
for human rights are intertwined. We welcome the
integration of human rights considerations in CTED’s
work and the briefing of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to the CounterTerrorism Committee in October. Our work on counterterrorism cannot become static nor can it be carried out
in isolation. Only though a unified, complementary and
evolving approach can the international community
effectively deal with the scourge of terrorism. The
United Kingdom urges the Committees to redouble
their efforts to make their work relevant and effective
and to adapt them to meet the challenges of the evolving
threat of terrorism.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Like previous speakers, I wish to thank the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) — Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Oh Joon, respectively — for their
briefings and for the commitment with which they lead
the work of the Committees. I thank our Australian
colleague for his joint briefing, which underscored the
ongoing cooperation among the three Committees and
their panels of experts.
The briefings of our colleagues described the
efforts of the United Nations to combat terrorism.
However, such efforts will be effective only if all
Member States take the necessary steps to meet their
obligations. Today’s meeting is important in that regard
as it enables the Council to show all Member States what
its subsidiary bodies are doing to counter terrorism and
to raise awareness with regard to those activities.
In the same spirit of transparency and outreach,
as Ambassador Quinlan said in his joint briefing, the
Chairs of the three Committees and of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1718 (2006), 1737
(2006) and 1988 (2011) spoke in the presence of the
President of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
at an open briefing on 18 November on the respective
roles of the Security Council and the FATF in the fight
against terrorism and proliferation. That meeting was
useful, we hope, in briefing Member States sooner on
the measures decided by the Council and the relevant
recommendations and guidance of the FATF and in
underscoring the assistance that the Committees, their
panels of experts and the FATF can provide to Member
States.
The sanctions against Al-Qaida have an important
role in the fight against terrorism. I pay tribute to the
Monitoring Team for the excellent work that it continues
to undertake, which clearly shows the changing natuire
of the terrorist threat. The sanctions list is continually
updated so as to ensure the relevance and effectiveness
of the sanctions regime. We also commend the activities
undertaken by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities in underscoring the
implementation of the sanctions. The special meeting of
the Committee on the changing nature of the terrorist

S/PV.7071

threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Sahel and the Mahgreb,
to be held on 3 December, seems particularly timely in
that regard.
We can never stress enough that the fight against
terrorism should be guided by respect for fundamental
democratic values and the principle of the rule of law.
Luxembourg fully supports the work of the Office of
the Ombudsperson and thanks Ms. Kimberley Prost
for the examplary way in which she carries out her
mandate. We call on all Member States to continue to
cooperate fully with the Office of the Ombudsperson.
We commend the steps taken in recent years to ensure
the clear, fair and transparent procedures in the
context of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. It is
important to continue to work for the improvement of
those procedures. The authority and legitimacy of the
measures imposed by the Council depends on that. In
that regard, we await with interest next year’s review of
resolution 2083 (2012).
Luxembourg also acknowledges the important work
carried out by the 1373 Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
particularly with regard to their outreach role. I would
like to take this opporunity to welcome the new CTED
Executive Director, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, We are
certain that he will continue his predecessor’s excellent
work and assure him of Luxembourg’s full support for
the activities under his leadership. As the end of his
term approaches, we would like to pay a strong tribute
to Ambassador Loulichki and his team for the work
accomplished at the helm of the 1373 Committee, in
particular in building the capacity of the countries of
the Sahel.
The year 2014 marks the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), which plays a key role in curbing
the threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. That continues to seriousouly
threaten international peace and security. Resolution
1540 (2004) will be effective only if all Member
States are determined to implement its provisions. We
encourage all new initiatives in that regard and await
with interest the lessons learned from the peer review
process on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), led by Croatia and Poland.
During the period under consideration, Liberia
and South Sudan submitted their reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to the
Committee. We support the objective of the Committee’s

13-5843219/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Chair to achieve the universality of reports by the
end of 2014. Cooperation, information-sharing and
outreach and assistance activities will make it possible
to strengthen the capacity of Member States to deal
with the threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We encourage the 1540 Committee and its
panel of experts to persevere in their efforts to match
the requests for and offers of assistance in that regard.
Ms. Poroli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, on behalf of my delegation, I should like through
you, Sir, to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their
briefings and for their laudable work at the head of their
respective subsidiary bodies.
Argentina believes that the United Nations has a key
role to play in multilateral action and that the General
Assembly, the Security Council and their subsidiary
bodies are the most appropriate forums for effective
efforts to counter terrorism. We also believe that
ongoing cooperation among the Committees — whose
work we are considering today — and their Groups of
Experts strengthens coordination and consistency in
the activities of the United Nations in this sphere.
I underscore the importance of the open
briefings — held jointly by the Chairmen of the
three Committees and of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1718 (2006) ,
on the role of the Security Council and the Financial
Action Task Force to halt the financing and proliferation
of terrorism. We believe that, generally speaking, the
holding of these open briefings on a regular basis is
a good practice that strengthens the link between the
Security Council and all Member States. We therefore
encourage the Committees to pursue their efforts to
that end.
I should like to refer to the work of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities. Like the Chairman of the Committee,
we stress the importance of following clear and fair
procedures. We believe that it remains essential to
ensure respect for due process. We highlight the work of
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for its professionalism
and independence. On the basis of this experience,
we understand that it may be possible to consider
strengthening her mandate or extending it to all the
Sanctions Committees.

20/32

27/11/2013

We share the Chairman’s concern that the regime
should remain relevant and effective. The consolidated
list must therefore be reviewed periodically by the
Committee in order to ensure its quality and utility to the
Member States when they implement it. We appreciate
the work done by the Monitoring Team in that regard.
The availability of the list in the six official languages
of the Organization is of particular importance in that
respect and has a direct link to its implementation by
the competent authorities. In that regard, I particularly
welcome the efforts of the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Quinlan, and his team to resolve this
problem. We also appreciate the cooperation of the
Secretariat in that respect.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism plays a
crucial role in making the international community’s
fight against terrorism more effective. The CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
makes an essential contribution in its assistance to the
Committee and in building the capacities of States. My
delegation therefore participates with great interest
in the negotiations on the Committee’s report to the
Council on CTED’s work with a view to the review of
its mandate. We also hope that CTED will continue to
cooperate in building States’ capacities, and believe
that respect for human rights should remain a crosscutting issue in its own work and that of the Committee,
as well as in the overall fight against terrorism.
Resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee
established pursuant to it are essential instruments
in preventing weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems from falling into the hands of
terrorists. However, the efficacy of international efforts
to that end hinges on the adoption and implementation
of the requisite national measures and on regional
coordination. We are therefore convinced that resolution
1540 (2004) should be implemented at the regional
level, in which the effective control of technology and
dual-use materials is made possible by the effective
harmonization of operational and legislative efforts in
each region.
I underscore the importance for States to brief the
Committee on their practical efforts to implement the
resolution, in follow-up to the note of the Committee
Chairman. Such practices can be models that may
be adapted to the realities of other regions, thereby
enhancing their effective implementation. As we
approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

resolution next year, we highlight the efforts of the
Committee Chairman to achieve universality in its
implementation and the presentation of reports. My
delegation fully supports such efforts.
In conclusion, I reiterate our support for initiatives
that help to improve transparency in the work of the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies and that
strengthen coordination and cooperation among the
three Committees and their Groups of Experts. As
we understand it, greater synergy among the three
Committees would improve the Security Council’s
contribution to the fight against terrorism and allow
the matter to be addressed in a more comprehensive
manner.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I thank Ambassadors Quinlan,
Loulichki and Oh for their briefings and their leadership
of their respective Committees. I also associate myself
with the statement to be made ​​by the observer of the
European Union.
I should like to speak briefly about each of the
three Committees, beginning with the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. The threat of Al-Qaida is unfortunately still
alive, as the Nairobi attack a few weeks ago and the
murder this month of two French journalists near Kidal,
Mali, reminded us.
If the fight against Al-Qaida is to progress, we must
remain vigilant in the implementation of sanctions.
It is therefore crucial that the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee continue to work closely with all Member
States in order to ensure the effective implementation
of the sanctions regime and the regular updating of the
list, which must optimally reflect the state of the threat.
In this regard, we welcome the Committee’s holding of
meetings dedicated to the fight against the spread of this
threat, such as that held in April on Mali and that to be
held in early December on the Sahel. The organization
of such events, involving the States of the region in
the debate on sanctions against Al-Qaida, ensures that
the regime responds to the new challenges in the fight
against that organization in areas particularly affected
by this threat.
Above and beyond the importance we attach to the
effective implementation sanctions, we also feel it to be
essential that they respect the fundamental freedoms
of persons on the list and that the sanctions regime

S/PV.7071

has adequate procedural safeguards. Ambassador
Quinlan was right to insist on that point in his briefing.
We welcome the outstanding work of Ombudsman
Kimberley Prost, who has been doing critical work to
that end for more than three years.
Over the past year, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism has done rich work and focused on pursuing
several initiatives, in perfect tune with topics of interest
to the Council. On the Sahel, for example, several events
have taken place, including a conference convened in
March in Rabat on border control in the Sahel, and
the organization of a special meeting on the Sahel in
September.
Next month, the Security Council will renew the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. I
wish to make two comments in that regard.
In its new mandate, it is essential that the Committee
continue to attach the greatesy importance to the due
implementation by Member States of the Council’s
decisions concerning the fight against terrorism,
namely, resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).
In recent years, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate has carried out a significant
number of visits to inform the Committee on the status
of implementation of those resolutions by Member
States. It will now be crucial to pursue that dialogue
with Member States by ensuring regular follow-up to
those visits.
The second point I would like to make is that it
is essential that the Committee continue to accord the
highest importance to respect for human rights in the
fight against terrorism. In that respect, I would like to
welcome the fact that on 24 October Ms. Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, paid a
visit to the Committee. I wish to highlight that regular
dialogue between the Committee and the Office of the
High Commissioner is an excellent practice, one that
should continue.
I would like to pay tribute to Mike Smith, who has
done an outstanding job at the head of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate. I take this
opportunity to congratulate his successor, Mr. JeanPaul Laborde, on assuming his functions and wish him
every success.
Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
1540 Committee. I wish to recall that the proliferation

13-5843221/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and their
means of delivery and related materials and the risk
of them falling into the hands of terrorists are real
threats, and that States should maintain and strengthen
their commitment to fighting those threats. The
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) plays an
important role in the prevention of those threats, and
the progress achieved since its adoption in 2004 is
important.
Today, a majority of States around the world have
adopted measures to include the provisions of that
resolution in their national legislation. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of the South Korean chair
aimed at encouraging the handful of countries that
have not yet done so to report to the Committee on
the implementation of that resolution in their national
legislation.
However, for those reports to be relevant, they must
above all be sincere, and that is not always the case. In
that respect, the 1540 Committee received a new report
from Syria in May. In that report, as in previous ones,
Damascus once again failed to mention the existence of
its military chemical programme. Since the chemical
attack at Ghouta, in August, Syria has acknowledged
that it owns several tons of chemical weapons. Under
international pressure, it agreed to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention and, consequently, to destroy
those weapons. Syria’s use of chemical weapons against
its own population reminds us that we must remain
vigilant with regard to Syrian statements. We must not
lower our guard.
I note that the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), on the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons,
which requires that the Council be informed of any
violation of resolution 1540 (2004), will contribute to
improving the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and thus to strengthening our collective security.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the fight
against terrorism must be coordinated. We also rely
heavily on the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and its working groups to make concrete progress
in that coordination. That will strengthen the coherence
and visibility of the United Nations efforts in the fight
against terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

22/32

27/11/2013

I thank Ambassador Quinlan, Ambassador Loulichki
and Ambassador Joon Oh for their briefings. China
appreciates the important contributions made by
Ambassador Loulichki, during his tenure as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
to the effective implementation of the Committee’s
mandate and the coordination of international efforts
in the fight against terrorism. China also expresses
its appreciation to Ambassadors Quinlan and Joon Oh
for their leadership as the Chairs, respectively, of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is one of the
main instruments at the disposal of the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, in the fight
against terrorism. China supports the Committee in its
efforts to improve communication with the countries
concerned, strengthen the activities for the review
of listing and delisting on an ongoing basis, conduct
regular consideration of the sanctions list as planned,
and implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 2083 (2012)
in a comprehensive and accurate manner, with a view to
contributing further to the cause of counter-terrorism at
the international level. China supports the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in its activities
under the leadership of the Committee and notes the
efforts by the Office of the Ombudsperson to improve
the fairness and transparency of the mechanism. We
hope that Member States will actively cooperate with
the Committee in its activities in order to preserve
the authority and effectiveness of the United Nations
sanctions mechanism.
China appreciates the many activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC).
China supports the CTC and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) in their continued efforts to promote the
implementation of the Council’s relevant resolutions by
improving assessments of resolution implementation,
organizing relevant meetings and events, conducting
country visits and providing the necessary technical
guidance to Member States, upon request. China hopes
that the CTC will continue its dialogue and interaction
with Member States and assist them in strengthening
capacity-building for the fight against terrorism. As the

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Security Council is going to consider the extension of
the mandate of CTED, China will take an active and
constructive part in the consideration of the relevant
draft resolution.
Over the past six months, thanks to the joint efforts
of the members of the 1540 Committee and the panel
of experts, the programme of work of the Committee
has been carried out in a steady manner. Its outreach
activities in particular have raised awareness of the
resolution among Member States and have enhanced
international assistance and cooperation.
Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). A universal,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of
the resolution depends on Member States playing a
central role and requires the Committee to carry out
its mandate in letter and in spirit. China supports the
Committee’s efforts, through solid and steady efforts
and in accordance with its mandate, to increase the
number of reporting States, to compile experience in
the context of the resolution’s implementation, and to
promote international assistance and cooperation in
its main activities. China will continue to work with
all parties in a joint effort to enhance the role that the
United Nations plays, as it should, in the prevention of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month and thank you
for convening this important meeting.
We have listened with interest to the briefings
by the three Chairs of the Committees on the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism. They discussed the activities of the
three Committees since the most recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.6964).
Despite the many threats posed by terrorism, the
United Nations remains the main forum for coordinating
international efforts to achieve a world free from that
scourge. The Security Council has been committed that
idea and has adopted a number of resolutions on fighting
terrorism. In addition, the General Assembly has
adopted the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism

S/PV.7071

Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288). All of
those efforts are aimed at coordinating the efforts of the
Member States to combat terrorism.
The United Nations counter-terrorism entities must
step up their efforts and improve their effectiveness.
They must refrain from politicizing the issue of
combating terrorism so as not to give in to the
temptation to justify terrorism or the temptation on the
part of some to classify terrorism as either benign or
not benign.
Despite all of this, and despite the many efforts
and the many resolutions on combating terrorism, the
fact remains that terrorism continues to increase and is
starting to employ new methods. As that has been noted
by many of our colleagues who have taken the floor
before me, I will not repeat what was said.
We are now witnessing a new surge in extremism
and radicalization that is producing unprecedented acts
of violence, contrary to the belief held by some that
terrorist organizations, led by Al-Qaida, have become
weaker and that the world has become a safer place after
the death of Osama bin Laden. Sadly, the fact is that
terrorism poses a serious threat to international peace
and security, and certain entities and their branches
affiliated with that organization are trying to find
bases from which they can relaunch their activities in
new places, taking advantages of conditions in certain
countries and exploiting the support and unlimited
sponsorship offered to them by certain States Members
of the United Nations who have found in terrorism a
tool to benefit their own foreign policy and narrow
interests.
Since the crisis in Syria began, my country’s
delegation has unremittingly tried to shed light on
the increasing terrorist danger that is targeting my
country, Syria. In addition to our statements at the
United Nations, in which we have sought to explain
the various aspects and types of terrorism that we are
being subject to, on behalf of my Government, I have
sent 259 official letters to the Secretary-General and
successive Presidents of the Security Council on all
issues related to the fight against terrorism. I have in my
hand the entire file — 259 official letters, 76 of which
refer to terrorist activities by Al-Qaida, in addition to
nine addressed to the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and four addressed to Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We

13-5843223/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

have been waiting for an official response on practical
measures undertaken by the Council through the three
Counter-Terrorism Committees with respect to the
terrorism that is targeting my country. In other words,
we are still awaiting a response to 259 letters addressed
to the Security Council on the struggle against terrorism
in Syria.
In those letters, we have drawn the Council’s and
the Committees’ attention to barbaric terrorism acts
committed by armed terrorist groups, some of which
are affiliated with Al-Qaida, the majority of which are
cross-border extremists and foreign mercenaries who are
pursuing a proxy war on Syrian territory. Those acts have
targeted institutions of the State, infrastructure, basic
public services, hospitals, educational establishments,
religious shrines, monuments, museums, holy places,
national civil service administrations, clerics and
peacekeepers of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.
Those attacks have taken a different turn recently
by focusing on civil targets, arbitrarily firing mortars
against residents and Islamic and Christian shrines.
They have also targeted children in schools, school
buses, in an effort to deprive children of their education
and maintain the ignorance that fuels extremist views
and attitudes. Yesterday, 40 Saudi mercenaries were
killed by the Syrian Armed Forces. One of them was
the son of the head of the Saudi Arabian Royal Guard
Regiment. Mortars were also fired on a school yesterday
in Damascus, killing dozens of children. Yesterday, in
the city of Deir Atiyah, terrorists and mercenaries who
had crossed the Syrian-Lebanese border killed eight
doctors and 10 nurses and many patients in the hospital
there.
Despite the fact that the Al-Nusra Front and its
head, Abu Mohammed al-Golani, are listed in the list
established and maintained by the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) with respect
to individuals, groups, undertakings and other entities
associated with Al-Qaida, despite the sanctions imposed
against that entity, despite the Council’s October 2013
condemnation of the increased terrorist attacks carried
out by Al-Qaida in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15), despite the
Council’s call on all parties to commit to putting an
end to terrorist acts perpetrated by such organizations
and individuals, despite the Council’s reaffirmation in
resolution 2118 (2013) that all Member States refrain
from providing any form of support to non-State actors
that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess,

24/32

27/11/2013

transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery — despite all of the
foregoing, those efforts have not been commensurate
with the challenge posed by international terrorism
targeting Syrian and the entire Syrian people.
That is why we think that we all need to take
additional steps to bolster those measures in order to
achieve results, namely, addressing the concerns that
we have conveyed to the Council and which are closely
aligned with the authorities and competencies of those
Committees; preventing the funding and arming of
terrorist groups and refraining from sponsoring them;
combating extremist radical thought and fanaticism,
regardless of its sources; calling on States to control
their borders and stop the transit of extremists and
terrorists who are seeking to travel to Syria.
In that regard, I want to cite the article from The
Independent that came out yesterday, which said that a
British extremist, Anjem Choudary, organized a network
to send terrorist mercenaries to Syria. According to
Choudary himself, he sent over 300 people. The article
in The Independent states that there are mercenaries
coming from France and elsewhere, and it is the same
problem.
In accordance with resolution 1624 (2005),
Member States need to be engaged in stopping the
incitement to terrorism and hatred in the media or in
official statements, the procurement of weapons for
terrorists and the political, financial and media support
for terrorist groups. We need to combat the exploitation
of the Internet and information and communication
technologies that are being used to incite terrorists
and target young people in different parts of the world.
We need to thwart the attempts by terrorist groups to
access to and use of weapons of mass destruction in
my country, such as what happened in Khan al-Assal
in March and in Ghouta in August. We have submitted
documents to the 1540 Committee which prove that
terrorist organizations active in Syria are trying to obtain
chemical weapons through neighbouring countries. We
have also drawn the Committee’s attention to reports
about these attempts, as well as shipments which were
seized in Turkey and Lebanon, and given it the names
of individuals who have been arrested red-handed..
The Governments that are financing, training
and facilitating terrorist elements need to be held
accountable. Those terrorists are moving throughout
Syria and being sponsored by States, and those States

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

need to be treated as participants in terrorist activities
because they are killing Syrians. Those States must be
made to stop those destructive practices, which violate
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and 2118 (2013). They
are also in contravention of the Geneva Declaration.
Therefore, we need to reach a settlement on the Syrian
crisis through a Syrian-led political process based on
national dialogue among the Syrians themselves.
My country has for many decades constantly
called for an end to hegemonic colonization. We have
incessantly called for the sanctity of the commitment to
the non-interference in the internal affairs of States. On
many ocassions, my country has affirmed its conviction
regarding the role of the United Nations in combatting
terrorism. The struggle can only be carried out on
an individual basis. Therefore, we want to draw the
Council’s attention to another form of interference and
to more attenpts to dominate other countries. In other
words, that is what is being done by certain Member
States who openly fund terrorist acts and terrorists, in
order to impose their own political agenda and to take a
stand against systems of power.
All this falls within the comptenence of the Council
and the counter-terrorism committees. Combatting
the terrorism from which Syria is suffering is vital to
reach a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis and for
the political process in Syria to gain credibility. Our
statement is an appeal to the Security Council to show
solidarity with the Syrian Government in the face of
the terrorism that has claimed the lives of thousands
of people. Much like in 2003, when we were members
of the Council and called on the Council to make the
Middle East a zone free of all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction, we now call on the Council to make the
Middle East a zone free of all kinds of terrorism as a
step towards eliminating terrorism at the global level.
One last comment. I told the Council what had
happened yesterday. I forgot to mention how missiles
yesterday struck the Social Education Institute in
Damascus, where disabled patients were being treated,
as well as an orphanage. That led to the death of many
disabled people in those two institutions, many of them
children.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Gilles Marhic, head of the Legal Section,
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.

S/PV.7071

Mr. Marhic: 1 have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates, Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely and useful briefing. 1 should
also like to thank the Chairs of each Committee for
their extensive updates and summary of actions and for
the initiatives taken within the last six months.
The recent dreadful attacks in Kenya were further
evidence — as if any were needed — that terrorism
remains one of the major global threats. The fight
against terrorism is one of the highest priorities of
the European Union and its member States and should
continue to be a priority for the United Nations. In that
context, we are convinced that the work of all three
Committees is of vital significance, as it contributes to
the prevention of and response to terrorist threats.
We are of the view that the scourge of terrorism can
be overcome only by measures that adhere to the highest
human rights standards and are in full compliance with
the rule of law. That is one of the reasons why the EU
fully supports the establishment of the International
Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law in Malta.
Sanctions remain a vital part of our counterterrorism mechanisms. With regard to the targeted
sanctions regimes, we acknowledge the importance of
the recent case law in the European Court of Justice.
We remain convinced that fair and clear procedures and
respect for the rule of law are necessary to uphold the
legitimacy and efficiency of such regimes. We welcome
the significant steps taken by the Security Council to
further reinforce fair and clear procedures for Umited
Nations sanctions, including through enhancing the
role of the Office of the Ombudsperson and publishing
delisting procedures online. We commend the work
of the Ombudsperson. We welcome the renewal of
the mandate of the Ombudsperson last December
with further enhancement to the Office, including its
effectiveness and transparency.
We note with appreciation that in her sixth report to
the Security Council (S/2013/452), on 31 July 2013, the
Ombudsperson emphasized the strong and continued
cooperation with Member States. We call on all Member

13-5843225/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

States to extend their full cooperation with the Office
of the Ombudsperson in each and every case.
We commend the work of the Committee established
persuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular with
regard to enhancing State capacity-building and
strengthening regional cooperation. In that regard,
we praise the 2 October launch by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
of the Global Initiative on Effective Counter-Terrorism
Investigations and Prosecutions while Respecting the
Rule of Law and Human Rights. This project, to which
the European Union has pledged €3 million, intends to
build effective cooperation at the regional level and to
support the efforts of States to strengthen the capacity
of criminal justice and law enforcement officials
to effectively investigate, prosecute and adjudicate
terrorism cases. Additionally, the EU is going to
finance the Nigeria/EU/UNODC/CTED partnership
on strengthening criminal justice responses for
multidimensional security, which is due to start very
soon.
The EU also supports and promotes multilateral and
regional counter-terrorism cooperation. In cooperation
with other countries and regions, the EU has started
to develop comprehensive counter-terrorism strategies,
in partnership with countries in the Sahel, the Horn of
Africa, Yemen and Pakistan. Those strategies reflect
our long-term engagement, building on national and
regional counter-terrorism approaches and therefore
ensuring ownership and participation.
Increasing efforts regarding countering violent
extremism, radicalization and recruitments, as well
as terrorist financing, is one of our top priorities.
Regarding Prevent, the EU anticipates €7 million in
this area this year, €2 million in the Horn of Africa and
€5 million in South Asia.
We welcome United States Secretary of State
Kerry’s announcement of the establishment of a global
fund to support efforts to counter violent extremism.
The EU looks forward to discussing the details of
that initiative and will actively participate in its
establishment.
We also regard the establishment of Hedayah — the
first International Centre of Excellence for Countering
Violent Extremism, generously hosted and supported
by the United Arab Emirates — as a key achievement
of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) in that

26/32

27/11/2013

area. The EU already supports the work of the Centre,
both financially and through knowledge and expertise
from all our member States. We will also address
countering violent extremism issues through regional
workshops starting on 3 December 2013, focusing
on the Horn of Africa/Yemen, Sahel/West Africa,
North Africa, and South Asia. We are also working
on updating our strategy to combat radicalization and
recruitment. The recent CTED briefing on the action
plan for implementing resolution 1624 (2005) was
particularly useful and timely in that regard.
Taking a geographical approach, we see the Horn of
Africa and Yemen as a region of primary importance to
follow closely. It is crucial that we support international
efforts to stabilize the region, as was underlined during
the recent New Deal for Somalia Conference held in
Brussels on 16 September, which the EU co-hosted with
the President of Somalia. Following the last meeting of
the GCTF Ministerial Plenary and the renewal of the
terms of the co-chairs of GCTF working groups, the
EU will continue to co-chair, with Turkey, the GCTF
Horn of Africa region working group. In light of the
recent events in Nairobi, the EU will reflect jointly
with its co-chair on how to enhance our focus on
border security, terrorist travel and countering violent
extremism in that region.
The Sahel is another region where we must focus
our efforts. We therefore welcome the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which puts forward
an integrated approach by focusing on three strategic
objectives: security, governance and resilience. It is of
vital importance to start implementing such strategy.
I would like to share a few comments regarding
the 1540 regime. The risk of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors remains a
significant threat to international peace and security.
We should spare no efforts to increase our capacity
in proliferation prevention. Although in recent years
we have fortunately been spared an attack using such
weapons, we cannot be complacent. As technology
progresses and more people get access to advanced
systems and the know-how to operate them, the threat of
a chemical and biological weapons attack in particular
is increasing.
The EU and its member States are fully committed
to the implementation of the 1540 regime and to
offering assistance to the Committee and other States,
as appropriate. There is a shared understanding that no

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.7071

single member State can handle the threat alone and
that continuous cooperation, exchange of information,
outreach activities and assistance play an important
role in building tools to counter the mass-destruction
capacity of terrorism. We also recall that cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations is essential, as it provides the Committee
with specialized expertise.

framework.The highlight of the initiative was the local
ownership of the process, which enabled Poland and
Croatia to engage in a voluntary dialogue, identifying
differences rather than setbacks and opportunities rather
than shortcomings in a cooperative, non-patronizing,
audit-free way. The United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs and 1540 experts maintained an
advisory role throughout the entire process.

I would like to conclude by stressing that while we
have witnessed significant progress in the fight against
terrorism, our resolve to defeat terrorism must never
weaken or falter. All acts of terrorism are criminal and
reprehensible, wherever and by whomever they have
been committed. The active promotion of counterterrorism policies and actions must therefore remain a
priority for the United Nations and its Member States.

As I already mentioned, the peer review process was
rolled out in two phases — phase one in Croatia in June
2013 and phase two following in Poland four months
later, in October. As a wrap-up of the final session in
Warsaw, the two delegations presented several tools and
measures hand-picked as the effective 1540 practices.
They included, inter alia, a national strategy and/or
a pertinent action plan serving as a framework 1540
document at the national level; the interaction of national
agencies and stakeholders; regional cooperation and
activities fostering collaboration between individual
States; and awareness-raising among industry and
academia. A detailed report will be presented to the
1540 Committee early next year.

Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): The European Union
has already spoken on the matter, but I would like
to make an additional statement on behalf of Poland
and my country, Croatia, and to brief the Council on
a joint endeavour our two countries undertook earlier
this year to promote the objectives of resolution 1977
(2011) within the scope of resolution 1540 (2004). As
the Council is aware, resolution 1977 (2011) extended
the mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) for ten years
and tasked the 1540 Committee to work to identify
effective practices, templates and guidance for the
implementation of that resolution.
Poland and Croatia combined their efforts in that
regard and gave birth to an initiative known as peer
review, which was officially launched in Croatia in June
2013. The 1540 peer review was a tailored process of
cooperation between Poland and Croatia by which the
two countries engaged their national non-proliferation
experts in coming together to compare national
measures, regulations and legal frameworks related to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Although
it is by no means a novelty in the overall international
security architecture, Poland’s and Croatia’s peer review
was fairly uncharted territory in the 1540 arena. Poland
and Croatia moved beyond the traditional tools of 1540
implementation and introduced a brand-new concept
in identifying effective implementation practices. The
peer review initiative featured an exchange of visits of
national peers and opposite numbers to their respective
capitals and their hands-on interaction on a wide range
of 1540-related matters.
A pivotal question here is what makes the peer
review such a ground-breaking idea in the entire 1540

Finally, let me briefly add, in my national capacity,
that Croatia stands ready to share that experience with
our partners in South-East Europe. Thus in the lead-up
to the tenth anniversary of the 1540 resolution, I can
announce the follow-up to the peer-review initiative
next year in Croatia. It will take the form of a regional
workshop, which we intend to hold in our ancient city
of Split in spring 2014.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
China on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Chairmen of the Committees for their informative
briefings and professional work. I want also like to
take this opportunity to welcome the new Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), Jean-Paul Laborde. We
are happy to have him on board and look forward to
working closely with himin the future. Israel believes
that the United Nations counter-terrorism committees
are essential to the global efforts to isolate terrorists.
We appreciate their dedicated work, along with that of
other relevant United Nations agencies.
Since the inception of the State of Israel in 1948,
not a single day has gone by where we did not face the
threat of terrorism. Out of that persistent need to defend
our citizens, Israel became a specialist in the field of

13-5843227/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

27/11/2013

counter-terrorism with techniques, technologies and
tools unmatched by any other country. Over the years,
terrorists have become increasingly sophisticated,
and Israel’s counter-terrorism efforts have evolved
to keep us one step ahead. From aviation security to
border security and from money-laundering to legal
infrastructures, Israel has a well of expertise for
countries to draw on. From the plains of Africa to
the jungles of Central America, Israel is proud to be
sharing its counter-terrorism capabilities and saving
countless lives.

take every measure necessary to protect its citizens
and will not allow any strategic weapons to reach the
hands of Hizbullah and internationally recognized
terrorist organizations. Israel commends the steps that
have been taken to destroy Syria’s chemical arsenal.
That must continue to be a priority for the international
community, which must also ensure that the process
is properly monitored, verified and completed. While
ensuring that the agreed timelines are met, we must
also ensure that chemical weapons never fall into the
hands of terrorist organizations.

Let me give the Council just one example. The issue
of aviation security is increasingly a focus of concern
for many nations today. Israel has been grappling with
that threat ever since an Air France flight filled with
Israeli passengers was highjacked in 1976 and forced
to land at the airport at Entebbe in Uganda. Since that
time, Israel has become a leader in the field of aviation
security, as we share our innovative techniques with
countless nations, Israel is making the skies a safer
place and airports more secure.

As we speak, terrorist groups are taking advantage
of the chaos and instability in Syria to train, recruit and
arm a new generation of terrorists. Syria has become the
foremost academy for foreign terrorists, who are taught
the philosophy of fundamentalism, the engineering
of explosives and the calculus of chaos. Two of the
terrorists behind the September attack in a shopping
mall in Nairobi that left 67 people dead were found to be
European citizens who had been trained in Syria. The
ongoing slaughter in Syria was made possible through
the financing of fighters that Iran sends to prop up the
dictator in Damascus.

Just as it is with family, we do not get to choose our
neighbours on the map. Israel is not exactly surrounded
by Benelux countries. I do not have to convince anyone
in the Chamber that Israel finds itself in one of the most
volatile and violent neighbourhoods in the world. Every
day, we use our counter-terrorism expertise to keep our
citizens safe from the threats that surround us on every
side. For years, Israel’s southern citizens have been
the targets of rocket fire and terror attacks from Gaza.
Just last month, the Israeli Defence Forces discovered a
2-kilometre-long tunnel originating in Gaza and ending
just outside an Israeli community, not far from homes,
kindergartens and playgrounds. The tunnel was built
by Hamas, using 500 tons of cement that had been
earmarked for construction. Just imagine how many
schools, hospitals and homes could have been built with
all that cement. Instead of using construction materials
to build a better future for the Palestinian people, the
leadership in Gaza is committed to destroying the State
of Israel.
On our northern border, Hizbullah has laid siege
to southern Lebanon and is hiding its arsenal of 60,000
rockets in civilian homes, schools and hospitals. In
doing so, Hizbullah has committed a double war crime,
first, by using the people of Lebanon as human shields,
and secondly, by targeting Israeli civilians.
No Government can be expected to stand by and
allow its citizens to be the targets of terror. Israel will
28/32

Iran may have a charming new President, but its
real decision-maker is still Khamenei; the Ayatollah
has been an accessory to Al-Assad’s slaughter of
120,000 Syrians, while accessorizing terrorists with
suicide belts in Gaza and in Lebanon. Iran remains the
world’s primary sponsor of terror. Its proxies include
Hizbullah and Hamas, which have dispatched hundreds
of suicide bombers, planted thousands of bombs and
fired tens of thousands of missiles at civilians. It does
not take the detective skills of Agatha Christie to see
Iran’s fingerprints on terror attacks from Argentina to
Bulgaria and from Thailand to India.
Last week, former British Prime Minister Tony
Blair provided a report to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) focusing on
the importance of education in countering terrorism.
Israel strongly supports the assessment that counterterrorism efforts must attack the root of the problem,
namely, the fertile soils for incitement. Terrorism
does not begin when a bomb detonates on a bus or
in a café. It begins in classrooms and mosques where
children are being taught prejudice instead of peace,
terror instead of tolerance and martyrdom instead of
mutual understanding. In Gaza, Hamas is poisoning the
hearts and minds of the next generation. They recently
published textbooks for 55,000 high-school students

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

in which page after page denies Judaism’s historical
connection to the land of Israel and describes Zionism
as racism. Textbooks should be for education, but
Hamas uses them for provocation, indoctrination and
escalation. Millions of Palestinians are growing up in
a society that portrays murderers and kidnappers as
heroes. That culture of incitement has led to deadly
consequences. Since the beginning of this year, there
have been 1,163 terror attacks against Israelis and
dozens of attempted kidnappings.
No nation should have to stand alone in the face
of global terrorism. Israel commends the CTED
for its efforts to coordinate actions and monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
constitutes the centrepiece of United Nations effort to
create a robust counter-terrorism regime. Israel fully
implements resolution 1373 (2001) and has adapted
its legislation to ensure compliance with resolution
1267 (1999), which established the important Office
of the Ombudsperson of the Security Council CounterTerrorism Committee and the Al-Qaida sanctions list.
Israel also supports resolution 1540 (2004), recognizing
that export-control systems and appropriate national
counter-terrorism legislation are critical for preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
dual-use items.
Finally, Israel supports the 2006 United Nations
Global Terrorism Strategy and reiterates that all four
pillars of that strategy should be treated as a whole.
We look forward to the upcoming fourth review of that
strategy.
Today, millions of Israelis are mourning the
passing of Arik Einstein, an Israeli cultural legend.
Over the course of his career, Einstein’s music became
the soundtrack of our nation, comforting us in times of
sorrow and making our hearts soar in times of joy. One
of his most famous songs is called “Me and You” and its
lyrics are as follows:
(spoke in Hebrew)
“You and I will change the world. You and I,
and others will join us. They have said it before. It
doesn’t matter, because you and I will change the
world”.
(spoke in English)
As we mourn the passing of one of Israel’s icons, let
the music that he left behind guide our efforts to make

S/PV.7071

this world safer, stronger and more secure. Together, all
of us here can change the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings.
The Committees were established nearly a decade
ago in response to the serious terrorism conditions
at that time and have carried out dedicated efforts in
the fight against terrorism. We believe that the many
kinds of practical measures taken by the international
community in that regard have made a substantial
difference.
At the same time, we have to admit that we are still
living in a reality that includes the threat of terrorism.
The tragedy in Kenya and the terrorist attack in In
Amenas, Algeria, in which 40 citizens, including
10 Japanese nationals, were killed, are still vivid in
our memory. It is obvious that many challenges remain
and that the international community must reinforce
its efforts with a particular focus on the threats on the
African continent.
Based on such recognition, Japan recently
announced a pledge of $16 million to support capacitybuilding in the States of North Africa and the Sahel.
At the fifth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development in June, Japan also committed to providing
$1 billion in humanitarian and development assistance
over the next five years and extending assistance to
foster human resources in the field of counter-terrorism
in the region.
Despite our collective efforts towards international
cooperation, it is undeniable that there is a limit to the
resources available for the fight against terrorism. We
believe that it is crucial for all relevant United Nations
agencies to act effectively and efficiently. At the same
time, it is also necessary for us to promote more positive
counter-terrorism activities within the United Nations
and outside it so as to maximize the effect of measures
taken by the international community as a whole. In
that context, Japan welcomes the recent initiative of the
Chairmen of the Committees to invite the President of
the Financial Action Task Force to the United Nations.
From that perspective, we believe that there may
be some room for improvement in order to avoid

13-5843229/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

duplication with respect to counter-terrorism measures
taken by the United Nations. We have seen several
United Nations agencies conduct various programmes,
sometimes alone and sometimes in cooperation with
each other. We would like to stress the importance of
avoiding unnecessary duplication, and expect those
agencies to make a special effort in that regard.
We believe that the role of each primary counterterrorism entity — namely, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, (CTED) the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — must be
clear. At the same time, it is necessary to strengthen
the mechanism for ensuring the overall coordination
and coherence of the programmes conducted by those
entities and by Member States. As the next Security
Council resolution expanding the mandate of CTED
will be adopted soon, we expect a practical and fruitful
discussion in that regard.
In addition, concerning the creation of a post of
United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, we
understand the need for such a post on the grounds that
it would enhance coordination of all efforts in the field
of counter-terrorism at the United Nations. We believe
that we need to clarify the actual role of the post in
order not to end up increasing the number of relevant
posts with little substantive added value.
For its part, Japan has made efforts for the sake
of effectiveness and efficiency in the fight against
terrorism. In May, Japan received a focused visit by
CTED, conducted on behalf of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism. During that visit, we widely shared our
best practices and latest measures in such fields as the
financing of terrorism, law enforcement mechanisms
and border control. We believe that Japan’s cooperation
with CTED during its visit contributed to making the
future activities of CTED more effective, and strongly
expect CTED to put the fruits of its visit to practical
use.
Japan continues to attach great importance to
preventing the proliferation of goods and technologies
related to weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We have
been working closely with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen
regional and global efforts to better regulate the
export and border control of WMD-related materials.
In addition to regional seminars in Tokyo, Japan has

30/32

27/11/2013

been organizing seminars on non-proliferation and
disarmament here in New York as well, partnering with
the Missions of Poland and Turkey. We believe that this
endeavour, which we will continue in the future, has
helped to nourish ties between Member States and the
Committee.
Japan expects that the three Committees will
continue to carry out their roles and fully cooperate with
each other, and we will continue to cooperate positively
in the efforts and activities of the three committees.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor in order to speak on behalf of the
group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions. That
group is comprised of Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and my own country,
Austria. As is well known, our group aims to support
the efforts of the Security Council to enhance the
fairness and transparency of its various sanctions
regimes, thereby contributing to their credibility and
effectiveness.
We thank the Committee Chairmen for their
informative briefings. We welcome this biannual
occasion to engage on this important set of Council
measures, which are binding and have significant
implications for the entire membership of the United
Nations. It is therefore important to note that all
Member States, most recently during the High-level
Meeting on the Rule of Law in September 2012, have
recognized the need to further develop fair and clear
procedures for United Nations sanctions regimes. The
like-minded group commends the concrete actions
taken to date by the Security Council to address serious
due process concerns regarding the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. In particular, we congratulate the Council on
its decisions to establish and subsequently to strengthen
the Ombudsperson process.
We would like to reiterate our full support
for the work of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly
Prost. She continues to fulfil her mandate with the
required independence and impartiality, as well as
with remarkable integrity and commitment. The
Ombudsperson has made a substantial contribution to
the fairness and effectiveness of the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. In particular, the Office of the Ombudsperson
has enhanced listing and delisting procedures and
improved the accuracy of the Al-Qaida sanctions list.

13-58432

27/11/2013

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The Ombudsperson process is a success story.
Within a few years, it has envolved from a necessary
initiative to a well-established safeguard for due
process. Nonetheless, challenges persist on the way
forward.
First, the judgement of the European Court of Justice
in the case of Commission, Council, United Kingdom v
Yassin Abdullah Kadi of 18 July has made it evident that
the existing listing and delisting procedures cannot be
the end of the line. It is important to keep in mind that
other regional and domestic courts have come to similar
conclusions. All of those judgements show that the
Security Council needs to explore additional measures
in order to improve the quality of listings and, most
importantly, to increase the available information on
reasons for listings. In that regard, further avenues for
increased exchange of information between Member
States and the United Nations must be explored. We are
convinced that the higher the quality of listings and the
standard of review at the level of the United Nations,
the less likely legal challenges will be at the regional
and domestic levels.
The group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions has made various proposals in recent years.
In our view, it is crucial to encourage designating
States to make all relevant information available.
Since the Ombudsperson has in-depth knowledge and
experience on sanctions matters, listed individuals and
entities should be encouraged to petition the Office of
the Ombudsperson before or at least while seeking legal
remedies in regional or domestic courts. Generally
speaking, the Ombudsperson procedure will provide
much more expeditious review of listings than courts
in most jurisdictions.
Secondly, we would like to recall that the question of
fair and clear procedures is not limited to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime; rather, due process standards and the
rule of law apply in all situations in which the actions
of the United Nations and its organs directly affect
individual rights and fundamental freedoms. In this
regard, we note yesterday’s judgement of the European
Court of Human Rights in the case of Al-Dulimi and
Montana Management Inc. v. Switzerland, which
concerns sanctions against Iraq. In that judgement, the
Court considered that as long as there is no efficient
and independent judicial review within the United
Nations system, national courts will need to review the
measures taken in implementing the sanctions.

S/PV.7071

We reiterate our insistence that every individual
or entity included on a Security Council sanctions list
should have the right to be informed of the reasons
for listing, the right to be heard, and the right to an
effective remedy. Security Council sanctions regimes
that grant fair and clear review procedures will benefit
from improved credibility and effectiveness.
We once again put forward that the Ombudsperson
process should, on a case-by-case basis, be gradually
extended to other appropriate sanctions regimes, in
particular those with broad criteria for listing. We are
of course fully aware that each sanctions regime and
its underlying political situation is unique, and that
some sanctions regimes are more suitable for such
extension than others. We have already identified the
Somalia/Eritrea and the Liberia sanctions regimes as
opportunities to make such progress. We would like
to respectfully invite Council members to consider
this step when they renew the Liberia sanctions in
December.
The group of like-minded States reiterates its
standing offer to further discuss any of the steps
identified, both in the interest of strengthening the rule
of law and fair and clear procedures, and in the interest
of effective sanctions implementation. We look forward
to continuing our dialogue with the Security Council in
this regard.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
In the statement I made earlier, I did not focus on
certain technical aspects of some the Council’s counterterrorism Sanctions Committees. Unfortunately, the
representative of Israel raised the issue of terrorism
in Syria in an attempt to cover up his country’s
involvement in the crisis in my country and Israel’s
support for terrorists operating there.
As Council members and the Israeli representative
know very well, we have much to stay about Israeli
terrorism, but at this meeting I shall refrain from
retelling the story of Israeli violations in order to keep
the door open to action in response to our repeated
requests for cooperation in the fight against the
terrorism in my country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The

13-5843231/32

S/PV.7071

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Security Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
As this is the last meeting of the Council for the
month of November, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of the China to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staffs and
the secretariat of the Council for all the support they
have given to us.

27/11/2013

It has indeed been a busy month, and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone and without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every Mission and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well as the interpreters, translators,
conference officers and sound engineers. As we end
our presidency, I know I speak on behalf of the entire
Council in wishing the delegation of France good luck
in the month of December.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

32/32

13-58432
