S/PV.7788

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7788

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2016/833)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31777 (E)
*1631777*

S/PV.7788

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2016/833)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Maman
Sidikou,Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
participate in this meeting
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/833, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Ambassador
Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent Representative
of Egypt, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to speak on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I shall focus my
remarks on the political, humanitarian and security
situations, the challenges facing the Democratic
2/11

11/10/2016

Republic of the Congo, and the support that the
Security Council could offer to the collective efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and international and regional partners.
The political situation remains extremely fragile
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
contributes to increased tensions, the ongoing
contraction of the political space, and a very real risk
that the situation could deteriorate further. Despite
the efforts of the Facilitator appointed by the African
Union, Mr. Edem Kodjo, and the continued support of
the United Nations and the international community
for those efforts, progress in the national dialogue has
been limited, although we have recently heard that
developments are moving apace in the right direction.
In September, Mr. Kodjo presented a proposal for
consideration by the parties to reach agreement, first, on
the duration of a political transition and the role of the
outgoing President beyond the interim period; secondly,
the establishment of a transitional Government and
key portfolios; and thirdly, a date for the holding of
the presidential election. However, due to the boycott
of the national dialogue by the opposition coalition
known as the Rassemblement des forces politiques et
sociales acquises au changement, and more recently the
withdrawal of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo from the dialogue, agreement on these issues
has not been reached. Moreover, the dialogue process is
not as inclusive as one might have hoped.
In the course of one session of the national
dialogue, the National Independent Electoral
Commission announced that the holding of presidential,
parliamentary and provincial elections in one day would
not be technically possible until 18 November 2018,
following the registration of voters to be completed
31 July 2017. This announcement has provoked strong
protests from several political opposition parties that
believe that Commission has been instrumentalized
to keep President Joseph Kabila in power beyond the
presidential term limits set out in the Constitution.
On 4 October in Kinshasa, the Rassemblement held
a conclave whose recommendations reiterate, inter
alia, a call for the resignation of President Kabila on
19 December. The conclave also announced its intention
to organize political demonstrations across the country
on 19 October.
16-31777

11/10/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(spoke in English)
Against this background of political polarization,
serious violence erupted on 19 and 20 September
following large-scale demonstrations in Kinshasa and
elsewhere. The United Nations has confirmed the
killing of at least 49 civilians in the clashes that took
place — 38 by gunshot — while others were burned
alive or killed by machete. More than 140 civilians were
injured, and there are unconfirmed reports of dozens of
other casualties. Four police officers were also killed,
allegedly by demonstrators, during the clashes.
MONUSCO investigations have documented the
involvement of State and non-State actors alike. We
have also documented the involvement of the Garde
républicaine in several instances of violence against
civilians. There were hundreds of arrests reported,
and more than 100 people were initially detained in a
military camp before being transferred to State courts.
Unfortunately, in the immediate aftermath of the clashes,
MONUSCO was denied access to detention centres,
several hospitals and morgues, making confirmation
of the casualties and arrests difficult. Moreover, those
demonstrations impacted civil and political rights in
other parts of the country where demonstrators were
also reportedly arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated by
State agents.
While not directly related to the electoral context,
the situation prevailing in Kananga, the capital of Kasai
Central province, is also a matter for serious concern,
with reports of several clashes between militiamen
affiliated to a traditional leader, including child
soldiers, and State actors, which impinge on the human
rights of the civilian population, including children’s
rights, causing widespread displacements. Here again,
MONUSCO’s presence in Kananga is very limited,
and the force is not present, which is an additional
risk to protecting civilians. Nonetheless, the Mission
is actively monitoring the situation and has deployed
a team of human rights and political affairs officers
to better monitor, report on and analyse developments
in the area. We have also engaged with political
authorities, local leaders and members of civil society
to find a peaceful solution to this crisis.
For our part, we have consistently called for
restraint on the part of all actors, including opposition
members, and I have personally raised our concerns
with my Government interlocutors about the role
of State actors in the violence. Throughout the past

S/PV.7788

months I have worked with other stakeholders,
including the diplomatic community, civil society and,
importantly, the Church, to build bridges between the
Facilitator — Mr. Kodjo — the presidential majority
and opposition groups. I have also liaised closely with
the Government to take confidence-building measures
to create political space for dialogue, notably through
the release of political prisoners and allowing media to
operate without constraint.
The Mission has also reinforced its presence in
Kinshasa with additional assets, which will allow for
a greater presence and improved monitoring of the
situation. The Mission will continue monitoring closely
and reporting on the political, security and human rights
situation. Also, MONUSCO will continue to impress
upon the national authorities and security services the
need to manage public order in accordance with the
Constitution and international standards. An important
effort will also continue to be dedicated to engaging all
political actors on the need to find a peaceful resolution
to differences linked to the electoral process and the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While much attention is currently focused on
the political situation, I would like to highlight the
fact that the security situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains very
worrying and is characterized by severe protection-ofcivilians risks in many communities. Those tensions
are only increasing throughout the electoral period.
In the Beni area, where a serious massacre took
place in August, small-scale attacks on civilians by
suspected elements of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) have continued in recent weeks. Violence in
the broader northern Lubero area has contributed to a
surge of displacement, with more than 100,000 people
displaced in the past three months alone.
In that context, the protection of civilians remains
the highest priority of MONUSCO, one that requires
every component of the Mission to play a role. Of critical
importance is the ability of the Mission to act quickly and
effectively to early-warning threats of violence, based
on a solid understanding of the dynamics of a given
situation. In Beni, where protection threats are severe,
MONUSCO has established a joint analysis-collection
and early-warning cell, which brings together civilian,
police and force elements to provide cross-cutting
analysis and direction to the Mission’s operations. This
is a positive development that has already enhanced the

16-317773/11

S/PV.7788

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mission’s response and effectiveness. We are looking
to further develop those capacities to support the
Mission’s tailored strategies against all priority armed
groups, including the newly mandated area of criminal
networks in resolution 2277 (2016).
In support of those strategies, MONUSCO has
continued to carry out military operations against armed
groups, based on solid cooperation between the force
and the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC). In Eringeti, ongoing joint
operations against ADF positions over the past several
months have dislodged ADF elements from several
key locations and allowed the FARDC to establish a
more consistent presence in the affected areas. Those
operations against the ADF have seen the FARDC in
the front lines, supported closely by MONUSCO. The
operations have cleared key ADF camps in the socalled triangle area and have disrupted their operations
and supply lines. The challenge ahead will now be to
consolidate the gains and assist the FARDC in building
up its control in the area.
Robust peacekeeping requires a proactive approach
and looking to deter violence before it happens. I
believe the Security Council could usefully reinforce
that message with the troop-contributing countries as
we continue to work together to make the Mission more
effective in its protection mandate.
In the context of the continued violence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to highlight an immediate concern with
regard to the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme. Following violence in
the DDR camps in Kamina and Kitona over the summer,
the Government initiated the return of more than 1,000
ex-combatants to communities in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. While the
reintegration of ex-combatants into communities is an
essential part of the DDR process, that move was taken
before the Government and the World Bank-funded
partners had adequately prepared. Without sufficient
sensitization and preparation, there is a risk that those
ex-combatants may cycle back into armed groups, or
exacerbate already high tensions in communities where
they return. MONUSCO has worked to implement its
community violence-reduction programme to support
the transition of ex-combatants back into civilian life.
However, it is critical that the Government, the World
Bank and implementing partners move quickly to put in
place the necessary community reintegration measures,
4/11

11/10/2016

if further returns from the camps are to take place in a
constructive manner.
As I mentioned, population movements in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular have increased the risks to already vulnerable
communities. That has stretched already strained
humanitarian delivery systems beyond their means. I am
pleased to report that the humanitarian community has
brought life-saving assistance to more than 3.5 million
people this year, but that still falls far short of those in
urgent need. Currently, the 2016 humanitarian appeal
of $690 million is only half funded. With continued
displacements, an additional 350,000 refugees arriving
from South Sudan and epidemics, such as the recent
outbreak of cholera, we expect the needs to continue to
grow in 2017. I hope the Council will join me in urging
for greater support to those most in need in the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has entered
a period of extreme risk to its stability. The electoral
crisis has become a constitutional crisis, with deepening
political polarization and no immediate resolution in
sight. Actors on all sides appear more and more willing
to resort to violence to achieve their ends, while the
space for constructive political activity has shrunk still
further. If that trajectory continues, I believe large-scale
violence is all but inevitable. And while MONUSCO
will do everything it can within its mandate to protect
civilians, the scope of the threats dramatically outstrip
the Mission’s capabilities.
The only solution is for the parties to re-engage in
an inclusive process that charts a peaceful path forward
for the country. I have remained actively engaged
with all of the national, regional and international
stakeholders, and I believe there is a chance for the key
parties to come together in a credible, inclusive manner.
However, they will not do so without engagement by
all of us, including the Security Council. I hope the
Council will speak collectively and individually to
reinforce the following key messages.
First, the Rassemblement des forces politiques
et sociales acquises au changement and other key
stakeholders currently boycotting should be encouraged
to return to the dialogue process. Secondly, the
Government should be encouraged to undertake direct
confidence-building measures with the opposition,
including steps to ensure the rights of peaceful political
activity are preserved and ensure direct engagement
16-31777

11/10/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

between President Kabila and the leadership of the
Rassemblement, namely, Mr. Tshisekedi.
Thirdly, there should be no impunity for any actor
perpetrating political violence. Finally, the regional
organizations, that is, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Economic
Community of Central African States, working in close
consultation with the United Nations, need to engage
more directly, including through efforts to designate a
high-level emissary to help bridge the political divide.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I should like to stress that the coming
period will almost certainly be extremely difficult. The
tipping point in the serious violence could be reached
very quickly. I believe that the Council should remain
actively seized of the situation and endeavour to hold
regular exchanges with the Secretariat leadership and
MONUSCO in coming months.
I am very grateful for the opportunity given me
to convey to the Council certain observations on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
I hope that together, along with the Congolese people,
we can chart a more positive course for the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Aboulatta.
Mr. Aboulatta: At the outset, I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having provided me with this
opportunity to brief the Council in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is my first time briefing the Council in this
open format; I should like to stress that Egypt has been
honoured to chair this Committee since the beginning
of its membership in the Security Council.
During my most recent briefing to the Council, in
closed consultations last June, I highlighted some of
the findings and recommendations contained in the
final report of the Group of Experts, extended pursuant
to resolution 2198 (2015), and also touched upon the
Committee’s consideration of the report. I also provided
a brief overview of possible activities that were being
considered by the Committee.

S/PV.7788

In my statement today, I intend to provide an
update on the work of the Committee since my last
briefing and discuss possible avenues for enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
Egypt, together with the members of the Committee,
is fully aware of the tremendous challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly this
year. Members of the Committee are determined to
ensure that the work of the Committee and its Group
of Experts contribute significantly to achieving
peace and stability in the country. It was within this
context that I visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda from 1 to 6 August. The
trip itself represented only the second time since the
establishment of the Committee in 2004 that a Chair of
the Committee had travelled to the Great Lakes region.
In this connection, I should like to extend my utmost
appreciation to the Government of those three countries
for their cooperation and for facilitating the visit.
I should like also to take this opportunity to convey
my personal thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Maman Sidikou and his team in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which provided invaluable assistance during the visit.
A number of themes resonated during the course
of the visit and the several meetings I had with
Government interlocutors and representatives of civil
society and the diplomatic community. They included
the growing tension over the uncertainty in the electoral
cycle, the security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and measures to
counter the illicit trade in natural resources. During my
trip to Beni and Erengeti, I was able to hear first-hand
the frustrations of the population over the persistence
of violence and the continued suffering inflicted upon
them by the armed groups.
As I approach the end of my first year as the Chair
of this regime, I am of the view that the sanctions
regime remains vital to addressing the critical issue
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces. In
this connection, the Committee is continuing to work
to enhance the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
by focusing on, among other things, improving
cooperation with regional States and the effective
implementation of the sanctions measures. I therefore
paid attention to promoting a better understanding of
the work of the sanctions Committee during my visit

16-317775/11

S/PV.7788

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
region, and I encourage interlocutors to raise issues of
concern that could be relayed to the Committee in New
York.
The key point that I would like to raise here today
is that the regime was established to work with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to promote peace in the country. Towards this end,
I encourage officials to cooperate with the Group
of Experts by facilitating their visits and providing
information as appropriate and welcome a continued
dialogue with Government officials, as well as express
the hope that the visit will serve to further facilitate and
strengthen cooperation.
Following my visit, I capitalized on the momentum
back here in New York by following up informally with
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Yesterday, 10 October, the
Committee also met with those States and other States
of the region during formal consultations to continue
our reflection on how to improve the implementation
of the measures and enhance collaboration. I should
like to stress that these questions require thoughtful
consideration by the Committee and a renewed
engagement with the States of the region, with a view
to enhancing the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
and its contribution to the stabilization effort.
I am also aware of the fact that key challenges
continue to impede the achievement of peace in the
successful implementation of the sanctions regime.
Armed groups, in particular the Allied Democratic
Forces, remain a major threat to peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda, while
causing significant disruption to border communities,
is reportedly more fragmented and weakened. However,
it remains critical to continue working to limit the
capacity of these armed groups to pose a threat not
only to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but also to the region. I would like to seize this
opportunity to acknowledge the new momentum in the
cooperation among the countries of the region in this
regard.
Another issue of key concern remains the illicit
exploitation of natural resources. The potential for
armed groups to benefit from illicit exploitation and
smuggling remains great, and criminal networks inside
and outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo
6/11

11/10/2016

indirectly support armed groups and contribute to the
instability. As Chair, I will continue to focus on these
matters and encourage the Group of Experts and the
Committee to remain vigilant, including by discussing
means to help country address this matter.
Lastly, the rising political tension in the country
has the potential to further exacerbate the security
situation and undermine the hard-fought gains made in
stabilizing the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
In conclusion, I should like to note that in addition
to our focus on humanitarian concerns and the related
attacks by armed groups, the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and cooperation with regional States,
the Committee has also continued to engage with
the Group of Experts towards the regular and timely
submission of reports concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I therefore stress the fact that
support for the work of the Group remains critical for
the implementation of the sanctions regime.
Furthermore, and in ensuring regular discussion
and information-sharing with the relevant actors,
the Secretariat has contacted the Office of the
Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and for Children in Armed Conflict for
additional information-sharing with the Committee
on humanitarian-related issues pertaining to their
respective mandates. I intend to invite both Special
Representatives to provide briefings to the Committee
in the context of informal consultations.
Finally, as mandated by the Security Council, the
Group of Experts will be presenting its mid-term report
to the Committee during the month of December.
Following the Group’s presentation and after the
publication of the report, I also intend to invite the States
of the region to present to the Committee their views on
the report. This will further continue to enhance our
engagement and cooperation with those States.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, for having
introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the
16-31777

11/10/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2016/833).
I should like also to thank Mr. Sidikou’s entire
team, as well as the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for the work
that they have been doing in the country. I should like
also to thank the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
Mr. Amr Aboulatta, for his introduction in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I should like to reiterate Uruguay’s commitment
to the stability and the establishment of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, not only as an
elected member of the Security Council, but also as a
country contributing troops to MONUSCO, which we
have been doing without interruption for the past 16
years.
Uruguay is deeply concerned about the stalled
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is increasing political tensions and
generating numerous incidents. There is a pressing
need to unblock that situation, and the only way to
do so is through inclusive, good-faith and transparent
dialogue among all national political actors. Political
actors, which should act in the interests of the country
and its inhabitants, have an enormous responsibility
of garnering the necessary consensus to hold credible
elections without undue delays, if they are to avoid
an escalation of tension and violence. Similarly, we
once again call upon the political groups that have not
yet joined to dialogue process to do so and to play a
constructive role that will contribute to the timely
holding of credible elections.
We are also concerned about reports on increases in
civil and political rights abuses, including violations of
the freedom speech and assembly, committed even by
Government linked forces or personnel. In that regard,
it must be clear that sooner or later those responsible
should be brought to justice and held accountable for
their actions.
Finally, Uruguay regrets every civilian death over
the past few months, including those that occurred
during the Kinshasa protests on 19 September and
those in Beni in the month of August, allegedly carried
out by armed groups.

S/PV.7788

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We agree with the
representative of Uruguay on the issue of making the
discussions in the Security Council more transparent to
the broader membership, and that is why we have asked
for the floor today.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is grateful
for the briefing of Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
to whom we pay tribute. We also commend him for his
excellent work as an intermediary and for supporting the
efforts carried out by the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to bolster national security and
stability.
We also take this opportunity to thank the Ambassador
of Egypt for his briefing.
We are closely following the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
national dialogue that started in September, launched
by the initiative of Joseph Kabila’s Government, with
the main political stakeholders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That dialogue, in the context of
the current political, economic and security reality in
that country, should aim to establish a road map that,
in consideration of costitutional provisions, will enable
consensus to break the deadlock with regard to the
upcoming electoral process.
In that regard, we regret that the increase in political
tensions has led to violent protests in recent weeks by
opposition members attempting to boycott the national
dialogue initiative. To that end, we urge all the country’s
political actors to abstain from acting in a way that
could promote violence. In that connection, we believe
that an ongoing, inclusive, constructive dialogue is the
only way to jump-start the stalled electoral process.
The Security Council should send a message of
solidarity to the Support Group for the Facilitation of
the National Dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, led by the African Union-appointed Facilitator
and former Prime Minister of Togo, Mr. Edem Kodjo,
who has the support of the Group, made up of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community, the
European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations.

16-317777/11

S/PV.7788

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We believe that the facilitation of political dialogue
is essential to maintaining and consolidating governance
an stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As such, it should enjoy the backing of the international
community, as it relates to the sovereignty and political
independence of that country. In that regard, we welcome
the fact that MONUSCO continues to provide technical
and logistical support to the Independent National
Electoral commission in reviewing and updating the
voter rolls and in encouraging financial contributions
to the United Nations Development Programme
Administrative Fund to facilitate the election cycle in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We reiterate our concern about the violence
sparked by rebel groups, both Congolese and foreign,
that operate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which exacerbates the humanitarian situation in the
east of the country. Such actions have contributed to the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons,
clashes between communities and a heightened lack of
security.
We value the ongoing work of MONUSCO in
supporting the the implementation of the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, as well as on the repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration of ex-combattants. In that regard,
the measures enacted over the past decade by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and better financing for national social assistance
programmes to help ex-combattants during their
reintegration are essential to promoting disarmament,
the protection of civilians and human rights.
Finally, we are convinced that the consolidation
of the presence and authority of the Congolese State,
together with renewed trust in the framework of
strategic dialogue with MONUSCO, continue to be
vital elements to overcoming armed violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that process,
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
be ensured, in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate, Sir, on the Russian Federation’s
8/11

11/10/2016

accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October and to convey my delegation’s
high esteem for the skilled steering of our deliberations
since the beginning of the month. I would also like
to take this opportunity to convey my appreciation
to your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Gerard Van
Bohemen, Permanent Representative of New Zealand,
for the manner in which he presided over the work
of the Council in September. Finally, I would like
pay heartfelt tribute once again to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who has made enormous efforts and
sacrifices throughout his mandate to bring peace and
security to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to the Great Lakes region in Africa.
My delegation has very closely followed the final
report (see S/2016/466) of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/833) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which were touched on in the
brifings by Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, President of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. While we welcome
the successes set forth in both reports, allow me to
mention several points that require clarification from
us. Primarily, they relate to events that occurred on
19 and 20 September in Kinshasa, the electoral process
and the national political dialogue under way — and,
more broadly, the security in the east of my country.
As the Council has monitored, a faction of the
opposition that does not participate in the national
political dialogue under way in my country decided to
organize a peaceful march in Kinshasa on 19 September
to protest the holding of elections and to submit a
petition to that effect to the Independent National
Electoral Commission at its headquarters. After having
requested authorization and in accordance with the law
on meetings and demonstrations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the itinerary to be followed and
starting time of the demonstration were agreed with the
Governor of the city of Kinshasa, who authorized its
organization.
While, according to organizers, the march was
supposed to begin at noon, it was noted that in the very
early morning and the evening before, in certain sections
of the city, barricades were raised and tires burned along
16-31777

11/10/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

several thoroughfares that were not supposed to be part
of the demonstration’s itinerary. Moreover, calls to loot
and pillage the houses belonging to politicians of both
the majority and the opposition, who were participating
in the dialogue, were launched on social networks by
supporters of the march’s organizers.
The municipal authorities’ efforts to reach out to
the organizers and ask them to calm the demonstrators
were in vain. Against that backdrop, the situation
degenerated and the march become a genuine
insurrection. Demonstrators armed with stones attacked
the police. They targeted a 12-year-old girl in uniform
on her way to school, raping and then killing her. They
burned alive a policeman stationed outside a political
party’s headquarters after stripping him of his weapon,
and then proceeded to kill three other policemen who
were trying to restore order.
The demonstrators subsequently looted private and
public property, maliciously destroyed schools and gas
stations, set ablaze the headquarters of the political
parties of the majority and the opposition taking part in
the national dialogue, and set fire to police stations and
the district court of Matete. The violence continued on
20 September with the destruction and burning of other
property, including the headquarters of opposition
parties not participating in the national dialogue.
The situation was finally brought under control
thanks to the efforts of the police who managed to
disperse the demonstrators using tear gas and not by
firing live ammunition, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Those events led to the deaths of 32
people, including four policemen. More than a 100
perpetrators of criminal acts during the demonstrations
were arrested. They were apprehended in the act,
and approximately 100 of them were sentenced to
terms ranging from 45 days to 25 years in prison.
Approximately 30 were acquitted.
With regard to the national political dialogue, it
seems important to reaffirm to the Council that the
dialogue process was initiated by the President of
the Republic to allow all active forces of the country,
including a variety of politicians and actors from civil
society and religious and traditional authorities, to
agree on the means to overcome the obstacles standing
in the way of peaceful elections and establishing a
consensus in connection with the ongoing process. In
that regard, my Government wishes to see all actors
participate in the dialogue. Unfortunately, a fringe

S/PV.7788

group of the opposition, united under what is known
as the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
acquises au changement is boycotting the dialogue,
which at one time was supported by some of the political
parties within the Rassemblement.
For its part, my Government has responded
favourably to a number of demands made by the
opposition in order to defuse political tensions and
promote broad inclusiveness in the dialogue. Those
demands were mainly focused on the appointment of
an international Facilitator and an international support
group for the Facilitator, as well as the release of socalled political prisoners and the reopening of media
outlets belonging to the opposition. In addition to the
Government’s efforts, the Facilitator has also striven to
establish contacts with all the constructive forces within
and outside the country to achieve this inclusiveness.
The segment of the opposition that rejects dialogue
and makes ever-new demands, undoubtedly to more
effectively delay the process, went so far as to reject
the Facilitator, demanding that the African Union
appoint another one. With the help of the international
support group — comprising the Special Envoy and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
representatives of the European Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, and the Southern
African Development Community — the Facilitator
has been working on the dialogue since 1 September.
Although the work of the dialogue remains unfinished,
it would truly be in bad faith not to acknowledge the
largely positive results that have been recorded thus far.
Indeed, the participants in the dialogue have agreed on
a number of points, in particular the electoral register.
Having considered the reports of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
and the Independent National Electoral Commission,
the participants agreed to draw up a completely new
register to ensure the holding of credible elections
and to avoid the challenging of results. The update of
the register will take 16 months and end in July 2017.
Meanwhile, the voter registration process has already
begun in Gbadolite, North Ubangi province.
With regard to the sequence of elections, the
participants in the dialogue agreed to combine the
presidential, national legislative and provincial elections
so that they could be organized on the the same date,

16-317779/11

S/PV.7788

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

while municipal and local elections will be able to take
place later. In terms of the transition, in accordance
with article 70 of the Constitution, they agreed that the
current Head of State should remain in office until his
successor assumes his functions and a Government of
broad national unity, composed of representatives of the
majority, the political opposition and civil society, is set
up to allow for the collegial and transparent governance
of the transition. They also agreed that no members of
this Government would be able to run as a candidate in
the presidential election.
With regard to the electoral calendar, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General just
mentioned, a draft electoral calendar was proposed by
the National Independent Electoral Commission. The
participants will discuss that in order to agree on the
date for the presidential election combined with the
national legislative and provincial elections.
On the issue of the political agreement, at the end
of the dialogue the parties agreed to sign an agreement
that will reprise all the points on which they will have
agreed, along with the dates of the elections.
Some countries criticize the Government of
my country for not having called for elections on
19 September and demand a broadening of political
dialogue and other confidence-building measures, such
as the release of other political prisoners and the inclusion
of certain figures, whose presence they have judged
important in the dialogue. My delegation recalls that
the dialogue concerns first and foremost the Congolese
people who, through international facilitation, are
debating, in the context of their country’s best interest,
issues on the agenda and on which they have previously
agreed in order to allow for the electoral process — as
we have always stressed — to take place in a peaceful
environment. Partners of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, wishing to contribute to finding solutions
to the situation in my country, are called upon to do
so with the consideration and respect that we owe each
other. Everyone can agree that although, in this context,
recommendations or suggestions are welcome, neither
invective nor demands of any kind are acceptable.
To return to the point of not having called for
the holding of elections, the Council will recall the
explanation provided here by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of my country,
as well as by me, on the topic of the opposition, which
once rejected the partial electoral calendar and rejected
10/11

11/10/2016

the comprehensive electoral calendar twice. It will also
recall the electoral register that was not updated after
the 2006 elections and the need — following the audit
of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the Group of Experts and the Independent National
Electoral Commission — to update it to include those
Congolese who had recently reached voting age and
those who were abroad. The Independent National
Electoral Commission therefore could not convene
elections with a non-existant electoral register.
Finally, with regard to broadening the dialogue, I
must once again recall that it is intended to be inclusive,
in accordance with the decree of our Head of State. It
is with this mind, as we have said, that the Government
has responded favourably to several demands of the
opposition. It is also to that end that the facilitator has
reached out broadly to convince all political actors in
the country from all political leanings to engage in
dialogue. Only those political actors of the opposition
who are absent from today’s dialogue freely chose
not to participate in it; it was not the Facilitator who
excluded them, much less my Government, which from
the outset of the dialogue requested the support of the
Council by way of a letter from our Permanent Mission
in September.
In another confidence-building measure, my
Government has amply demonstrated its good faith by
taking appropriate steps, as I have already mentioned,
with a view to easing the situation. While there may
be political actors who are prosecuted for reasons other
than political ones, the rule of law requires all citizens
of the country to enjoy equal rights before the law. It
would be wrong for the Government to intervene in
the interest of certain people in purely private affairs,
pitting individuals against each other.
As the Council is surely aware and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has noted, that
opposition group — in reaction to the dialogue being held
with the support of the international community — held
a closed meeting during which it adopted positions
that are in breach of the Constitution. The opposition’s
threats to wreak havoc and call for an uprising and
violence must be condemned unequivocally. We called
the attention of the Council on 23 June (see S/PV.7724)
with the intention of forewarning it of the situation
when we stated that the Council is the United Nations
organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. It has the weighty responsibility to work
towards peace and prevent the outbreak of all conflict.
16-31777

11/10/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Thus, any discourse emerging from the Council that does
not promote an atmosphere of trust or that aggravates
tensions could have very serious consequences on the
ground for Member States.
As we said yesterday, the tensions in my country
today are in part due to resolution 2277 (2016), the
provisions of which have been interpreted in various
manners. Given the way the situation has evolved in
my country, what we expect from the international
community in general and the Security Council in
particular, as the Representatives of Uruguay and
Venezuela have just said, is its continued support to the
facilitator and the political agreement resulting from
the dialogue under way.
We welcome the resumption of cooperation between
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). We hope that such cooperation
will produce rapid results in order to allow the people
in the east of our country to live in peace and freely
go about their daily lives. That is why my Government
prioritizes the joint mission that has been tasked to
FARDC and MONUSCO to neutralize all armed groups
in the country by December.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/833) also
notes the presence of several hundred armed groups
and a number of civilians from South Sudan in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country met on this issue with the
leaders of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
during his trip to New York. My delegation maintains the
position held by the Head of the Congolese diplomatic

S/PV.7788

corps on that occasion. The United Nations knows the
precise conditions under which these people arrived in
our country. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not intend on reliving the its past experiences with
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. We
therefore believe that the United Nations will take all
necessary measures to relocate the South Sudanese
nationals.
We cannot reiterate often enough the fact that the
people of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
have known no peace peace and for several years have
lived under the reule of foreign and national armed
groups. The humanitarian disaster resulting from this
situation should drive us to find immediate solutions
so that the people of the Great Lakes region of Africa
can live at home and in peace, and enjoy Goal 16 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
that context, my country thanks the Governments of
the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom for
financing the Peacebuilding Fund, which has allowed
us to implement plans and strategies to stabilize the
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I cannot conclude without extending my
Government’s gratitude to the United Nations, and
especially to the Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for their commitment and devotion to the cause of my
country and the Great Lakes region. I also express my
country’s thanks and gratitude to all members of the
Council.
The President: I now invite members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

16-3177711/11
