VDI.

6. Commends the Joint Inspection Unit and the
Secretary-General for their efforts in the area of evaluation and advice both internal and external, and urges
them to contin~e their efforts in that direction, with a
view to improving the administrative and budgetary
efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations system.

106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/ 165.

223

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Report of the International Civil Service
Commission

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the fifth annual report of the International Civil Service Commission,3 1
Reaffirming the central role of the ~ommi~sion in ~~
development of a single unified mternational civil
service,
Endorsing the efforts of the Commission to strengthen
the United Nations common system by adjusting it to
changing circumstances, especially those caused by
currency fluctuations,
Recalling its resolution 3 3/ 119 of 19 December 1978,
in sections I and II of which it set down important objectives for maintaining and reinforcing the common
system and established guideli,1es for the future work
of the Commission,
Suggesting that the Commission should consider ways
of reducing the length of its annual report while still
making clear in the report or the annexes thereto any
recommendations to the General Assembly and the precise effect, impact and costs of any proposals,
I
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the action taken by
the International Civil Service Commission under articles
13 and 14 of its statute and urges the Commission to
continue its work under its long-term function;
2. Requests the Commission to begin urgently a
fundamental and comprehensive review of the purposes
and operation of the post adjustment system with a view
to eliminating distortions and anomalies in the resulting
levels of remuneration at the various duty stations and
grade levels and thereby achieving an improved mechanism for adjusting United Nations remuneration to reflect more accurately the differences in the cost of living
at the various duty stations and their evolution over time
as a result of inflation and currency fluctuations, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session;

II
l. Approves the grading equivalency recommended
by the Commission in paragraph t 19 of its report to be
used in comparing United States civil service and United
Nations remuneration;
2. Requests the Commission to examine the possibility of establishing a contributory system of death
grant benefits;
3. Decides that effective 1 January 1980 no staff
member shall be' entitled to any part of the repatriation
grant unless evidence of relocation away from the
country of the last duty station is provided;
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. }O (A/34/30 and Corr.I).

III
Decides that any staff member joining the United
Nations Secretariat on or after 1 January 1980 shall not
be entitled to receive reimbursement from the Tax
Equalization Fund or otherwise for nation3;I income
taxes paid on lump sum pension payments receiv~d fr~
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund; this decision will not affect staff members serving with the United
Nations prior to 1 January 1980.
I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/166.

Review of the rates of reimbursement to the
Governments of troop-contributing States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision of 29 November 1974, taken
at its twenty-ninth session, by which it established, as
from 25 October 1973, standard rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries for pay and allowances of their troops serving in the United Nations
Emergency Force and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, 35 and its decision 32/416 of 2
December 1977, by which it revised those rates of reimbursement as from 25 October 1977,
Recalling also its decision of 15 December 1975,
taken at its thirtieth session, by which it appr ..wed the
principle of reimbursing the troop-contributing States
for the usage factor for personal clothing, gear and
equipment,3" and the related report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session establishing the rates therefor as from 25 October
1973,:3 7
Recalling further its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April
1978, by which it applied the same standard rates _of
reimbursement payable to those Governments contnbuting troops to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon,
Recognizing that inflation and escalating troop costs
have adversely affected in real terms the existing standard rates of reimbursement,
Requests the Secretary-General to study, in consultation with the States contributing troops to the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the existing standard
rates of reimbursement, with a view to ensuring an
equitable rate of reimbursement to the Governments
of troop-contributing States, and to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
106th plenary meeting
17 December I 979
34/219.

Personnel questions

The General Assembly

I
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session:
(a) A detailed report outlining the basis on which
the desirable ranges in effect in 1979 (posts subject to
equitable geographical distribution) were established,
3 r, Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631
and Corr.2), p. 140, item 84.
36
lbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034), p.
148, item 107.
37
A/31/288.
