S/PV.8117

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8117

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lambertini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/982)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40287 (E)
*1740287*

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/982)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/982, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Last week, we released the United
Nations 2018 Humanitarian Needs Overview for Syria.
It lays out the continued plight of the Syrian people
after almost seven years of conflict. Some 13.1 million
people urgently need humanitarian assistance and
protection. Of those, some 5.6 million are in acute need.
Syria remains the world’s largest and most dynamic
displacement crisis, with half of all Syrians displaced
from their homes. More than 6,500 people have been
displaced on average every day in the first nine months
of 2017, while some 2,500 people have gone back home.
The crisis continues to affect the vulnerable most
severely. An estimated 1.75 million children, or almost
one school-age child in three, are out of school. One-third
of schools are damaged or destroyed. Fewer than half of
Syria’s health facilities are fully operational, leading to
thousands of preventable deaths from injury or disease.
Nearly 3 million people continue to live in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas throughout Syria, including close
to 420,000 in 10 besieged areas. The vast majority of
them — 94 per cent — are in eastern Ghouta. The
remaining 6 per cent are in Fo’ah and Kefraya in Idlib
governorate, and in Yarmouk in Damascus.
2/13

29/11/2017

I want to touch first upon specific issues of concern,
and then I will update the Council on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
Fighting has escalated in eastern Ghouta and
Damascus. The World Health Organization (WHO)
reports that from 14 to 17 November, 84 people were
killed and 659 were injured, including hundreds of
women and children. Earlier this week, air strikes on
Duma and other areas reportedly resulted in further
civilian deaths. Over the same period, more than 200
mortar shells and rockets were reportedly fired on
residential areas in Damascus, resulting in hundreds of
deaths and injuries.
Against this background, news over the past two
days of a ceasefire in eastern Ghouta would, if true and
sustained, be important. But I am extremely worried
about the food crisis in eastern Ghouta. Despite efforts
made to reach them, only 100,000 people out of an
estimated population of 400,000 in the enclave have
received food assistance this year, and those people are
getting only occasional, one-off deliveries. The closure
of the only crossing point into the area on 3 October,
together with the increase in air and ground strikes, has
resulted in a rapid deterioration of the situation. The
World Food Programme (WFP) reports that agricultural
areas in eastern Ghouta are difficult to access because
of the fighting, and that their output is very low because
of a lack of water for irrigation. I am also deeply
concerned about a growing number of people, including
children, with complex medical cases — now reaching
nearly 500 — who require urgent medical evacuation.
The available evidence suggests that severe
acute malnutrition rates among children in eastern
Ghouta have increased fivefold in the past 10 months.
United Nations staff have seen this first hand through
assessments made during convoys to Kafr Batna and
Duma over the past two months. Children’s deaths from
malnutrition are preventable if we get more, and more
regular, aid convoys in. I had constructive discussions
on this in Moscow and Tehran last week, and I hope that
they will result in meaningful progress.
The situation in north-eastern Syria also remains
a cause for concern, as fighting continues down the
Euphrates river towards the border with Iraq. Since
the beginning of the offensive against Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in November last year, airstrikes
and clashes have displaced more than 436,000 people
from and within Raqqa governorate. Another 350,000
17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

people have been displaced from and within Deir ezZor governmorate since August.
The risk from explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices continues to hamper
humanitarian access throughout the north-east,
including to the cities of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. This
is reportedly resulting in trauma incidents and deaths
as civilians return to Raqqa city. New restrictions on
humanitarian access and deliveries in the north-east are
limiting the number of people we had previously been
able to reach with help. Since 9 November, the United
Nations has faced a series of bureaucratic impediments
imposed by the parties in the area. As a result, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance has been curtailed
for much of the past month. This has happened as needs
continue to rise, with 125,000 displaced people moving
north in Deir ez-Zor governorate so far this month.
At least 30,000 Syrians remain stranded in dire
circumstances on the berm along the Syrian-Jordanian
border. Following my visit to Amman last month, I
remain hopeful that we can find a sustainable solution,
while at the same time enabling immediate life-saving
assistance for these people.
I am also concerned about increasing displacement
in north-western Syria. Nearly 70,000 people have
been displaced to Idlib governorate in recent weeks,
while over 27,000 people have been displaced within
different parts of the governorate in the same period. As
previously, I repeat the Secretary-General’s call on all
parties to the conflict in Syria to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure as required under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to allow
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need.
Despite the constant challenges that are inherent in
operating in the midst of a violent conflict, the United
Nations and its partners continue to provide life-saving
assistance to millions of people across Syria every
month. In September, United Nations support ensured
that 4.3 million people received food baskets, 1.7 million
people benefitted from water and sanitation assistance,
and 1.7 million received medical procedures.
I will briefly update the Council on United Nations
aid delivery, first to areas controlled by the Government
of Syria; secondly, across lines; and thirdly, through
the cross-border programme.
Assistance to areas under the control of the
Government of Syria continues to represent the majority

S/PV. 8117

of the United Nations response. In October, some
2.8 million people in these areas were reached with food
assistance, delivered through some 1,500 WFP convoys.
WHO treated over 123,000 patients with medical
conditions. UNICEF provided nutrition assistance to
183,000 people. Other agencies — including the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration, the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East — all provided lifesaving assistance through their
humanitarian programmes in areas under the control of
the Government of Syria.
Secondly, cross-line convoys continue to be
heavily restricted. On average, just over a quarter of the
beneficiaries planned to be reached in the bimonthly
plans receive aid. That limited response is despite an
agreement with the Government of Syria on bimonthly
access plans and the creation of de-escalation zones
that cover two of the main areas we attempt to access,
that is, eastern Ghouta and northern rural Homs.
So far in November, only four cross-line convoys
have gotten through, namely, two to northern rural
Homs, reaching just over 200,000 people, and two
to besieged eastern Ghouta, Duma and Nashabiyeh,
in rural Damascus, reaching just 28,000 people. The
convoy to Nashabiyeh, serving about 7,000 people,
reached its destination only yesterday, at the second
attempt, after having to turn back on Monday because
of the fighting. Airstrikes were reported in the vicinity,
despite security assurances from all sides.
Medical items continue to be removed from
convoys. As the Secretary-General has said, improved
access through cross-line convoys is critical to ensuring
that the severe and worsening situation of civilians,
including children, is improved.
Thirdly, the United Nations continues to deliver
life-saving assistance to those living in north-western
and southern Syria via cross-border deliveries. This
month, approximately 800,000 people have received
food assistance. In addition, medicines, educational
supplies and other non-food items are regularly delivered
cross-border to hundreds of thousands of people.
United Nations cross-border assistance is checked
and verified by the United Nations monitoring
mechanism at designated border-crossing points — Bab

17-402873/13

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

Al-Hawa, Bab As-Salam and Al-Ramtha. Every truck
is checked to ensure that it contains only humanitarian
supplies. Deliveries are confirmed by United Nationscontracted third-party monitors upon arrival at
warehouses inside Syria. They check the items being
off-loaded against the waybill. There is then postdistribution monitoring, including by independent
third parties and incorporating community feedback.
United Nations cross-border assistance is also subject
to the normal accountability mechanisms between the
donors and the delivery agencies, and that too includes
a verification system.
In the first 10 months of 2017, on average each
month more than 750,000 people were reached through
United Nations cross-border activities. That sustained
assistance is essential for those in need.
It is clear that each of the three modes of delivery
by the United Nations is critical for the people of
Syria, and that there is complementarity between
them. As needs remain high, it is important to preserve
all means of access. Civilians in areas not under the
control of the Government are reached in much larger
numbers, with much greater consistency and with much
more comprehensive support, through cross-border
operations than through cross-line operations. It is for
that reason that the Secretary-General has called for a
renewal of resolution 2165 (2014). As I have told the
Security Council before, the renewal of the resolution
is essential to save lives.
Finally, I want to let the Council know that,
following consultations with the authorities, I plan to
visit Syria in early January to assess the situation and
discuss how we can improve assistance to those in need.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his very complete briefing.
As we do every month, let me acknowledge the
constant work, sacrifice and courage of the staff of
the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and of its partner agencies in Syria
and bordering countries, who risk their lives every day
to try to alleviate the living conditions of millions of
Syrian civilians.
4/13

29/11/2017

In a scenario that unfortunately, month after
month, is presented as negative, yesterday we received
the much-anticipated news of a ceasefire, the lifting of
the siege and the entry of humanitarian assistance to
the area of eastern Ghouta. According to the reports,
conditions in that area are desperate due to famine and
malnutrition and the continuous bombings of recent
days, despite being one of the violence de-escalation
areas under the Astana process. We hope that the
conditions that made that agreement possible will be
maintained and that we will not return to a situation
of extreme violence and destruction, neither in eastern
Ghouta nor in any other part of the Syrian territory.
That announcement, which took place at the
beginning of the eighth round of intra-Syrian
negotiations in Geneva, is a sign that we are on the right
path — a confidence-building measure that can make
possible the bridging of positions in order once and for
all to discuss issues of great importance for the political
transition in Syria, such as a constitutional process and
a call for future elections.
We have little to add that we have not said in relation
to this conflict and the suffering of the Syrian people.
Nevertheless, we would like to reiterate some messages
that are very important for Uruguay.
Over the past two years, Uruguay, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, has
made the protection of civilians and international
humanitarian law a central focus of its efforts,
constantly working to prevent the hindering of access
and the distribution of aid throughout Syrian territory,
including besieged and hard-to-reach areas, without
distinction between besieged and besiegers. We are
concerned that humanitarian access continues to face
serious difficulties every month. Immediate, safe and
unhindered access is needed to serve all those in need
in Syria. We appeal to countries with influence over
Syrian authorities to take steps to ensure that access
is guaranteed by way of permanent cooperation and
coordination with OCHA.
In view of the pressing needs still facing the
Syrian people, we believe that it is of the utmost
importance that the Security Council be able next
month to renew resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent
resolutions in order to allow the entry of cross-border
aid from neighbouring countries. We reiterate that the
Government of Syria has the primary responsibility
to allow its own population access to food, water,
17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

medicines and supplies for their survival until the
conflict is definitively ended.
We have also constantly called for ensuring the
protection and safety of humanitarian workers as
they carry out their tasks. As we have said so many
times before: civilians are not targets; hospitals are not
targets. Humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law must be respected in
all conflicts. When they are violated, as has happened
blatantly and repeatedly in Syria, and when very
serious crimes have been committed that constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity, the only
option is to find a way to hold those responsible for
such acts accountable to justice. In that regard, we once
again support the call by Secretary-General António
Guterres that cases committed in Syria be referred to
the International Criminal Court. We also hope that
full cooperation will be given to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was
established at the end of last year.
With regard to the Astana process, it must be
emphasized that it and other regional initiatives to
achieve a cessation of local hostilities made possible
a significant reduction in violence. However, the
continuous bombing of eastern Ghouta by the Syrian
Government and its allies shows that the terms
announced at the beginning of May by the three
guarantor countries have not been fully respected.
Although there have been important advances, it is
necessary to ensure unrestricted access by the United
Nations and to humanitarian aid in those areas,
including freedom of movement to enter and leave those
territories voluntarily, which would afford guarantees
that the basic principles of international humanitarian
law are being respected.
The priorities in Syria are clearly defined: a
political solution must come about that puts an end to
the war and ushers in a peaceful transition in Syria;
the ceasefires must be consolidated until a cessation of
hostilities is achieved throughout the entire territory;
all sieges must be lifted; and humanitarian access
must be guaranteed for the millions of people who still
depend on assistance for their subsistence.
In conclusion, in the next stage, which we hope will
not be too far-off, reconstruction, national reconciliation

S/PV. 8117

and the return of the millions of internally displaced
persons and refugees in third countries will also
become a priority and a course of action for the future.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia appreciates the
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and we wish to assure
him of our full support in the tasks entrusted to him.
Bolivia commends the joint declaration that was
issued after the latest session in Astana, held on 30 and
31 October, which underscored the progress made in
the implementation of the de-escalation areas, as well
as the significant reduction of violence on the ground
as a specific result of the measures taken to strengthen
and maintain the ceasefire. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts made by Russia, Iran and Turkey as
guarantors of the process, which is complementary to
the Geneva negotiations.
Nevertheless, we underscore that the establishment
of de-escalation areas and security must be a temporary
measure, based on consensus among the guarantors,
and that this should not undermine in any way the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We also wish to highlight the important work that
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is undertaking, both
as a guarantor of security in the supply of humanitarian
assistance and in the evacuation of people from the
towns where armed confrontations have taken place.
Proof of this is the fact that since 20 November it carried
out a total of 1,681 humanitarian operations.
My delegation wishes to highlight the significant
achievements made with regard to the progressive
liberation of the Syrian territory from Da’esh control.
We believe that the courageous efforts to eliminate
the presence of that terrorist group must undoubtedly
be accompanied by strategies to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
In that regard, we note — according to what was
reported in the report (S/2017/982) of the SecretaryGeneral — the existence of explosive remnants of war,
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
in the field. We believe that demining and the removal of
those explosive devices is an essential task in ensuring
the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance and the

17-402875/13

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

return of more than 6 million internally displaced
persons who have been uprooted since the beginning
of the conflict.
Likewise, we view with concern the reports of
asymmetric attacks and possible violations of human
rights that have been committed by the parties to the
conflict during the period under review, which has led
to a total of 61 deaths and 238 wounded. That terrible
figure is in addition to the more than 7,000 deaths
recorded so far this year, and the more than 500,000
fatalities since the beginning of the conflict.
We recognize the cooperation and coordination
between the Syrian Government and the different
various humanitarian assistance agencies to improve
the delivery of assistance. We call for improvements
in order to avoid any administrative impediments
that would undermine or otherwise hamper such
aid delivery.
We believe it is urgent that the humanitarian aid
arrives swiftly to the population that most needs it.
We therefore reiterate that the parties to the conflict,
within the framework of international humanitarian
law, have an obligation to ensure unconditional and
unfettered access to humanitarian assistance. They
must safeguard its security and integrity, avoiding the
identification of convoys and humanitarian personnel
and ensuring that medical care centres do not become
military targets under any circumstances.
In that regard, based on the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we express our strong condemnation of the
destruction, by aerial bombardments, of vaccines
that were intended to combat the outbreak of measles
and polio. On the other hand, we reiterate once again
our highest appreciation for, and tribute to, the work
carried out by the staff of various agencies and
humanitarian organizations, who put their lives at risk
in the performance of their work.
Finally, it is important to note that the humanitarian
situation that currently affects more than 13 million
people in Syria should be resolved only through an
inclusive political process, negotiated and concluded
by and for the Syrian people. That is the only way to
achieve a peaceful solution to this prolonged conflict..
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock warned us today
about dire conditions in the besieged community of
6/13

29/11/2017

eastern Ghouta. He warned us about children on their
deathbeds due to severe, acute malnutrition and about
hundreds of sick people who desperately need to be
evacuated for life-saving treatment.
In fact, he has been giving us those warnings
for months. One Syrian mother in eastern Ghouta is
running out of options. That mother reportedly came
into a clinic recently. She was crying as she brought
in her four malnourished children to be treated. But
what this mother told the clinic’s doctor was shocking
to hear, even for a doctor working in the midst of one
of the worlds’ worst war zones. The mother said that all
she could do was give her four children damp pieces of
newspaper to chew on so they would stop screaming.
That is all she had left — damp pieces of newspaper to
feed her children.
To my colleagues around this table, therefore, I say:
tomorrow morning, when we pick up a newspaper, we
need to think about what this mother is going through
and realize that that is just one family. That is just
one family out of the nearly 400,000 people living
under siege in a region just a short drive away from
Damascus. One can say that it is ironic that eastern
Ghouta is a so-called de-escalation area, but it is no
coincidence that in the past week dozens of civilians
have died from relentless air strikes and shelling there.
It is no coincidence that those air strikes were carried
out by the Al-Assad regime with the support of the
Russian Government.
The Syrian regime is pummelling a population of
starving, desperate people who have been cut off from
food and medicine for months. It is the latest version of
the Al-Assad regime’s despicable starve-and-surrender
strategy. The objective is not peace, but domination.
The regime does not even try to hide its strategy.
This month the Al-Assad regime allowed the United
Nations to make only one shipment of aid to a besieged
area. That one delivery helped 21,500 persons, but the
398,000 other Syrians living in eastern Ghouta and
nine other besieged areas got nothing. They received
no food, no medicine, no vaccines. They will spend
another month collecting whatever scraps of food they
can find or, when that fails, chewing on things like
grass or damp newspapers. Moreover, the 2.5 million
civilians living in hard-to-reach areas are also suffering
profoundly and struggling to survive. In October,
thanks to the Al-Assad regime’s strategy of denying
aid to its political opponents, the United Nations could
17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

deliver humanitarian assistance to only about 6 per cent
of its population.
But the cruelty does not end there. The Al-Assad
regime and its allies, like Hizbullah, steal pieces of
assistance out of United Nations convoys all the time.
They have taken out more than 630,000 medical items
from United Nations trucks since the beginning of
2017. The regime and its thugs grab surgical gloves,
ultrasound equipment, ventilators and, as we have all
heard, even formula for infants, from United Nations
trucks before they reach the Syrians in need.
Some members of the Council urge us to put more
faith in the Al-Assad regime. They ask us to trust that
the regime will allow for aid deliveries. They act like
the regime makes decisions in the best interests of the
Syrian people. But why would we ever expect a regime
that literally steals medicine from the sick to do the
right thing? Why would we ever expect a regime that
has spent years starving Syria into submission to do the
right thing? Why would we ever expect a regime that
has gassed its own people, fire-bombed its cities and
turned its schools and hospitals into rubble to do the
right thing for its people?
One thing is clear: those countries with influence
over the Al-Assad regime must use their influence. That
is especially true of Russia, which is both a permanent
member of the Security Council and a nation that has
stated its commitment to a Syrian political process.
We must all demand that every besieged area and all
civilians in need receive assistance. We must all demand
that Al-Assad and the militias allied to the regime stop
plundering aid provided by the United Nations. That is
a simple message, but one that the Al-Assad regime has
almost never accepted in the history of this conflict.
As members of the Security Council, we have
another extremely important responsibility coming up.
In December, the Council must renew the authorization
for cross-border deliveries of aid into Syria, originally
granted in resolution 2165 (2014). The consequences
of this mandate are enormous. It is no exaggeration to
say that renewing it is a life-and-death question. Since
2014, the United Nations has conducted more than 663
cross-border convoys, with 16,844 trucks containing
aid passing through border crossings approved by the
Security Council. On average, that assistance reaches
more than 1 million Syrians every month. Again,
1 million people get aid as the result of a mandate from
the Security Council. We can only imagine the number

S/PV. 8117

of lives saved by this one resolution. To give just one
example, in October the World Heath Organization
sent supplies for nine health-care facilities and 80,567
people in two cross-border deliveries. More than
546,600 Syrians benefited from access to clean water
through cross-border shipments in October as well. We
are therefore talking about hundreds of thousands of
Syrians who will not get sick this month because of the
Council’s cross-border-assistance mandate.
Nor can we forget that this assistance is also closely
monitored. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic looked at 420 trucks
used in 20 shipments in October. For each truck, the
Monitoring Mechanism confirmed that every delivery
was humanitarian and notified the Syrian authorities
about what was in it and where it went. Despite our
divisions on Syria, the Council’s rare moment of unity
on cross-border assistance has had a vital impact. We
managed to set politics aside and come together to
establish this mandate and then renew it for each of
the past two years. We must once again stand with the
Syrian people and renew that authorization. The lives
of far too many Syrian depend upon us living up to our
responsibility to help.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for his briefing.
Our successes in eliminating terrorist nerve centres
and taking de-escalation measures in the framework
of the Astana process have enabled us to significantly
improve the situation in Syria. What we also need is
progress on the political front, increased international
humanitarian aid, and assistance in restoring the
infrastructure of the liberated areas and in mine
clearance. However, the inadmissibility of attempts to
establish preconditions, a principle that we traditionally
apply to the Syrian parties involved in the political
process, is also true for humanitarian assistance from
our international partners.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that the
11 November statement of the Presidents of Russia and
the United States included a call to the States Members
of the United Nations to increase their contributions
to meeting the Syrian people’s humanitarian needs in
the next few months. The same subject was included
in a joint statement on 22 November by the Presidents
of Russia, Iran and Turkey that emphasized assistance
with humanitarian mine clearance, preserving

17-402877/13

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

historical heritage and restoring basic residential
infrastructure, including socioeconomic facilities.
Russia has consistently advocated for expanding
humanitarian assistance to Syria and does not divide its
inhabitants into “us” and “them”. We have been helping
Syrians on a daily basis and have kept the Security
Council regularly informed about that. On the other
hand, we have been seeing unilateral sanctions that do
not allow Damascus to buy medicines or acquire and
repair medical equipment. That is eloquent testimony
to various international stakeholders’ real attitude
to Syrians.
We are extremely concerned about the
humanitarian catastrophe in Raqqa, primarily caused
by the indiscriminate violence of the coalition. Now
the United States and its major allies are taking steps,
including in the information space, to hide the serious
consequences of their military operation. The United
Nations is still unable to get into Raqqa in order to
conduct an assessment. The official version — that it is
too dangerous — is frivolous fudging aimed at people
with short memories. A year ago, when the terrorists
were withdrawing from their last refuge in eastern
Aleppo, a few members of the Security Council
literally tried to drag representatives of the United
Nations and its partners there by force, including by
adopting a resolution. Then everything was organized,
both the evacuation and the monitoring, and received
high praise from the humanitarian workers.
We have been assured that Raqqa has long ago
been liberated from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) without any controlled evacuation or
signs of monitoring, but what is going on there is the
mystery of the seventh seal. The banal reason is that the
coalition has something to hide from the international
community — significant numbers of civilian victims
and huge destruction. An unattractive picture is
emerging from communications concerning a deal that,
as we understand it, was cut when Raqqa was liberated
between ISIL and the paramilitary groups allied with
the coalition. We are concerned about the situation of
the people fleeing Raqqa, who are held in inhumane
conditions in camps for displaced persons, in a zone
that is de facto controlled by armed groups protected
by the coalition.
There have been reports that various local authorities
have been established in districts liberated from ISIL,
with the direct participation of the coalition, and that
economic recovery measures are being negotiated
8/13

29/11/2017

with them. They are not discussing such issues with
the Syrian authorities. We have listened to people
voicing unfounded fears that establishing de-escalation
areas could affect Syria’s territorial integrity. We
have consistently refuted such insinuations. What the
coalition is doing, however, is taking real steps to pull
the country apart. Basically, the foreign presence is in
Syria illegally, however hard individual officials in the
United States try to find legal grounds for it, because
there are none. Moreover, we are seeing the occupying
forces attempt to gain a foothold in Syria an indefinite
period that has nothing to do with the counter-terrorism
efforts that we are assured are the coalition’s only goal.
We recognize the importance of providing
assistance to the people of Raqqa and its environs,
as well as to the hundreds of thousands of displaced
people who have been forced to leave the city. However,
that assistance cannot be supplied at the expense of
other parts of the country, including those liberated
by the Syrian army. In order for the coalition to gloss
over its actions in Raqqa as a distraction, it needs an
alternative tragedy of the month. That job has recently
fallen to eastern Ghouta, where terrorists remain and
clashes between various armed groups continue. We
have been cultivating intensive contacts in eastern
Ghouta, including with armed groups, in order to help
to resolve emerging humanitarian access issues, and we
are discussing the parameters of medical evacuation.
Those are all very delicate issues requiring work on the
ground. A tripartite mechanism with the participation
of Russia, Syria and the United Nations has great
potential, and cooperation of that kind is essential to
finding solutions to complex issues. I should point
out, by the way, that the Syrian authorities have just
announced a truce in eastern Ghouta.
We have already said that the Security Council
will have to have a serious discussion about crossborder operations in the absence of proper monitoring.
It is non-governmental organizations that are the
concertmasters in this area, with the United Nations
playing second fiddle. The requirement of resolution
2165 (2014) — that the assistance being dispatched
through the border crossings it designates must go
to every area of Syria — is not being met. We have
no way of knowing where it actually ends up. There
is an understanding that in this way only the areas
held by armed groups are supplied. We have heard
Mr. Lowcock’s information about the cross-border
deliveries, but it is not enough, and we want to know
17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

more. We want a briefing on cross-border deliveries at
the beginning of next week under the heading of “Any
other business”.
This mechanism cannot be maintained in its
current form. It usurps Syria’s sovereignty and is
contrary to the principles of emergency humanitarian
assistance endorsed by the General Assembly. It is an
unprecedented and extreme measure that must now
be reassessed.
Positive changes in the situation on the ground,
thanks to the Astana process, help to increase the
volume of convoys through the line of contact. We
are encouraging the Syrian authorities to engage
constructively. At the same time, there needs to be
order in the distribution of humanitarian aid so as to
ensure that it does not to fall into the hands of terrorists
to then be resold to the Syrian people at higher prices.
We are troubled by the humanitarian situation in
the Al-Rukban camp, at the border with Jordan. As the
Syrian Government has no access there, we cannot ask
it to do the impossible. This is an area under the control
of the American military, which arbitrarily established
the camp around the Al-Tanf military base. In that
time, the area has become a black hole through which
terrorists freely flow. We trust that our United States
partners will assist the United Nations in normalizing
the situation in that area.
In conclusion, we note that the assessments
pointing to a reduction in the volume of humanitarian
assistance to besieged and hard-to-reach regions need
to be continuously verified so as to ensure that they
align with reality. Assistance is reaching those areas
except when, for objective reasons, it cannot do so due
to ongoing hostilities.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation, Sir, for the update by Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock on the humanitarian situation
in Syria and commend his efforts.
Kazakhstan remains committed to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at resolving humanitarian
issues in Syria. We believe that it is of the utmost
importance to preserve all possible humanitarian access
modalities, including cross-border systems that are
indispensable to bringing humanitarian aid to millions
of people in northern and southern Syria. We appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations, under the leadership
of Mr. Lowcock and colleagues from the Office for the

S/PV. 8117

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at Headquarters
and in the field, to supply food, fuel and drinking water
to devastated areas of Syria in need of urgent assistance,
and to organize the evacuation of civilians. We also
support the humanitarian activities of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent
Society and United Nations agencies, which are
operating under extremely complicated conditions.
We also support members of the military contingent
who are carrying out demining actions in the liberated
territories. Efforts should be focused on creating the
conditions necessary to further stabilize those areas.
That includes ensuring compliance with the ceasefire,
including in the de-escalation zones. It is also essential to
comply with international humanitarian law. All parties
to the conflict should use their influence to ensure
unhindered humanitarian access, including assistance
in providing medical assistance and evacuation.
The issue of ensuring that the large numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the camps
receive assistance should be addressed. The Astana
process draws attention to the problem of the large
number of explosive devices left behind by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant militants in the territories
liberated from terrorists. We urge support for the
United Nations initiative to clear those territories.
That will allow for the elimination of unexploded
ordnance, the launching of humanitarian operations
and the return of refugees to their homes. Ensuring the
continuous delivery of humanitarian assistance will
facilitate that, but international support is required. It
is therefore important to unite the global efforts of all
United Nations Member States.
Kazakhstan continues to support all international
efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the
Syrian crisis. We hope that the agreements reached
within the Astana platform and the Geneva process
will be fully implemented. We are also of the strong
view that civilians should be protected. Therefore,
in our capital and within the Astana peace process,
careful work is being done to strengthen measures to
build trust between the parties. In particular, efforts
are now directed towards the release of detainees
and hostages, the transfer of bodies of the dead, and
the exchange of information on missing persons. Our
main priorities are to address the appalling flight of
detainees, abductees and missing persons and to ensure
full humanitarian access to any besieged or hard-toreach area, including eastern Ghouta. As the country

17-402879/13

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

hosting the Astana platform, Kazakhstan will make
every effort to ensure that progress in de-escalation will
result in increased humanitarian access. We thank all
those who continue to provide substantial humanitarian
assistance to Syria through international organizations
and bilateral channels.
Lastly, we are convinced that only full compliance
with the ceasefire agreement will directly improve the
humanitarian situation and reduce the level of violence.
We commend the efforts of the stakeholders of the
Astana process and other interested parties to achieve
this goal. However, we stress that no initiative aimed
at establishing peace in the world’s conflict zones can
be successful and efficient without the support of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for
his comprehensive and objective briefing, and to
emphasize the extent of France’s concern at the recent
developments in the humanitarian situation in Syria. In
that context, I would like to highlight three points that
are essential in our view: the critical situation of the
people in eastern Ghouta, who are besieged and without
humanitarian assistance; attacks against hospitals and
medical facilities; and the persistent restrictions on
access to humanitarian assistance in Syria.
First, in eastern Ghouta, the Syrian regime has
established a veritable blockade that has trapped the
Syrian people. Dozens of civilians have died in recent
days, victims of the intensified bombing by the regime,
which continues to use famine as a means of war.
No United Nations convoy has been authorized since
that sent to Duma on 12 November. The population,
exhausted by over four years of siege carried out in
disregard of the fundamental principles of humanitarian
law, has been subjected to every kind of suffering.
The recent figures reported by the non-governmental
organization Médecins Sans Frontières in eastern
Ghouta are terrifying. Hospitals sponsored by that
organization treated 576 wounded and recorded 69
dead between 14 and 26 November. One-quarter of
those victims were women and children. Moreover,
as stressed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/982), the regime continues to refuse to deliver
the necessary authorization for emergency medical
evacuations. More than 470 people are concerned,
including 193 children. France once again calls on
States with influence on the regime to persuade it to
10/13

29/11/2017

authorize enable those evacuations. Attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure must end.
More broadly, and beyond eastern Ghouta, the
regime continues to remove medicines and medical
material from convoys. Medicines and medical material
for more than 12,000 people were removed from
convoys last month. In total, over 630,000 medicines
have been removed since the beginning of the year. We
have already had occasion in the Council to strongly
denounce that practice, which is entirely unacceptable.
Equally unacceptable are ongoing restrictions on
access for humanitarian assistance in Syria. The report
of the Secretary-General is clear. De-escalation zones
have not led to a genuine improvement in humanitarian
access. Violations of humanitarian law are still being
observed. Humanitarian assistance across the front
lines remains greatly limited despite the establishment
of a tripartite coordination mechanism. On average, in
2017 only 26 per cent of those targeted were able to
benefit each month, and only 10 per cent were able to
benefit in October. Obstacles remain to the provision
of humanitarian assistance, including, inter alia,
myriad bureaucratic restrictions that have been duly
documented and reported.
We can never sufficiently emphasize that the
priority is to ensure safe, full, immediate and
unimpeded humanitarian access throughout Syrian
territory. Any form of obstacle to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance is unacceptable and must be
firmly denounced and condemned as such. France calls
on the States guarantors of de-escalation zones to fully
exercise their responsibility so as to put an end to the
violence and to ensure that humanitarian assistance can
reach people in need without obstacle.
Cross-border assistance remains absolutely
essential to the humanitarian response in Syria. Nearly
800,000 people enjoyed such assistance last month.
Since the establishment of the cross-border monitoring
mechanism in July 2014, the United Nations has provided
significant humanitarian and health assistance, as well
as medical treatment for millions of Syrians, through
that channel.
The Council will soon address the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014), and we call for it to demonstrate
unity and responsibility to safeguard that fundamental
achievement. It is indeed vital — in the true sense of the
word — to ensure access to people in need as promptly
and effectively as possible. The renewal of resolution
17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8117

2165 (2014) is therefore a top priority for France. The
critical situation requires more than ever before an
effective cessation of hostilities throughout the entire
territory, with a genuine monitoring mechanism and
sanctions in place for violations. Ongoing bombardment
makes humanitarian operations more difficult. We
therefore call on the guarantors to do their utmost to
ensure effective implementation.

My country’s Government confirms that those
preparing the monthly report should work on the basis
of respect for the content of relevant United Nations
resolutions, and in particular full commitment to
respecting the sovereignty and territorial unity and
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the
provision of humanitarian support in Syria without
politicization or selectivity.

As a new round of intra-Syrian talks began
yesterday in Geneva, I recall that a lasting cessation of
fighting and improvement in the humanitarian situation
will hinge solely on a political solution, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). United Nations mediation, with
all of our support, despite our differences, is the only
way to bring about a negotiated democratic transition.
We reaffirm our support for Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura.

On Monday, we sent an official letter to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council, laying out the position of the Syrian
Government on the current report. However, I should
like to make the following points.

Lastly, we strongly reaffirm France’s ongoing
support for humanitarian operations, but neither
reconstruction efforts nor requests for financial
contributions to that end will make sense until a lasting
political solution is implemented in Syria, with the
support of all.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s Government has reviewed the
forty-fifth monthly report (S/2017/982), submitted
by the Under-Secretary-General for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
While we note the improvements that it contains, we
continue to hope that future reports will reflect the
reality on the ground in an objective, transparent and
professional manner.
In the same vein, my country’s Government looks
forward to the announced visit by the Under-SecretaryGeneral to Syria in January and will remain open to
putting the relationship back on track and bridging the
confidence gap resulting from some mistakes made
recently by OCHA. We confirm the need for there to
be no double standards or politicization in the work
of OCHA. Furthermore, it should not submit to the
pressure being imposed on it by some permanent States
members of the Council to use humanitarian file as a
tool to exert influence over the Syrian Government.

The current report, like its predecessors, continues
to suffer from a major flaw. Those preparing it have
relied on politicized and other open sources that
lack credibility, while continuing to ignore trusted
Syrian Government sources. The Syrian Government
regrets that the report’s writers refer to what they
call “administrative impediments and deliberate
restrictions” that they claim limit the delivery of
humanitarian aid to unstable areas. Despite the fact
that armed terrorist groups continue to shell cities in
residential areas and to escalate and perpetrate violations
in the de-escalation zones, my country’s Government
offers every possible facility to ensure the delivery of
that aid when directed to eligible Syrian citizens and
when the necessary and proper arrangements are made
according to Syrian laws and regulations.
In that regard, I note the reference in the report to
the fact that the United Nations has managed to deliver
humanitarian aid to millions of people in need inside
Syria. That could not have been achieved without the
cooperation, coordination and support of the Syrian
Arab Republic and its institutions. On this matter, I
remind the members of the Council of the trilateral
cooperation mechanism that was established in
September, which includes the Syrian Government, the
friendly Russian Federation and the United Nations. It
has worked effectively and regularly to avoid any gaps
and obstacles with a view to facilitating coordination
and enhancing humanitarian access, and has achieved
positive results of late.
We ask those preparing the report to inform the
Member States of the real facts and figures that reflect
the tangible progress made in ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian access to its eligible beneficiaries,
thanks to the efforts of the Syrian Government and

17-4028711/13

S/PV.8117

The situation in the Middle East

its allies to liberate most Syrian territories from
abominable terrorism.
The Government of Syria regrets the continued
insistence of those preparing the report on promoting
cross-border aid delivery. We confirm that most of that
aid continues to fall into the hands of armed terrorist
groups present throughout the targeted areas. How else
can we explain the continued suffering of civilians in
those regions as a result of terrorists’ controlling and
seizing the nutritional material and aid that is delivered
and then reselling it at exorbitant prices to those who
need it?
My country’s Government further notes that the
border crossings of Bab al-Hawa, Bab Salama and ArRamtha are being used to smuggle arms and equipment
to the very same armed terrorist organizations in Syria.
We believe that the express desire of the SecretaryGeneral and his aids in Syria to turn over a new leaf
of professional work and cooperation with the Syrian
Government runs counter to the continued inclusion
by the report’s writers of baseless claims promoting
cross-border aid, tainting the image of the Syrian
Government, or even ignoring its efforts, thereby
effectively serving the political goals of some States
that have a negative influence in the Security Council,
including by promoting urgent claims for the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014).

29/11/2017

and distribute humanitarian aidto their supporters or
sell it at inflated prices to those who need it, as was the
case in the neighbourhoods of eastern Aleppo.
On the other hand, my country’s Government calls
on those who wrote the report to be transparent and
clear in holding the so-called international coalition
led by the United States responsible for the destruction
of Raqqa city and the massacres perpetrated by the
United States-led coalition in Raqqa city — which was
completely destroyed — and other Syrian areas, killing
hundreds and destroying many residential areas; and for
using internationally prohibited weapons — especially
white phosphorous — that constitute illegal war actions
tantamount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
My country’s Government also calls on those who
prepared the report to be transparent and credible by
clear stressing in future reports the deeply negative
impacts of the unilateral economic coercive measures
imposed on Syria by the United States of America,
members of the European Union and other States, which
have affected even the activities of the United Nations
agencies and foreign non-governmental organizations
operating in the country. Those measures have led to
the stalling of several important projects that were
designed to respond to the needs of the Syrian people.

My country’s Government confirms the need for
United Nations personnel in Syria to refrain from
dealing with any secessionist entities, illegal so-called
local councils or unlicensed civil society organizations.
We warn that most of those organizations have close
ties, amounting to subservience, to the armed terrorist
groups. Moreover, we call on the United Nations and
its agencies to stop using the border crossing of Fish
Khabur because it is an illegal crossing that is used
by certain parties and organizations that enter Syrian
territory illicitly.

Moreover, my country’s Government calls on those
who prepared the report to not simply take stock of the
rate of funding but to express clearly and openly that
some donors who made pledges are not fulfilling their
financial commitments, and that some have imposed
political conditions for the funding of international
organizations operating in Syria and obstructed the
Syrian Government’s plans for the rehabilitation of
infrastructure and the return of internally displaced
persons to their homes once security and stability
are restored.

The Syrian Government continues to have grave
concern over the persistent use of exaggeration and
hyperbole by those writing the reports, their use of
the expression “besieged areas” and their inclusion of
misleading information about the situation in eastern
Ghouta, in rural Damascus. Civilians in eastern Ghouta
are actually under an internal siege that is being imposed
by the various armed organizations present there, which
take advantage of civilians and use them as human
shields. Those armed organizations seize, monopolize

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic rejects the
call of the Secretary-General for the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We affirm that the ICC has no
jurisdiction over the situation in Syria. The Court has
lost all credibility since it was rendered a mere political
tool to impose the law of force and not the force of law.
The Syrian Arab Republic also rejects the SecretaryGeneral’s call for cooperation with the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism

12/13

17-40287

29/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, and calls on Member States
to read document A/71/799, which contains the text of
a letter from our Permanent Mission to the SecretaryGeneral, setting out the serious legal flaws of General
Assembly resolution 71/248, which established an
illegitimate mechanism that is not recognized by my
country’s Government or by the Governments of several
other Member States.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the UnderSecretary-General to focus transparently and

S/PV. 8117

professionally on improving ties with the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as on supporting coordination and
reaching out in order to preserve the humanitarian file
from any political pressure or foreign considerations
that some influential Governments are trying to
impose on the United Nations agencies working in the
humanitarian sector.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

17-4028713/13
