United Nations

S/PV.3955

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3955th Meeting
Wednesday, 16 December 1998, 9.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Buallay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bahrain)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Amorim
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Niehaus
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Essonghé
Mr. Jagne
Mr. Konishi
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Monteiro
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Türk
Mr. Dahlgren
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1172)

98-86710 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 December 1998 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1172)
The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1998/1172.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/1173, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 December 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the letter dated 14 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and its enclosure.
Members of the Council have received photocopies of
the following communications: letter dated 16 December
1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1175; letter dated 16 December 1998 from the

2

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the United States Mission
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1181; and letter dated 16 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1998/1182.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)(interpretation from Arabic): I
speak to you now while rockets and bombs are falling on
the cities and the villages of Iraq, Iraq that is steadfast
and patient. I am not speaking in symbolic language or
about a fireworks display in the Baghdad sky which is
being enjoyed by CNN viewers. Indeed, I am speaking
about bombs that are falling at this very moment to rip
out the hearts of elderly men and women and extinguish
smiles from the faces of children and scatter their limbs
everywhere. These are instruments of destruction that are
reaping the lives of Iraqi civilians who have been
suffering for the past eight years from one of the most
comprehensive and horrendous sanctions known in human
history.
The aggression launched by the United States and
Britain today is the most glaring evidence of the absence
of principles in international relations and of the
submission of the world to the authority of brute power.
Indeed, this is a very grim and sad day in the history of
the United Nations and the Security Council. At a time
when the Security Council, with the participation of the
Secretary-General, was discussing reports submitted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) on the
status of compliance by Iraq, and before the Council
reached any conclusion on this subject, the United States
and Britain launched their attack against Iraq. The two
Powers requested a suspension of the informal meeting of
the Security Council and their pretext for aggression was
that one of the two reports — the UNSCOM report —
emphasized the lack of full cooperation by Iraq with
UNSCOM. Thus, the United States has once again
arrogated to itself the Security Council’s authority and
flouted international law and the United Nations Charter.
Indeed, it has disregarded the prestige of the members of
the Council, who were in session and were not allowed to
even complete their discussion, in keeping with their

Security Council
Fifty-third year
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security.
Time and again we have warned against the partiality
and lack of objectivity of the United Nations Special
Commission. The conduct of the UNSCOM Executive
Chairman yesterday and today provided additional evidence
that his partiality, lack of integrity and lack of objectivity
as an international civil servant could indeed lead the world
to disasters, the first victims of which would be the United
Nations and its prestige. The UNSCOM Executive
Chairman singled out in his report yesterday five incidents
out of a total of 300 inspection operations; I repeat, five
incidents of 300 inspection operations that have been
undertaken since UNSCOM resumed its operations in Iraq
on 18 November. He considered those incidents as
categorical evidence of lack of cooperation on Iraq’s part.
What are these incidents? One is that the Iraqi side
requested UNSCOM to respect the Muslim religious
holiday on Fridays. Another was that the Iraqi side took
inspectors to the headquarters of a non-Iraqi organization
and the officers of that organization denied the inspectors
access to their headquarters. A third incident was that
UNSCOM inspectors entered a site where they were
expecting to find what was presumed to be documents and
they failed to find such documents because those documents
were not there.
Another incident relates to the "air force" document,
which we invited him to discuss jointly, in the presence of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. He refused to
do so. Yet another incident relates to a visit to the party
headquarters, in which a party representative requested a
written request — just a few lines — to inspect the party
headquarters. They refused to do so. And to complete his
non-objective conclusions with regard to cooperation by
Iraq, the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
today, without the knowledge or approval of the Security
Council — without its knowledge or approval — withdrew
his inspectors from Iraq in order to pave the way
completely for the military aggression against Iraq by the
United States and the United Kingdom.
The exaggerated uproar about Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction is nothing but a great lie; the other lie is the
allegation that Iraq poses a threat to its neighbours. With
regard to weapons of mass destruction, UNSCOM and the
International Atomic Energy Agency have been operating
since April 1991, with cooperation from the Iraqi side, and
have completed their essential work in the area of
disarmament. The International Atomic Energy Agency
announced recently that the disarmament phase has virtually

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
been completed, and UNSCOM declared that it was about
to complete that phase with regard to missiles and
chemical weapons, a month being set by the Chairman of
UNSCOM to do so.
The question that arises is, where are the prohibited
weapons which they allege that Iraq still has? If
UNSCOM has any evidence that Iraq possesses a
prohibited weapon or its components, then we challenge
them, as we have done in the past, to provide physical
evidence to the Security Council. Indeed, some members
of the Security Council have requested, time and again,
that such evidence be submitted, but UNSCOM has failed
to do so.
With regard to the threat posed by Iraq to its
neighbours — and there is a well-known exception in this
context — we ask the Security Council to tell us which
of Iraq’s neighbouring States claims that Iraq is
threatening its peace and security. Indeed, we would pose
another question: what has the Security Council done in
the face of the threats to the peace and security of Iraq
made every day by some permanent members of the
Security Council, and of other threats posed by another
neighbouring country?
In closing, I invite the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities as set forth in the United Nations Charter
and request an immediate and unconditional cessation of
the aggression that is under way against Iraq.
Furthermore, I remind the Council of the content of the
statement issued by the national leadership of my country
today: that we are confident that the people of Iraq will
prove once again that this aggression is futile and a
failure, as they have done in the past with regard to every
prior instance of aggression.
Finally, I wish a holy Ramadan to the steadfast
Iraqis and to Arabs and Muslims everywhere in the
world.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Today’s meeting is taking place at a time
when Iraq is being subjected to massive missile and bomb
strikes by the armed forces of the United States and the
United Kingdom. There have been casualties, valuable
material goods have been destroyed and a threat has been
created to peace and security not only in the region but
beyond it. I should like to recall that there are Russian
citizens in Baghdad. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Mr. Ivanov, stated today that if

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3955th meeting
16 December 1998

their lives should prove to be imperilled, that will have
extremely serious consequences.

the United Nations recently. The Iraqi leadership even
now confirms its readiness to continue on that course.

Grave harm has been done to the tremendous amount
of work done in recent years to effect a post-crisis
settlement in the Persian Gulf region and to dismantle the
capability of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems. The very existence of the system that was
so carefully set up over a long period of time to monitor
the prohibited programmes of Iraq has been called into
question. Such a turn of events, to which Russia decidedly
objects, has caused very serious concern and deep alarm. In
carrying out this unprovoked act of force, the United States
and the United Kingdom have grossly violated the Charter
of the United Nations, the principles of international law
and the generally recognized norms and rules of responsible
behaviour on the part of States in the international arena.
Essentially, a threat has been made to the entire system of
international security, in which the United Nations and the
Security Council act as a central link.

We believe that although there are certain problems
regarding the cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations Special Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the current crisis was created artificially,
partly as a result of the irresponsible acts of the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission, Richard Butler. On
the night of 15 December this year, he presented a report
that gave a distorted picture of the real state of affairs and
concluded that there was a lack of full cooperation on the
part of Iraq. That conclusion was not borne out by the
facts. Without any consultations with the Security
Council, Richard Butler then evacuated the entire Special
Commission staff from Iraq. At the same time, there was
an absolutely unacceptable leak of the report to the
communications media, which received the text before the
members of the Security Council themselves. Richard
Butler thus grossly abused his authority. His acts have led
to a sharp deterioration of the situation regarding Iraq.

The Security Council alone has the right to determine
what steps should be taken in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security. We reject outright the
attempts made in the letters from the United States and the
United Kingdom to justify the use of force on the basis of
a mandate that was previously issued by the Security
Council. The resolutions of the Council provide no grounds
whatsoever for such actions.
I should like to recall that paragraph 6 of the most
recent resolution of the Security Council on Iraq, resolution
1205 (1998), clearly states that the Security Council
“Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter.”
Clearly, therefore, those actions have been undertaken
in violation of Security Council resolutions. The entire
responsibility for the consequences of those actions must be
borne by those States that have chosen a unilateral act of
force in order to resolve their problems with Iraq. No one
is entitled to act independently on behalf of the United
Nations, still less assume the functions of a world
policeman. Russia has consistently made intensive
diplomatic efforts to promote a swift settlement of the
situation around Iraq. The potential for a political and
diplomatic resolution of the Iraqi crisis has by no means
been exhausted, as is made particularly clear by the
basically normal course of cooperation between Iraq and

4

It is symbolic that precisely at the time when
Richard Butler, during today’s consultative Council
meeting, was attempting to defend the conclusions
reached in his report, we were informed about the strike
against Iraq, and the justification for that unilateral act
was precisely the report which had been presented by the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission.
In the light of this new situation in Iraq, the Russian
Federation cannot remain unconcerned. We appeal for an
immediate end to these acts of military force, that
restraint and prudence be demonstrated and that no further
escalation of the conflict be allowed, a conflict which is
fraught with completely predictable consequences,
dangerous not only for the Iraqi settlement but also for
international stability as a whole.
We are convinced that the resolution of the Iraqi
problem is possible only through political and diplomatic
methods on the basis of compliance with the resolutions
of the Security Council and the norms of international
law.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement today in which he, inter alia, confirmed his
readiness to promote a peaceful settlement of the problem
in the region of the Persian Gulf.
We believe that the Security Council has its part to
play in accordance with the Charter of the United

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Nations, including giving an assessment, in principle, of the
current unilateral military action. In this context, today’s
meeting is of particular significance.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): This afternoon the United States and the United
Kingdom started a military attack against Iraq which
violated the United Nations Charter and norms governing
international law. We were deeply shocked by this act, and
we condemn it.
It must be pointed out in particular that with the joint
efforts of the Secretary-General and the international
community, Iraq had resumed its cooperation with United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and progress
had also been made in verification efforts.
Against this backdrop, the unprovoked military action
of the two countries is completely groundless. We are
deeply concerned over the safety and security of the people
of Iraq and the United Nations staff in the country.
We also would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the remarks he made today on this question.
The Chinese delegation at the open debate this
morning on the question of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building stated that we are
against power politics or the unilateral resort to the use or
threat of force in international relations. We believe that
such acts contravene international law and norms governing
international relations and are in themselves a serious threat
to international peace and security. These remarks of ours
were not without targets.
China has always strongly advocated peaceful
settlement of international disputes and is against the use or
the threat of use of force in international relations.
The differences that exist between UNSCOM and Iraq
on the verification issue can properly be settled through
dialogue and consultation. The use of force, far from
helping to reach a settlement, may create serious
consequences for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, for relations between Iraq and the United
Nations and for peace and stability in the world and in the
region.
We call upon the United States and the United
Kingdom to immediately stop all military actions against
Iraq, to avoid any other acts which may worsen the

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
situation and to return to the path of cooperation and
dialogue.
The leader of UNSCOM has played a dishonourable
role in this crisis. The reports submitted by UNSCOM to
the Secretary-General were one-sided and evasive
regarding the facts. It is difficult for the UNSCOM leader
to shirk his responsibility in the current crisis.
From the letters addressed to the President of the
Council by the United States and the United Kingdom, it
can be seen that they have taken the relevant UNSCOM
reports as the main argument for the use of force against
Iraq. Perhaps that was precisely the purpose of those
reports, but I must point out that whatever the intention
was behind the preparation of the reports by the
UNSCOM leader, and however the countries which read
them try to make use of them, there is in fact no excuse
or reason for the use of force against Iraq.
We believe that only through political and diplomatic
means can an appropriate settlement be found to the
various contradictions and differences over the question
of weapons verification in Iraq.
The United Nations Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the main responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. At this crucial moment
of war and peace, the Council should shoulder this sacred
responsibility. We are ready to join the international
community in an effort to this end.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): A few
hours ago the armed forces of the United Kingdom, along
with those of the United States, took military action in
Iraq. This was not a hasty decision.
There has been a long road to this crisis. At any
point on that road, Iraq could have chosen to cooperate
fully and freely, thereby avoiding the action which we
have been forced to take. It is worth looking back down
that road to see why we have reached this point.
Security Council resolution 687 (1991), bringing to
an end the Gulf War, made it a condition of the ceasefire
that Iraq both destroy its weapons of mass destruction and
agree to the monitoring of its obligation to destroy such
weapons.
Why was this assurance so vital? Because Iraq had,
unprovoked, invaded Kuwait. Because in the course of
that conflict, Iraq had launched indiscriminate ballistic

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year
missile attacks on neighbouring countries. Because Iraq had
already shown it was ready and willing to use the most
deadly weapons. It used chemical weapons extensively
against Iran, and against its own civilians in Halabja in
1988, using mustard gas and the nerve agent tabun, killing
thousands of civilians. Saddam Hussein is the only leader
ever to have authorized the use of nerve agents. Chemical
weapons casualties from the Iran-Iraq war number more
than twenty thousand. As was slowly revealed after the
Gulf War, Iraq had developed huge quantities of weapons
of the most deadly kind.
The United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
was set up to remove Iraq’s extensive weapons of mass
destruction capabilities and to provide a full and verifiable
account of what Iraq had produced and used in the past. To
complete this task UNSCOM was, in 1991, given
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all the
areas, facilities, equipment and records it wished to inspect.
But Iraq has never given UNSCOM the cooperation it
needed to complete its tasks. Instead, it has concealed the
evidence of its past and current programmes and has
engaged in a policy of harassment and deceit to thwart
UNSCOM in its tasks. Iraq has blocked inspections
whenever it feared that anything incriminating would be
found. It has failed to produce documents UNSCOM knows
to exist, documents that are demonstrably relevant to Iraq’s
programmes of weapons of mass destruction. Even the
infamous “air force” document has yet not been handed
over.
Over the past 14 months, Iraq has deliberately
provoked a series of crises in an attempt to wear down the
will of the international community: in October 1997,
February 1998, August 1998 and at the end of October
1998. Each time, they used the withdrawal of cooperation
both for further prevarication and for the dispersal of their
military capability.
On 14 November, at the last moment and in the
knowledge that they were about to be attacked, the Iraqis
offered full, unconditional and unrestricted cooperation with
UNSCOM. The attack was called off. We willingly made
that last extra effort to avert the use of force. But we said
at the time that we would hold Saddam Hussein to his word
and that, should he break his word once more, there would
be no second chances. The Secretary-General added his
own words of warning, as did others with channels to
Baghdad. Those words were not heeded.

6

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
UNSCOM’s report makes clear that Iraq has yet
again failed to keep its promises. The report details not
merely the obstruction but the fact that it relates directly
to documents, sites and personnel that would give a clue
as to the whereabouts of weapons of mass destruction and
the capabilities to make them. It is not obstruction simply
for the sake of it, but a plan of deceit to prevent those
weapons of mass destruction from being located and
destroyed.
UNSCOM has made clear time and again that it can
only make progress in clearing up the outstanding
questions and establish an effective system of monitoring
and verification if Iraq offers real cooperation. Tragically,
that cooperation has not been forthcoming. The whole
continuing history of concealment and deceit is the reason
why we have reached the point of military action.
In this, our objectives are clear: to degrade Iraq’s
capability to build and use weapons of mass destruction,
and to diminish the military threat Iraq poses to its
neighbours. The targets chosen, therefore, are targets
connected with his military capability, his weapons of
mass destruction and his ability to threaten his
neighbours.
There is a clear legal basis for military action in the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. Resolution
1154 (1998) made it clear that any violation by Iraq of its
obligations to allow the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency unrestricted access
would have the severest consequences. That was three
resolutions and nine months ago. Resolution 1205 (1998)
established that Iraq’s decision of 31 October 1998 to
cease cooperation with the Special Commission was a
flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991), which laid
down the conditions for the 1991 ceasefire. By that
resolution, therefore, the Council implicitly revived the
authorization to use force given in resolution 678 (1990).
And Ambassador Butler’s report makes clear that, despite
its undertakings to rescind the decision of 31 October,
Iraq has not only failed to resume full cooperation with
the Special Commission but has imposed new restrictions
on its work.
The British Prime Minister said in his statement
earlier this evening,
“This action could have been avoided. Since
the Gulf war, the entire international community has
worked to stop Saddam Hussein from keeping and
developing nuclear, chemical and biological weapons

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3955th meeting
16 December 1998

and from continuing to threaten his neighbours. For
the safety and stability of the region and the wider
world, he cannot be allowed to do so. If he will not,
through reason and diplomacy, abandon his weapons
of mass destruction programme, it must be degraded
and diminished by military force. Having exhausted all
other avenues, there is no realistic alternative”.

Hence, Costa Rica forcefully and vigorously appeals
to Iraq to put an end, once and for all and
unconditionally, to its provocative actions, to fulfil its
obligations without delay in conformity with the terms set
by the Security Council, and to bring its conduct into line
with what it has undertaken to do and with its promises
to the international community.

Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): As a small, peaceful, democratic and
demilitarized country, Costa Rica has maintained and
continues unswervingly to maintain an international policy
based on the principle of the rejection of the use of force
in relations among States. This long-standing policy is
grounded in our own national experience and in the firm
conviction that international law is the sole proper and
legitimate instrument for addressing and resolving disputes
among States.

Costa Rica today appeals to all parties concerned to
do everything in their power to make possible, through
intensive recourse to the law and to diplomacy, a peaceful
solution to the present crisis.

Over the past two years, Costa Rica, as an elected
member of the Security Council, has applied that policy of
principle by actively supporting the use in all cases, as a
matter of first priority, of the means for the pacific
settlement of disputes provided for in Article 33 of the
Charter. Moreover, Costa Rica in that same capacity has
reaffirmed that recourse to the use of force envisaged as an
exceptional measure in Chapter VII, Article 42, of the
Charter falls within the sole and exclusive purview of the
Security Council, and that only this principal organ of the
United Nations can authorize collective action of that kind.
In that context, Costa Rica learned with great and
profound disquiet of the air strikes carried out today by the
United States of America and the United Kingdom against
military installations in Baghdad, Iraq. Given those events,
Costa Rica reaffirms its long-standing position rejecting the
unilateral use of force and insisting on adherence to
international legal instruments.
Nonetheless, Costa Rica wishes to say that over these
two years it has witnessed with frustration the Iraqi
Government policy of defying and ignoring international
obligations. That dangerous conduct by the Iraqi authorities
has undermined full implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction in the possession of Iraq, has sapped
international trust in Iraq’s good word, has profoundly
harmed the living conditions of the country’s civilian
population, and has driven Iraq’s relations with the
international community into a dead end.

Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Tonight’s meeting is a sombre
occasion to reflect on a development that we had all been
trying to avoid for quite some time. This year alone, the
Security Council was repeatedly confronted with crises in
its relations with Iraq. Laudable efforts by the SecretaryGeneral, by the Security Council as a whole and by
several of its members more than once created hope that
full implementation of Iraqi obligations under the Security
Council resolutions would be achieved by peaceful means.
On the other hand, already earlier this year, at the time of
endorsement of the Secretary-General’s Memorandum of
Understanding reached with Iraq, the Council made it
clear, in its resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, that
any violation of its obligations would have the severest
consequences for Iraq.
That was a clear message of the seriousness the
Council has attached to the disarmament work in Iraq. It
was also but one in a series of opportunities provided by
the Council to Iraq to de-escalate tensions and to proceed
with the unfinished business of disarmament.
Unfortunately, Iraq failed to take full advantage of those
opportunities.
It is deplorable that we find ourselves today in a
situation characterized by military action against Iraq. We
would have preferred instead to be in a position to
proceed immediately with a comprehensive review, for
which the Security Council was patiently and diligently
working in the past few months. We particularly regret
that the Iraqi leadership themselves have prevented that
review by failing to live up to their latest unequivocal
commitment of 14 November 1998 to full and
unconditional cooperation. It should have been clear to
them that the perpetuation of crises could sooner rather
than later lead to a forceful action. They should have
understood better the repeatedly and unanimously stated
position of the Security Council that hindering the
disarmament work is not acceptable.

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year
We have reached the point where it is difficult to
predict how the Council could best deal with Iraq in future.
At this moment, we wish to emphasize that we share the
Secretary-General’s concern for human lives and for the
fate of humanitarian relief efforts. It is necessary to explore
all possible ways to continue to address the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. We wish to welcome the
Secretary-General’s readiness to play his part in this
important task.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal always hopes that
the Security Council will find peaceful solutions to
situations of conflict, and it feels no differently in the case
of Iraq.
We have always been of the view that full cooperation
by Iraq with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) is essential to fulfil the disarmament tasks, to
ensure compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and thus enable the Council to lift the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. The confirmation by UNSCOM
of full cooperation by Iraq, as promised in its letters of 14
November, would have enabled the Council to proceed
speedily with a comprehensive review of all disarmament
files, as proposed by the Secretary-General. But, after so
many efforts and attempts by the Council to bring Iraq to
the path of cooperation, the latest report of the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM states that Iraq has not lived up to
its commitments and that, in fact, it has not cooperated
fully with UNSCOM.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General to
offer for the Council’s consideration several possible
options to react to the UNSCOM report. Portugal was ready
to consider those options, and said so this morning. In the
meantime, however, we have been informed of the decision
to withdraw all UNSCOM and IAEA personnel from Iraq
for reasons of safety. The Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM provided further elements on the degree of noncooperation by Iraq today to Council members.
The Security Council is thus confronted with a
declaration by Ambassador Butler that Iraq has not
cooperated fully. The United States and the United
Kingdom had made it perfectly clear last month that, in the
absence of full cooperation by Iraq, they would act without
returning to the Council. It is not, therefore, a surprise to
my delegation that a decision has been taken to act
militarily. Naturally, the Council will have to evaluate the
consequences of military action with regard to fulfilling the

8

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
goals of disarming Iraq and maintaining peace and
security in the region.
Portugal deeply regrets that a peaceful solution could
not be found. But the main cause of the current crisis is
the obstinate policy of Iraq’s rulers in refusing to comply
with Security Council resolutions. As Chairman of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
661 (1990), I have been particularly sensitive to the
consequences of this crisis on the Iraqi people and have
sought to do everything possible in the context of the
humanitarian programme to alleviate their suffering.
Portugal will continue to try to contribute actively to
find ways to minimize the effects of the current
circumstances on top of the already difficult living
conditions of the Iraqi people. But we must also
remember that the primary responsibility for the wellbeing of all Iraqis falls to the authorities of that country.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Coalition
forces today began operations against military targets in
Iraq. Our ongoing military action is substantial. We are
focusing on Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its ability to threaten its neighbours.
Coalition forces are acting under the authority
provided by the resolutions of the Security Council. This
action is a necessary and proportionate response to the
continued refusal of the Iraqi Government to comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council and the threat to
international peace and security which Iraq’s noncompliance represents. In carrying out this action, our
forces have taken appropriate measures to defend
themselves from any interference by Iraq and have made
every possible effort to avoid civilian casualties and
collateral damage.
As the Council is well aware, this resort to military
force was undertaken only when it became evident that
diplomacy had been exhausted. The coalition acted out of
necessity, and the Government of Iraq bears full
responsibility for the consequences of this military
operation. We did not act precipitately. On the contrary,
the United States has worked with its partners in the
Security Council over the past months in a sincere and
sustained effort to bring about a peaceful resolution of the
confrontation created by Iraq. For reasons best known to
Saddam Hussein, Iraq chose to reject that effort.
Following the liberation of Kuwait from Iraqi
occupation in 1991, Security Council resolution 687

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3955th meeting
16 December 1998

(1991) mandated a ceasefire; but it also imposed a number
of essential conditions on Iraq, including the destruction of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction and acceptance by Iraq
of United Nations inspections.

mandate, by imposing new restrictions on the weapons
inspectors and by repeatedly denying access to facilities
which UNSCOM wished to inspect, Iraq once again acted
in flagrant and material breach of resolution 687 (1991).

In its resolutions — including, in addition to resolution
687 (1991), resolutions 707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154
(1998), 1194 (1998), 1205 (1998) and others — the Council
has elaborated and reiterated those conditions, including
“full, final and complete disclosure” (resolution 707 (1991))
of all aspects of its programmes to develop weapons of
mass destruction, and “immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access” (ibid.) for the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) “to any and all areas, facilities,
equipment, records and means of transportation which they
wish to inspect” (ibid.). Iraqi compliance with all these
requirements is a fundamental element of international
peace and security in the region.

I should like to pause here to praise the outstanding
professional work of the talented and dedicated staff of
the Special Commission and its Executive Chairman,
Richard Butler. Their efforts from 1991 until today have
reflected the seriousness with which they view their
mandate. Subjected repeatedly to a pattern of harassment
from a legion of Iraqi officials, they have always sought
to perform their duties in an accurate and serious manner,
and they have succeeded.

Nevertheless, Iraq has repeatedly taken actions which
constitute flagrant, material breaches of these provisions.
On a number of occasions the Council has affirmed that
similar Iraqi actions constituted such breaches, as well as a
threat to international peace and security.
Just one month ago, on 14 November, the Government
of Iraq committed to provide full and unconditional
cooperation with UNSCOM, as required by the resolutions.
The Iraqi Government described it as a “clear and
unconditional decision by the Iraqi Government to resume
cooperation with UNSCOM and IAEA”. Iraq stated that the
weapons inspectors could “immediately resume all their
activities according to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council”. It must be noted that Iraq rescinded its
restrictions on the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and offered those assurances only in the face of a
credible threat of force. Military force was not employed at
that time, however, because the United States, along with
other members of the Security Council, sought a peaceful
resolution to the situation created by Iraq and opted to go
the extra mile to test Iraqi intentions.
In that event, Iraq failed to fulfil its assurances. As the
15 December UNSCOM report makes clear, Iraq failed to
provide the full cooperation it promised on 14 November
and thus left UNSCOM unable to conduct the substantive
disarmament work mandated to it by the Council.
By refusing to make available documents and
information requested by UNSCOM within the scope of its

Iraq fully understood that its actions would be
reported accurately to the Security Council by the Special
Commission. Indeed, the Iraqi Government did not even
wait for the Special Commission’s report before
presenting its own skewed interpretation of events to the
Security Council yesterday, because the Iraqi leadership
understood that the report of the Special Commission
would be factual.
Following Iraq’s repeated, flagrant and material
breaches of its obligations under resolutions 687 (1991),
707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154 (1998), 1194 (1998), 1205
(1998) and others, in addition to its failure to fulfil its
own commitments, the coalition today exercised the
authority given by Security Council resolution 678 (1990)
for Member States to employ all necessary means to
secure Iraqi compliance with the Council’s resolutions
and restore international peace and security in the area.
Any Iraqi attempt to attack coalition forces or to initiate
aggressive action against a neighbouring State will be met
with a swift response by the coalition.
As President Clinton stated this evening, if we had
delayed for even a matter of days from Chairman Butler’s
report, we would have given Saddam Hussein more time
to disperse his forces and protect his weapons. Also, the
Muslim holy month of Ramadan begins this weekend. For
us to initiate military action during Ramadan would be
profoundly offensive to the Muslim world and therefore
damage our relations with Arab countries and the progress
we have made in the Middle East peace process.
President Clinton also stressed that the decision to
use force is never cost-free. Whenever American forces
are placed in harm’s way, we risk the loss of life. And
while our strikes are focused on Iraq’s military
capabilities, there will be unintended Iraqi casualties.

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Indeed, in the past, Saddam Hussein has intentionally
placed Iraqi civilians in harm’s way in a cynical bid to
sway international opinion.
Secretary Albright emphasized this evening that our
quarrel is not with the Iraqi people. On the contrary, we
recognize that Iraqis have been the primary victims of
Saddam Hussein’s failure to cooperate internationally and
of his reign of terror domestically. The United States took
the lead in establishing a United Nations programme to
meet the humanitarian needs of Iraqi civilians and
supported the expansion of that programme earlier this year.
Secretary Albright stressed that in carrying out military
action we will do all we can to minimize civilian casualties,
and we will support Iraqis who are working for the day
when the people of their country will be free to choose
their own leaders and shape their own destiny.
Iraq’s policy of unremitting defiance and
non-compliance necessitated the resort to military force.
The United States did not seek a confrontation and did not
undertake this decision lightly. The coalition now looks to
the highest level of the Iraqi leadership for an immediate
demonstration of unconditional compliance with the terms
of the Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): It is not difficult to say who
is to blame for the crisis between Iraq and the United
Nations, a crisis which has been such a large part of the
entire workload of the Security Council during the two
years that we have sat at this table.
It is the Government of Iraq that again and again has
refused to abide by the clear obligations which a unanimous
Security Council has decided upon. It is also clear that Iraq
has not fulfilled the promise it made to the
Secretary-General only a month ago: to cooperate fully and
without conditions with the United Nations weapons
inspectors.
This has provided a difficult challenge for the Security
Council, because the question of Iraqi compliance is indeed
a matter for this Council to deal with. We around this table
are responsible for ensuring the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions. We are the ones who should decide
the course of action. And I can state tonight, as I have
before, that when Iraq seriously violates its obligations, and
when all diplomatic means have been exhausted, my
Government would even be ready to support a decision in
the Council on military action, as a last resort. But that
would be a decision for the Security Council.

10

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
Now, without such a decision, military action was
taken against Iraq a few hours ago. These air strikes were
carried out just as the members of the Council were
meeting in informal consultations, discussing the latest
report from the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) on Iraq’s cooperation and also the SecretaryGeneral’s letter, which he had sent to us late last night.
The Secretary-General said earlier tonight that this
was a sad day for the United Nations and for the world.
My Government regrets these air attacks and the
consequences they may have for civilians in Iraq. We also
regret the fact that the Security Council has been
presented with a fait accompli — that we did not even get
a chance to conclude our evaluation of the latest
developments before military action was a fact. We fear
that this will not be of much help in getting the
inspections going again, because the Council’s overriding
aim must remain to rid Iraq of its programmes for
developing these awful weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The Security Council is
meeting this evening under the impact of a serious turn of
events in the Gulf. Ever since the adoption of resolution
687 (1991) in April 1991, the Council has been grappling
with the difficult task of ensuring the Iraqi regime’s
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in the implementation of their mandates.
Although Iraqi cooperation has all along been far from
satisfactory, UNSCOM and IAEA have performed very
valuable work in dispossessing Iraq of its weapons of
mass destruction, as widely recognized. It is regrettable
that just as the Council was preparing to undertake a
comprehensive review of the sanctions regime imposed on
Iraq, as suggested by the Secretary-General, the
international community was confronted with yet another
impasse. Had Iraq demonstrated full cooperation and
complied with its obligations under Security Council
resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding, we
would not be experiencing the present crisis.
We were informed this afternoon that military action
had been decided upon at the very moment when the
Security Council was gathered to discuss the report
presented by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM. We
had expected to participate in a discussion of the three
options suggested by the Secretary-General in his letter.
As it turned out, the Security Council did not have the
opportunity to reach its own conclusions.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
We deplore the fact that circumstances have led to the
use of force. Brazil has always favoured dialogue,
diplomacy and multilateralism in the articulation of
responses to threats to international peace and security. The
use of military force should be considered only as an option
of last resort. When the use of force is indeed
contemplated, this should take place within a multilateral
framework. The Security Council remains the sole body
with legal authority to mandate actions aimed at enforcing
compliance with its own resolutions.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): In line with our Prime
Minister’s comment which was issued today, I would like
the make the following statement.
The letter dated 14 November from the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq to the Secretary-General raised hopes that
Iraq would resume full cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The Security Council was
looking forward to a comprehensive review of Iraq’s
compliance with its obligations under all relevant
resolutions, which was to be conducted after confirming the
resumption of full cooperation by Iraq with UNSCOM and
the IAEA. Once full cooperation is resumed, all the
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions
can be fulfilled, and the prospect of lifting the sanctions can
be made clearer. Japan has long awaited this in order to
restore its traditional friendship with the people of Iraq.
However, from the letter of the Executive Chairman
of the Special Commission dated 15 December, one has to
conclude, regrettably, that Iraq’s resumption of cooperation
with UNSCOM is not sufficient and that Iraq’s behaviour
constitutes a serious violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulated the conditions for the ceasefire in 1991, as well
as the Memorandum of Understanding signed in February
this year by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq.
Up to now the Security Council and many Member
States have worked strenuously to persuade the Government
of Iraq to cooperate fully and unconditionally with
UNSCOM and the IAEA and have made their utmost
diplomatic efforts to ensure Iraq’s full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Japan, for its part,
made numerous démarches to the Government of Iraq and
has made various efforts, in cooperation with other States
concerned, in the Security Council and elsewhere in order
to correct Iraq’s behaviour. Regrettably, however, Iraq has

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
failed to provide full cooperation to UNSCOM, leading to
the consequences we face today.
In view of the course of events as stated above,
Japan supports the action taken by the United States and
the United Kingdom.
Japan strongly urges the Government of Iraq to
comply immediately and unconditionally with all its
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. By doing so, Iraq will be able to normalize its
relationship with the international community, and
international peace and security will be attained at the
earliest possible date. Japan sincerely hopes that this will
be realized as soon as possible. At the same time, Japan
earnestly hopes that the plight of the Iraqi people will be
alleviated as soon as possible.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): It is a pity that things have to
be this way. There is, however, no need to cry over spilt
milk. The die is cast. This morning, when we looked at
the options offered by the Secretary-General following the
latest report of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM), we thought that they constituted a possible
way out of the quandary in which we find ourselves —
not knowing that it was too late already. It is unfortunate
indeed, and very much so, that force had to be used to
deal with the situation.
Where do we go from here? Perhaps when the dust
has settled, we will be in a better position to see more
clearly how best to proceed with normal business. This
would depend, of course, on whether there is any business
left to do. Whatever the outcome, we would like to see
the unity of the Council restored. If it is not, the ability of
the vital organ of the United Nations, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will be seriously impaired.
Having said that, we still believe that Iraq should
resume full cooperation with UNSCOM and the
International Atomic Energy Agency as required under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. In this way, the
Council can proceed as planned with the comprehensive
review. However, we maintain that any comprehensive
review must take into account the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war, archives and other properties removed
illegally from Kuwait during the invasion. We are of the
firm view that the interests of small States must be
protected. This is why we insist so much on this point.

11

Security Council
Fifty-third year
We are also mindful of the plight of the innocent
people of Iraq. As far as this issue is concerned, we believe
that there is unanimity in the Council to do everything
possible to alleviate their suffering.

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
reports and the letter submitted to the Council today. As
the Secretary-General observed in his letter submitting the
IAEA and UNSCOM reports,
“The report from IAEA states that Iraq has
provided the necessary level of cooperation to enable
the above-enumerated activities to be completed
efficiently and effectively'. (S/1998/1172)

The people in the region also need peace. They have
had so many sleepless nights. The time has now come for
them to have some respite.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation is greatly
concerned about the current turn of events. It is extremely
worrying that while the Council was for the first time
discussing the reports submitted to us today by the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) — and it had
not concluded its consideration of those reports — a
decision to strike Iraq based on the same reports had been
taken, and, in fact, the strike seems to have already been
under way.

With respect to UNSCOM, the Secretary-General
said,
“The report from UNSCOM includes material
that relates to issues prior to 17 November 1998.
With regard to the period since then, the report
presents a mixed picture and concludes that
UNSCOM did not enjoy full cooperation from Iraq.”
(ibid.)

As we have repeatedly said in this Council, any
decision to take further action against Iraq remains the sole
responsibility of the Security Council. We have maintained
that position and ensured that it was reflected in our
resolutions. In our statement on 5 November this year,
during consideration of resolution 1205 (1998), my
delegation stated,

In our reading of the report, this does not in any
way indicate that UNSCOM suffered a total lack of
cooperation, but, on the contrary, indicates that there was
a considerable degree of cooperation extended to it. Given
these two positions, of IAEA and UNSCOM, the
Secretary-General in his wisdom offered three possible
options which, in our view, would have moved the
process of disarming Iraq forward.

“that the present draft resolution contains nothing that
could open the door in any eventuality for any kind of
action without the clear and precise authority of the
Security Council. In that respect, we are happy to note
that the Security Council, in operative paragraph 6 of
the draft resolution,

Any decision taken to force compliance by Iraq with
resolutions without the Council’s prior authority, in our
view, is contrary to the spirit and purpose of those very
resolutions, because it also deprived the Council of an
opportunity to analyse the reports submitted today and to
take a collective decision on them.

Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
to remain actively seized of the matter.'

It is for these reasons, in line with our declared
policy on the non-use of force to resolve international
disputes, that we regret today’s air strikes against Iraq and
call for their immediate cessation and a de-escalation of
tension, if the Council is to remain seized of this matter
and to continue fulfilling its mandate under the United
Nations Charter.

“It is, inter alia, on the basis of that
understanding that my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.” (S/PV.3939, p. 7)
We regret that the understanding agreed upon then by
this Council, and on the basis of which we and many
others, on several occasions, joined in a consensus, was not
taken into account when the decision to strike Iraq was
taken today.
We find it even more difficult to understand the
reasons for today’s attack, given the contents of the two

12

Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): I would like to read a communiqué issued this
evening by the French authorities, which is as follows:
“France deplores the chain of events that led to
the American military strikes against Iraq and the
serious human consequences that they may have for
the Iraqi population.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
“It regrets that the Iraqi leaders were not able to
demonstrate the spirit of full cooperation called for by
the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding of 23 February 1998 between the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and Mr. Tariq
Aziz, which would have made possible the
comprehensive review of Iraqi disarmament provided
for in Security Council resolution 1194 (1998).”
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
statement that he issued this evening when faced with the
facts while the Security Council was holding consultations.
We have always supported the Secretary-General’s tireless
and persistent actions to ensure that the law prevails,
despite the obstacles and pitfalls encountered.
The Secretary-General reminds us once again today,
a sad day for the United Nations, that the Organization’s
duty will be to play its role.
Mr. Essonghé (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
In my turn, I would like to express my delegation’s regret
over the turn that events have taken since this morning,
despite the numerous diplomatic efforts that have been
made at all levels.

3955th meeting
16 December 1998
The lengthy crisis that has prevailed between a
Member of the United Nations and the Security Council
could have been avoided in the light of the initiatives
undertaken in February and November this year by the
Secretary-General, who is present here, and by the entire
membership of the Security Council. Those efforts gave
us a glimpse of a possible peaceful resolution of the
misunderstandings and lack of understanding on both
sides.
Unfortunately, we must conclude that the new state
of mind and the hope that emerged on numerous
occasions have now been dashed by the events we have
learned about today. Nevertheless, we would like to
congratulate the Secretary-General on his readiness to
contribute to a new effort to produce a peaceful resolution
of the question.
The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 11.25 p.m.

13
