Re..,ladom adopted on the reporll of the Foarth Committee

8. Calls upon all States to take all effective measures
to put an end to all practices which exploit the Territoiies under Portuguese domination and the peoples
therein and to discourage their nationals and companies
from entering into any activities or arrangements which
strengthen Portugal's domination over, and impede the
implementation of the Declaration with respect to,
those Territories;
9. Calls upon the Government of Portugal not to
use chemical and biological methods of warfare against
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau), contrary to the generally recognized rules of
international law embodied in the Protocol for the
Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,• and to
General Assembly resolution 2603 (XXIV) of 16 De-

cember 1969;
10. Welcomes the action taken by the financial
~ps in certain States to withdraw their participation
m the Cabora Bassa project, but requests the Governments which have not yet done so to withdraw from
the activities relating to the Cabora Bassa project in
Mozambique and the Cunene River Basin proJect in
Angola and to take all the necessary measures to prevent the participation therein of any companies or individuals under their jurisdiction;
11. Invites all States and the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, in co-operation with the Orpnmltion of African
Unity, to render to the peoples of the Territories under
Portuguese domination the financial and material assistance necessary to continue their struggle for the
restoration of their inalienable rights;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the grave situation in the Territories of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) created by the continued violation by Portugal of its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and the growing
collaboration between Portugal, the racist Government
of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, which constitute a threat to international peace and security;
13. Recommends that the Security Council should
continue to give special attention to the problems of
Portuguese colonialism in Africa and of the collaboration between Portugal and the racist minority regimes
of southern Africa, and to take effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter,
to ensure the full implementation of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and its own resolutions relating thereto;
14. Invites the Secretary-General, in the light of
General Assembly resolution 2557 (XXIV) of 12
December 1969 and in consultation with the specialized
agencies and the Governments of the host countries,
to develop and expand training programmes for the
indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for
qualified administrative, technical and professional personnel to assume responsibility for the public administration and the economic and social development
of their own countries, and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the progress
of these programmes;
29 League

No. 2138.

of Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. XCIV (1929),

99

15. Requats the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all States and to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on steps
taken or envisaF, by States in the implementation of
the various promions contained therein;
16. Reqwns the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territories under review.

1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2'709 (XXV).

()uesdon of Amerlean Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Vlrpl
Islands, Brunel, Cayman lalands, C ~
(Keeling) hlands, Dominica, Gilbert and
EWce laland1, Grenada, Guam, Montaerrat,
New Hebrlde1, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
K.lt11-Nevu-Anpilla, St. Luela, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon hland1, Tokelau
hlands, Turkl and Caleoe hlandl and the
United States Virgin hlande

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamasista~uda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cayman
s, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and B1lice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides; Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vmcent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
HavlnR uamined the cha_pters of the report of the
~ Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 80
RecalUng its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
otfier relevant resolutions, as well as the relevant proviaions of itl resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970 containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration,
Deeply concerned 'at the' policy of SODJ.f' administering Powers in establishin and maintaining mill
bases in some of the erritories under their
ministration, in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Deploring the attitude of those administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visitinir missions to visit the Territories under their ad-

f

1:1-

ministration,

Reaffirming the vital importance of visiting missions
as a means of securinJ adequate and first-hand informa-

tion in regard to political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes and
aspirations of the people in these Territories,
Conscious that these Territories require the continued attention and assistance of the United Nations
in the achievement by their peoples of the objectives
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and
lo Official Records of the General ..4uembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapters XVlI
anc1 xvm.

100

General AHembly-Twenty-fifth See,ion

in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these TerritorieS,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries ~d
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution

1514 (XV);
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement with respect to these Territories, and without
further delay, resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses its conviction that the questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to these
Territories;
5. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Strongly urges the administering Powers to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to
permit access by such visiting missions to Territories
under their administration;
1. Decides that the United Nations should render all
help to the peoples of these Territories in their efforts
freely to decide their future status;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2710 (XXV). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 2593 (XXIV) of 16
December 1969 concerning Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,a1
1. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~on with regard ~o the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countries and P~oples ~elating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent;
2. Requests the Special Committee to give urgent
consideration to all aspects of this question in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2593 (XXIV)
and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2711 (XXV). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara,82
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of ·12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Taking into consideration the resolutions adopted,
respectively by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its seventh ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
1 to 3 September 1970, and by the Third Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September
1970,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966, 2354
(XXII) ~f 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 and 2591 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Sahara to self-determination in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara;
3. Expresses its regret that it has not yet been possible for the consultations to take place which the administering Power was to conduct with the Governments concerned in connexion with the holding of a
referendum in the Territory;
4. Declares that the continued existence of a
colonial situation in the Territory retards stability and
harmony in north-west Africa;
5. Regrets the incidents of bloodshed which occurred in the Territory in June 1970 and calls upon
3t Ibid., chapter XVII.
s2 Ibid., chapter IX
