Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoc Political Committee
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all. without distinction as
to rare, sex, language or reli~ion,
Recallinq that the General Asseml,ly declared in its
resolution ·103 (I) of 19 November 1946 that it is in
the higher interests of humanity to put an end to religious and so-called racial persecution, and called upon
ail governments to conform both to the letter and to
the spirit of the Charter and to take the most prompt
and energetic steps to that end,
1. Declares that in a multi-rac-ial society harmony
and respect for human rights and ireedoms and the
peaceful development of a unified commnnity are best
assmed when patterns of legislation and practice are
directed towards ensuring equality before the law of ail
persons regardless of raèe, creed or colour, and when
economic, social, cultural and political participation of
ail racial groups is on a basis of equality;
2. ✓lffinns that governmental policies of Member
States which are not directed towards these goals, but
which are designed to perpetuate or increase discrimination. are inconsistent with the pledges of the Memb""rs under Article 56 of the Charter;
3. Solemnly calls upon all l\Iember States to bring
their policies into conformity with their obligation
under the Charter to promote the observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
401st plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.

617 (VII). Eritrea: report of the United Nations
Commissioner in Eritrea
The Oeneral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 390 A (V) of 2 December
1950, providing that Eritrea be constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown,
JI aving noted the adoption and ratification of the
Eritrean Constitution and the ratification of the Federal Act embodying the provisions contained in paragraphs 1-7 inclusive of that resolution,
H aving noted that the conditions laid down in paragraph 13 of resolution 390 A (V) of 2 December 1950
have been fulfilled, and that on 11 September 1952 the
Federation of Eritrea with Ethiopia was proclaimed,
N oting further the final report 6 of the United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea of 17 October 1952 and
the report 7 of the Administering Authority of 27
October 1952,
N oting with appreciation the part played by the
United Nations Commissioner .and the former Administering Authority in Eritrea in preparing Eritrea
to take its place in the Federation,
See Official Records oi the G,neral Assnnbl:,,, Sru,nth
Session, SuPPlement No. 15.
7 See document A/2233.

9

N oting also with satisfaction the contributio!1 made
by Ethiopia to the establishment of the Federation and
Ethiopia's expression of determination scrupulously to
execute the provisions of the Federal Act,
1. W elcomes the establishment of the . Federation
of Eritrea with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the
Ethiopian Crown ;
2. Congratulates the people and govemmental att"t
tborities of the Federation for their effective and loyal
fulfilment of resolution 390 A (V) of the General
Assembly of 2 December 1950.
404th plenary meeting,
17 December 1952.

618 (VII). Repatriation of Greek. children
The General Assembly,
Vieiuing with grave concern the report 8 of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
League of Red Cross Societies and the report 9 of the
Secretary-General and the Standing Committee on the
Repatriation of Greek Children,
1. Thanks the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, the Standing
Comimittee on the Repatriation of Greek Children and
the Secreta.ry-General for their efforts to give effect to
General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III), 288 B
(IV), 382 C (V) and 517 (VI);
2. Recalls that the States. harbouring Greek children have not opposed the successive recomnnendations
of the General Assembly for the solution of the problem of repatriating these children;
• 3. Expresses· deep regret that, except for Yu~oslavia, none of the harbouring States has complied wtth
these recommendations ;
4. Condemns ~he failure of the harbouring States
other than Yugoslavia to co-operate in efforts to enable the Greek children to return to their homes ;
5. Decides to discontinue the Standing Committee
on the Repatriation of Greek Children, and agrees to
the suspension of the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of Red Cross
Societies-with the exception of the activities referred
to in paragraph 7 below-until such time as conditions
making practical action by the Red Cross possible and
useful are established ;
6. Notes wlth satisfaction that further groups of
Greek children have been repatriated from Yugoslavia;
7. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to continue their work in Yugoslavia until all children have
been repatriated.

404th plenary m,eting,
17 December 1952.

6

• See documenta A(l1.36 and Add. 1.
• See document A/2241.
.
