TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 15 SEPTEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 5 11) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:

Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1511
-i

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND ELEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 15 September 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 511)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the previous decisions of the Council and with
the consent of its members, I now propose, with the
Council’s consent, to invite the representatives of Israel, the
United Arab Republic and Indonesia to take the places
reserved for them at the Council table, so that they may
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic) and Mr. U. R
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took phces at the Counciltable.

2. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Russian):In accordance with other decisionstaken earlier by the Council, I
shall now invite the representativesof India, Somalia,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Ceylon and Malaysia to take the
places reservedfor them at the sides of the Council
chamber,sincethe spaceat the Counciltable is limited.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. A. S. Gonsalves
(India), Mr. A. A. Farah (Somalia), Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan), Mr. J. M Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. H S.
Amerasinghe(Ceylon)andMr. S. A. L. M, Hashim(Malaysia)took theplacesreservedfor them.
3. The PRESIDENT(translatedffom Russian):I wish to
inform the members
of the Council that I have alsoreceived
letters from the representatives
of Lebanon[S/9446] and
Tunisia [S/9448/, requestingpermissionto participate in
the debateon the questionbefore us. Therefore,if there is
no objection, I propose,in accordancewith the usual
procedure, to invite the representativesof Lebanon and
Tunisia to participate in the debate on this question
without the right to vote. In view of the limited space
availableat the Counciltable, I shouldlike to askthem to
take the placesreservedfor them at the sidesof the Council
chamber.I shallinvite eachof them to take a placeat the
Security Counciltablewhenhisturn comesto speak.
At the invitation of the F?esident,Mr. E. Ghotra (Lebanon) and Mr. S. El Goulli (Tunisia)took the placesreserved
for them
4. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Russian):The Security Council will now continueits considerationof the item
on the agenda.The first speaker on my list is the
representativeof France,on whom I now call.
5. Mr. BERARD (translatedfrom French): Mr. President,
all those who, like myself, are old hands in the United
Nations, andwho have for years beenable to observethe
work of Don Jaimede Pin&, first asMinister Counsellor
and then asAmbassador
at the headof bis delegation,knew
that he would be an outstandingPresidentof our Council
and that he would displaythe qualitieswhich enabledhis
country to leave such a profound imprint upon world
history. The facts have not belied this expectation; quite
the contrary.
6. With regardto yourself, Mr, President,we have known
your qualities of intelligence,political skill andyour great
experienceof the United Nations too weIl not to behappy
to work in this Councilunderyour guidance.Weknow that
you will be for us an ever-vigilantguide and a sagacious
partner in dialogue.

to fix responsibility, thereby contributing to a calming of
feelings. We emphasize that the preservation and protection
of all the Holy Places of Jerusalem is one of the ess,ential
elements of a settlement in the Middle East. Finally, we
consider that this painful affair makes it even more
necessary and urgent to put into effect an over-all, just and
lasting solution of the problems confronting the Middle
East. I reserve the right to speak again later, during the
discussion of the draft resolution.

7. Strong feeling has swept the world at the news that one
of the most revered Holy Places, towards which hundreds
of millions of persons turn their thoughts, one of the most
famous works of art of the Middle East, dating back to the
seventh century, has been damaged by fire. That feeling, of
which each day has brought us a new echo, is fully shared
by my delegation and my country.
8. Imbued with equal respect for all religions and beliefs,
France ’ has always condemned anything which could
undermine them. It also considers that works of art, in
whatever country they may be found, are part of the
cultural heritage of all mankind, and that any misfortune to
one of them injures the world community.

14. The PRESIDENT (translated @wz Russian): I thank
the representative of France for the kind words he has
addressed to me.
15. The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon,
whom I now invite to take a place at the Council table and
to address the Council.

9. My delegation wishes to tell the Arab and Moslem
representatives again that it understands the heartache this
event has caused them. However, we express the persistent
hope that the eminently religious nature of that emotion
may, by that very fact, prevent any aggravation of the
tension which provoked that deplorable fire. We appeal to
everyone to spare no effort to avert such a consequence.

16. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr.President, I wish to
thank you and the members of the Council for giving me
this opportunity to state my delegation’s views on the
question before the Council regarding the arson committed
against the Al Aqsa Mosque. However, allow me at this
stage to share in the various tributes paid in the Council
both to your predecessor, Ambassador Pinits of Spain. and
to you, Mr. President.

10. The repercussions have been all the greater because
this painful event occurred in the sector of Jerusalem which
has been occupied by Israeli forces since June 1967 and
because it concerns one of the exalted places of the city. A
city holy to three religions, Jerusalem is naturally one of
the most critical points in any settlement in the Middle
East, and one over which passions are most readily
inflamed. That is why the Security Council, in its concern
to foster a relaxation or, at least, prevent an increase of
tension, once again demanded, in a unanimous resolution of
3 July 1969 [X7 (1969)/, that no change should be made
in the status of Jerusalem, censured “in the strongest terms
all measures taken to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem”, and declared them “invalid”.

17. When the question of Jerusalem was last dl:bated
before the Council, I had occasion to state the following on
2 July 1969 on behalf of the Lebanese delegation:
“Jerusalem is of particular importance and interest to
Lebanon. The Christian and Moslem communities which
compose the population of Lebanon have had, from time
immemorial, deeply rooted spiritual, traditional and
affectionate ties with the Holy City. Until the Israeli
occupation in June 1967, their access to the religious
shrines had never been interrupted and this constaut
association has been to them a source of pride and
inspiration. The calculated and sustained Israeli pla~lsfar
the de-Arabization and the Israelization of the Old City,
containing the Moslem and Christian Holy Plao:~, has
aroused the gravest concern of the Government arId
people of Lebanon.” / 1484th meeting, para. 123.1

Il. On that occasion, my delegation was instructed to
recall that “the problem [of the Holy Places/ is a political,
religious and legal one and not only an administrative and
social one”, and that “the future of Jerusalem cannot be
decided unilaterally” [1483rd meeting, para. 521.
12. The reactions aroused in the world by the burning of
the Al Aqsa Mosque have shown how justified these
anxieties were. In a more general way, it has become
apparent, once again, that the prolongation of the tension
in the Middle East constitutes a daily danger to peace. In
the face of incidents and military actions whose frequency
and gravity are constantly increasing, my country is more
than ever convinced of the need to arrive at a just and
lasting over-all settlement of the conflict without delay. For
several months now it has proposed a procedure to break
the vicious cycle of violence once and for all and bring
about an equitable solution based on the unanimous will
expressed by the Council in its resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967.

18, Our concern was justifiable and well-founded. Here 1
seem to be borrowing the words of the representative Of
France, who has just spoken. We did not have to wait ver)r
long before tangible proof was given for that concern. The
burning of the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque on 21 Augilst last
shocked the whole world, It aroused amongst the Lebane~
people a deep sense of anguish, dismay and indignation.
These feelings cannot be attributed to religious and political
considerations alone, important though they may bme.
They
spring also from an inner revolt against an injurious acl
committed in a flagrant manner against civilization ilself, an
act which affects a human heritage respected by peoples of
all cultures and religions, And because of that act, the
moral and spiritual values cherished by mankind Ilaw?
profoundly suffered.

13. Following the new and serious event represented by
the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque-Al Aqsa the distant,
yet so close to the hearts of all Moslems-my delegation
shares the wish of those who hope that a complete,
impartial and public investigation will make it possible soon

19. In its usual show of unanitnity when its par~anloual
interests or those of the Arab peoples are at sta.ke, f113 ;
Lebanese people expressed in many ways their indignstic* i
I
2

at the outrage, and their solidarity because of the outrage,
with Arab and Moslem peoples everywhere. The whole
country went on strike on 23 August. The day was
considered a day of national mourning and grief. The
leaders of all religious and political groups voiced their
protest and sorrow. Many of them declared that Israel
should be held responsible for the conditions which led to
this act of arson.

“All believers, not only Arabs, Moslems or Christians,
should feel bound to take some joint and legitimate act of
self-defence vis-&is the Israeli action.”
24. Yes, there is an original sin at the root of all that is
happening in the Middle East. That sin is the continuous
aggressive policy of Zionist Israel against the Arab peoples
and countries. We were reminded at the 1510th meeting by
the representative of Ceylon that if it had not been for the
Israeli occupation of the Old City of Jerusalem, the
situation we are discussing would never have arisen.

20. Prime Minister Rashid Karami of Lebanon strongly
condemned Israel’s act of sacrilege on the Al Aqsa Mosque
and stated that this act affected not only the Moslems and
Arabs but also all those who believe in God, anywhere in
the world. He saw in it another expression of the grave
injustice committed by Israel against the Arab peoples and
called upon the great Powers to shoulder their r?sponsibility to put an end to it.

25. The burning of the Al Aqsa is a reminder to the world
that what happened on 21 August can happen again and
that the Holy Places of any religion are no longer safe and
secure under an alien military occupation. It is therefore
high time to put an end to this occupation and to promote
conditions conducive to the establishment of peace with
justice. This act of arson cannot be considered as an
isolated act. It should be viewed within the context of the
whole situation in the Middle East. It took place under the
umbrella of military occupation.

21. Prayers were held in mosques and churches alike for
the safety of the Holy Places in the occupied areas and for
the deliverance of the Old City of Jerusalem from the yoke
of Israeli occupation. Some of the Christian leaders
expressed their fears about the fate of the Holy Sepulchre
Church and the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.
Moslem and Christian leaders genuinely believe that the
process of the Zionization of Jerusalem, in which the Israeli
authorities are at present engaged, holds many forebodings
for the future of the non-Jewish Holy Places.

26. The conditions created by the Israeli military occupation are conducive to the perpetration of such an act, The
person allegedly responsible for the arson, Mr. Rohan, is
being represented as a Christian in order to absolve Israel of
all responsibility. But this so-called zealot Christian, was
brought to Israel by the Jewish Agency, which is the
international arm of Israel. He lived in a kibbutz for several
months. He shared with his Israeli foster-parents his visions
and his mission to destroy the Mosque so as to clear the
way for the rebuilding of Sblomon’s Temple, in preparation
for the arrival of the Messiah. Therefore, his intentions were
not hidden; they were known. The French weekly, Nouvel
Observateur, of 1 September described Mr. Rohan as being
a Zionist more than the Zionists and perhaps a carrier of
one of their obscure dreams.

22. Our esteemed Secretary-General is already, I presume,
in possession of cables from some of those leaders. Our
fears, as well as those of the Arabs, about the future safety
of the Holy Places can be dispelled only in one way: by the
immediate withdrawal of Israel from the Old City of
Jerusalem, as well as from the occupied areas, in compliance with the Council’s decisions, and then by the
restoration of the legitimate Arab authority and jurisdiction
over them. As the Arabs have for centuries protected the
safety and sanctity of the Holy Places, they can resume
their historic role in making of Jerusalem a home of peace
and justice, a centre where all sacred shrines are protected,
respected, and accorded due care.

27. We have heard in the Council assessments of the
perilous situation in the Middle East. It has been stated that
instead of progress, there has been regression. The other
day our esteemed Secretary-General, in his statement
before the United Nations Correspondents Association,
drew attention to the explosiveness of the situation in the
Middle East and to the fact that 22 months after the date
on which resolution 242 (1967) had been unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, no break through had
been achieved towards a settlement of the crisis.

23. I am not here at this stage of the debate to establish
the responsibility of Israel. That has been amply done by
my colleagues who preceded me. They have ably expounded all arguments and proof to establish that responsibility. But in this context I wish to put on record the
following statement of President Charles HBlou of Lebanon :

28. We fully agree with those views, The situation is
fraught with danger. The peace and security of the Middle
East, nay, of the whole world, are imperilled. The Security
Council assumes, in these circumstances on the eve of the
convening of the General Assembly and the meeting of
world leaders at the United Nations, a grave responsibgity.
Injured parties have come before the Council time and
again to plead their cases, seeking action against the
persistent acts of aggression of Israel against its Arab
neighbours and its occupation of their territory. The most
that those injured parties have been able to achieve here has
been to walk out with some moral satisfaction that the
aggressor has been condemned. They have obtained scores
of mimeographed resolutions, but those resoiutions remain

“Israel bears, without doubt, the responsibility of this
crime irrespective of the identity of the person or persons
who committed it, In addition, the presence of Israel in
Jerusalem and her actions there constitute in themselves a
violation of human rights and an infringement on the
sacred and divine principles.
“The burning of Al Aqsa Mosque is but one of the
manifestations of this original sin. There is no parallel in
human history to this challenge to heaven and earth
which can be left to pass with impunity.
3

ineffectual because of Israel’s stubborn refusal to comply
with them. The deadlock created by that refusal of Israel
must be broken. This could be done by decisive action
undertaken by the Security Council, and by concentrated,
sustained and vigorous efforts deplored by the major
Powers with a special responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in the world.

me have ably and accurately recounted them. But I sh.ould
like to be allowed merely to quote the message which the
President of the Republic of Tunisia, on learning of the
tragic event, addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations:
“I have the honour to inform you that the Government
and people of Tunisia have heard with emotion the news
of the fine that has ravaged the Moslem Holy Places in
Jerusalem.

29. I conclude by saying that Israel’s actions are fanning
the flames of violence in the Middle East. Those flames
must be extinguished. The fire-engines of peace must act
promptly. The Security Council can set the provisions of
the Charter in motion without waiting for Arab complaints
against Israel’s action. By doing so with decisivenessand
speed it can avert catastrophe in the Middle East and the
world, and strengthen the chancesfor peace.

“This heinous act, aside from the fact that it shows.a
complete contempt for the highest spiritual values,,will
by its nature gravely aggravate the situation in the Middle
East and render even more difficult the search for a just
peace in the region.

30. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The next
speaker is the representative of Tunisia, whom I now invite
to take a place at the Council table and to address the
Council.

“The Tunisian Government considers that the responsi.
bility of the Zionist State, the occupying Power, is
directly involved.”
35. The terms of this message express perfectly the depth
and nature of the emotion aroused in my country by that
unspeakable act. It is neither religious fanaticism, nor racial
solidarity, nor any supposed interest in political manocu.
vring designed to alarm international public opinion unduly, as some have claimed, that has aroused the emotion
of the Tunisian people and their President,

31. Mr. EL GOULLI (Tunisia) (translated from French):
Mr. President, since I am newly accredited to the United
Nations by my Government, and this is the first time I have
the honour of speaking before the Council, it is my pleasant
duty to congratulate you on the qualities of high diplomacy
with which you are presiding over these discussions,and to
thank you and the members of the Council for your
kindness in allowing me to participate in your work.

36. We have stated our position on the substance of the
question many times, in other circumstances, and unequivocally. Today, it is a cry of distress we utter here, voicing
the pain and incomprehension of millions of Tunisians who,
like millions of other Moslems, feel struck to the very heart
by an indescribable act which places the situation in
Jerusalem in its true proportions. This act augurs a dark
future for the spiritual values of which history has madle the
Holy City the guardian and which many generations of
Moslems, Christians and Jews have venerated and continue
to venerate, thereby giving the inhabitants of that land the
finest example of tolerance and human brotherhood.

32. This is a solemn, and I would even say a grave,
occasion. At a time when mankind is already terribly
afflicted by all kinds of ills-political conflicts, devastating
wars, poverty, hunger-its spiritual values, quite rightly
respected and spared since the creation of our Organization,
now, with the criminal arson of the Al Aqsa Mosque, are in
turn sullied. In the face of the worst misfortunes, men,
whatever the political regime, social organization, degree of
economic and technical development in which they live,
have constantly sought salvation in faith, that faith which
gives their lives its ultimate meaning.

37. It would be superfluous to review the details which
can only tarnish this debate and, in our view, prevent it
from rising to the level of the event involved. Whether the
damages are great or not, whether the firemen arrived
quickly or took their time, whether the Sheikh, the leader
of the Moslem community, participates in the investigation
or not-all these factors should not obscure the essentia!
point: the military occupation which has created an
atmosphere conducive to the perpetration of this crime.

33. The request addressedto you, Mr. President, under the
pressure of the public opinion of 25 States, to convene this
Council, reflects the danger to international peace and
security caused by the criminal arson which occurred on 21
August in occupied Jerusalem. The fact that my country
has decided to add its voice to that of other Moslem
countries in coming here, to this chamber, to state its
concern and express its indignation bears witness, needless
to say, to our total confidence in the United Nations, and
particularly in its principal organ, the Security Council, the
last bulwark, in the eyes of the international community
and under the Charter, against racism, arbitrary action,
injustice, and the policy of fait accompli. In short, the
ultimate responsibility, in our view, devolves upon the
Council, whose duty is clear: it must react appropriately to
these acts which are likely to disturb world peace and
security.

38. We do not want to give a religious dimension to the
conflict in the Middle East. It is Israel that does this. From
the moment Israel’s leaders set up race and religion as
principles of power, this can only lead to fanaticism.
39. Therein lies the sinister truth. Therein lies the real
danger which the international community must denounce.
And that is why hundreds of millions of people today fear
they will find themselves swept by the unleashing of
passions and the logical sequence of fanaticism intlo the
vicious circle of violence and hatred.

34. Mr. President, with your permission I shall not review
the chronology of the events of 21 August. The facts are
well known to the Council. Those who have spoken before
4

40. What a part of humanity is experiencing today is a real
tragedy; a tragedy of misunderstanding, injustice and
passivity, Yet the process unleashed by the Zionist authorities since their occupation of Palestine is clear, and their
intentions no less evident. After having dispossessed and
driven the Palestinians from their country, the occupying
authorities, carrying out a carefully prepared plan, are now
attacking basic values. Their purpose is step by step to
Judaize the whole of Palestine and the burning of Al Aqsa
is but one link in the chain.

taken unawares by some fanatic? If he was able to commit
his crime it was surely because the context was conducive
to it, and the psychological conditioning he received in the
particular atmosphere prevailing in that martyred land
prepared him for it.
45. Once the crime has been committed, it is very easy to
appease one’s conscience at little cost, as the Israeli leaders
are doing, by appealing for understanding and fraternity. It
is even easier to refer to one or two comments in the press
to prove their point.

41. It is a classic rule to annihilate, among a colonized
people or what is left of it, everything that may give it an
awareness of its identity, of its specific individuality as a
nation, and that can keep its history and glory alive. The
occupiers, the colonizers-as the peoples of the third world
know only too well-do not confine themselves to military
oppression and repression, which most often results only in
the physical incapacitation of the colonized. The colonizer
realizes that to wipe out a people he must destroy its SOUR
and drive it to moral decadence and to the renunciation of
its values. That is the reason for the Israelis’ relentless
vindictiveness against the Holy Places of Islam and Christianity in Palestine.

46. The representative of Israel here sings us the litany of
fraternity and peace. But how will they be possible when he
knows full well that the authorities who have instructed
him to do so will never act on the resolutions of the
Council? That is why we think it is up to the Council, and
to the four great Powers in particular, to assume their
responsibilities in this matter and, above and beyond the Al
Aqsa fire, in the whole Palestine question,
47. That is why, on learning of this crime, the President of
the Republic of Tunisia addressed Secretary-General
U Thant directly, as well as the Heads of State of the four
great Powers. We reiterate his appeal that Israel’s responsibility for this criminal act should be denounced, that the
occupation of the Arab territories should be terminated,
that the Palestinians should regain their right to their
usurped land, and that the world, and especially the Middle
East, should be spared new wars.

42. Yet the resistance of nations against cultural decay
throughout history should remind the Tel Aviv authorities
of the vanity of their enterprise, unless their intention is, by
a diabolical tactic, to make peace impossible in the Middle
East by unleashing the devastating forces of passion there.
There is a real danger of seeing that part of the world blaze
up into a conflagration which by its duration-and now by
its nature-could
easily spread to other areas, thereby
plunging into the darkness of war a world which has
suffered from it all too much.

48. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from Rench):
. Mr. President, my delegation is happy to congratulate you
on your accession to the presidency of the Council. Your
political instinct, your cordiality, your skill and your
perspicacity are known to all of us, and we also congratulate ourselves on the cordial relations that exist between
your great country and ours.

43. While the representatives of a large portion of mankind, meeting here, try to hasten the hour of peace, the
Israeli leaders, intoxicated by passing military successes,
resolutely turn their backs on the world community,
flouting an international order which others have patiently
built up, and treating with the greatest contempt wise
resolutions of which-with
regard to Jerusalem-I need only
mention the most important, namely, those adopted by the
General Assembly in 1967 [2253 (ES-V) and 22.54 @8-I’)
of4 and 14 July 19671 and the two unanimously adopted
by the Security Council /252 (1968) of 21 Muy 1968 and
267 (1969) of3 July 19691. Those resolutions forbid Israel
to change the status of Jerusalem and condemn all
acquisition of territory by military conquest.

49. We should also like to repeat our feeling of admiration
for Ambassador PiniBs, who presided over the Council last
month.
50. The Council has been meeting for several days now at
the request of 25 Members of the United Nations to
examine the situation created as a result of the burning of
the Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. My delegation, as you
undoubtedly know, Mr. President, has no intention of
encouraging passions at this debate. We consider it our duty
to try to contribute effectively and in a positive manner to
the search for a just and lasting solution of the painful
problem which is rending the Middle East. That has been
and remains a constant of our policy on the problem
affecting the Middle East. We are obliged, however, to
recognize that occurrences such as the burning of the Al
Aqsa Mosque are not likely to facilitate the restoration of
peace in that area. The burning of Al Aqsa, one of the high
Holy Places of Islam, is indeed an odious act which the
conscience of the whole world condemns.

44. Israel has been occupying Arab territories, and JerusaIem in particular, for over two years. It has repeatedly
proclaimed its firm determination to give that city a new
status, its aim being to confront the world with a fait
accompli. Suiting the action to the word it has, under the
vigilant surveillance of its soldiers, undertaken works,
proclaimed measures and decreed laws tending to turn this
high seat of Islam, Christianity and Judaism into a Zionist
garrison. The only way it was able to carry out its nefarious
plans was by the military occupation of the city. That is
why we maintain that Israel bears full responsibility for the
situation. Is it not inconceivable that those supposedly
highly trained technicians-as the Israelis are-should be

51. The mosque was set on fire as a deliberate attack on
spiritual values which, as everyone knows, constitute a basic
dimension of human existence, and we can readily under5

appreciation to our eminent colleague Don Jaime de Pini&
for the fashion, at the same time ta&l and constructive,
in which he conducted our deliberations last month, It was
a particularly busy and difficult month in the Council, and
we were therefore especially fortunate to have the benefit
of Ambassador Pin&’ wise leadership.

stand the indignation felt by all believers, whether Moslem,
Christian or Jewish, throughout the world.
52. The Senegalesepeople, which is profoundly attached
to the values of the spirit and respects all beliefs, provides
the example of a country where perfect harmony prevails
among the various religious communities.

61, Permit me also to welcome you, Sir, to the presidency,
We know that we can count on your great experience and
talents to ensure that our deliberations this month will also
contribute to international peace and security.

53. Senegal, which is fortunate in having at its head a
humfnist of world renown, an ardent and tireless fighter for
the cause of man, learned with great indignation of the act
of sacrilege committed at the Al Aqsa Mosque, one of the
most revered places of Islam, an act which testifies to a
marked contempt for the highest spiritual values.

62. The United States was profoundly shocked and
dismayed by the burning, on 21 August, of the Al ,4qsa
Mosque in occupied Jerusalem. We understand and are
deeply moved by the evidence of genuine concern and
devotion that this unfortunate incident has evoked from
Moslems the world over. In addition to the special grief felt
by all the followers of Islam, the damage to that historic
shrine and to its priceless furnishings is mourned as a heavy
loss of part of the spiritual legacy of all mankind.

54. We know that, in their public statements, the Israeli
authorities have expressed feelings of indignation and
reproof. But, actually, this problem raises the question of
the status of Jerusalem. In fact, the problem will not be
settled until the day that Jerusalem is evacuated. Only the
withdrawal of Israel from Jerusalem and the ‘other territories under military occupation can ensure the safety of
the Holy Places. That raises the question of the observance
of all the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council in this field. However, Jerusalem is still
under the control of the Tel Aviv authorities, as are many
other Arab territories. The burning of Al Aqsa, which the
whole world condemns today, is not an isolated occurrence.
It is the direct result of Israel’s occupation of Arab
territories by force. Thus, incidents of the kind we
condemn today will not be put to an end once and for all
until an over-all solution to the problem is found.

1

‘:

63. We respect the concerns expressed by the 25 Members
in their message of 22 August to the President of the
Security Council [S/9407/,1 which, as we understand
them, are essentially threefold. First, we would agree that
the facts surrounding this tragedy must be investigated
thoroughly and impartially. To do any less would be to
encourage suspicion, emotionalism and fanaticism.
64. Secondly, we see merit in the proposal that a group of
distinguished Moslems assist in determining the extent of.
the damage to the Mosque and be associated with the
necessaryrepairs. We were pleased to hear Mr. Tekoah, the
representative of Israel, state that his Government has no
objections to this proposal. Such a step would be entirely
consistent with our views on the major role of the religious
communities in Jerusalem and with the widely-sharedview
that Jerusalem is a legitimate concern of the international
community.

55. We sDeak this blunt truth without anv hatred or anv
hostility iowards the Jewish people, whiih, as President
Senghor has said, is, together with the Arab and the black
people, one of the three suffering peoples of the world.
56. But we cannot forget that, at present, it is the Arabs
who are subject to physical attack and occupation.
57. We have always condemned the use of violence to
settle political problems. That is a basic principle of our
foreign policy. However, there is another, no less important, principle which we have always advocated: negotiation.

6.5. Thirdly, I believe there is no disagreement on the
necessity for more adequate precautions against repetition
of such a desecration.
66. Having said that, I wish to make it clear that my
Government’s deep and abiding interest in Jerusalem has
caused it to examine very carefully the facts that are SOfar
available. Without attempting to prejudge the findings of
competent investigations, I should like to say that we have
seen no shred of evidence to support the allegation that the
act of suspected arson which occurred at the Harm Ash
Sharif on 21 August was other than an individual act, as
demented as it was dastardly. We would think it most
unfortunate if the international community, which itself
shares a deep interest in Jerusalem’s shrines, were divl:rted
from formulating a positive response to the prf:sent
situation, by incitements or allegations in support of other
objections. The Council cannot lend itself to any such

58. We still consider that resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967 constitutes the most suitable framework
for the restoration of a just and lasting peace in that
troubled part of the world. It is the responsibility of the
Security Council as a whole, and its four permanent
members in particular, to make much more whole-hearted
efforts to give effect to that resolution in all its aspects,so
that peace may be restored and the countries of the region
may devote themselves to the tasks of development in order
to achieve a better life for all the populations living there.
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of Senegal for the kind words he has
addressedto me.

1 Incorporated in substance in document S/9447, annexI; see
Official Records of the Security Council, Tiventy-fowth Year
SuPPhnent for July, August and September 1969.

60. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I am very
happy, first, to take this occasion to express our deep
1
/

,),
,,,

:
1
I

6

incitements or allegations. Our real interest lies in ensuring
that the full facts regarding the fire and the circumstances
surrounding it are brought to light in a manner which
satisfies the legitimate interests and concerns of Moslems
and others throughout the world.
67. My Government notes the steps taken immediately by
the Government of Israel to institute a broadly-based
Commission of Inquiry which contains representatives of all
three great religions which have Holy Places in Jerusalem.
Wk welcome Israel’s announcement that the hearings of the
Commission of Inquiry and the trial of the suspected
arsonist will be public and open to observers from any
country or of any faith.
68. Several speakers have already referred to the 1954
Convention and Protocol for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,2 to which Israel
and. the Arab States are parties, and to which they have
already had recourse at the suggestion of and through
maChinery set up with the assistance of the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization. The application of this Convention
in the Arab-Israeli area appears to have proceeded rather
smoothly. We view Ambassador Tekoah’s remarks as
indicating that the Government of Israel is prepared to
continue to co-operate with the Director-General of that
organization in applying the Convention.
69. It is therefore entirely possible that it could also be
applied in a satisfactory manner to assist in resolving the
legitimate question regarding the circumstances of the fire
at the Al Aqsa Mosque. It might also serve as a basis for
facilitating measures to guard against future tragedies of
this nature, pending the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the area, including closer communication and
planning between Moslem representatives on the one hand,
and the occupation authorities on the other.
70. Barely nine weeks have passed since the Council
cn-nimously reaffirmed the special interest of the international community in the City of Jerusalem [rholution
267 (1969)]. On that occasion I elaborated in some detail
the position of the United States on the subject of Israel’s
responsibilities as an occupying Power [1483rd nzeeting].
That position has not changed; it remains as I stated it on
that occasion.
71. We do not, however, consider that it is appropriate or
desirable SO soon again to re-examine and pronounce upon
the status of Jerusalem or to link the deplorable fire in Al
Aqsa to the whole tragic Arab-Israeli conflict. We regret
that the draft resolution which we have before us [S/944.5/
has gone so far beyond the purpose, as we understood it,
for which the Security Council was called into session. We
were hoping for a resolution which would concern itself
directly and exclusively with measures for the maintenance,
repair and protection of the Holy Places, including provision for adequate participation of Moslem representatives,
but not one which again went over the ground covered
during our debate last July.
2 Signed at The Hague on 14 May 1954
Treaty Series, vol. 249 (1956), No. 3511).

(see United

Nations,

72. Our position on the political elements of the status of
Jerusalem was made completely clear by our vote for
Security Cbuncil 267 (1969). Had the present draft resolution reaffirmed that resolution but dealt substantively only
with the concerns expressed in the 22 August communication to the President of the Security Council, we would
have been able to vote for it. Since we do not have that
option and since, as we have said, we find other portions of
the draft resolution inappropriate in the present context
and not well-calculated to serve the ends we have in mind,
the United States will abstain.
73. This does not, I repeat, imply any lack of concern by
my Government for the maintenance and protection of the
Holy Places. We consider that the Government of Israel, as
an occupying Power, has a heavy responsibility to Moslems
everywhere and to all mankind to see that the Holy Places
are protected. We urge it to take every precaution to do so
and to co-operate fully with the Moslem community in so
doing. We are prepared to support any suitable action by
the United Nations in achieving this objective.
74. Finally, we need hardly remind ourselves that our
presence here today, as on so many occasions in the past, is
against the backdrop of another no less urgent need. That
need is for even greater efforts toward the achievement of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, a peace which has
been long awaited and is long overdue. In support of that
goal, restraint and co-operation of the parties themselves
are absolute requirements. As we approach a time when the
Foreign Ministers of the States most concerned and of the
four permanent members of the Security Council which
have been seeking to assist in the search for peace in the
Middle East assemble here, let us all make a very special
effort to restrain violence, to moderate debate and to create
an atmosphere of conciliation and goodwill in which the
peacemakers may work constructively.
75. The PRESIDENT (PansEated from Russian): I thank
the representative of the United States of America for the
kind words he has addressed to me.
76. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, I should like first
of all to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Ambassador
of Spain, for the manner in which he guided the work of
the Security Council during the last month, and to express
our compliments and good wishes to you in your office. We
admire your personal qualities and respect YOU as the
representative of a great country whose contribution to the
development of contemporary world society is far more
than I can say. It will indeed be a pleasure and privilege to
work under your leadership. I assure you of the wholehearted co-operation of my delegation in your task.
77. With regard to the item under consideration, I wish to
state very briefly the position of my delegation on it. My
delegation shares the sentiments of profound sorrow and
indignation expressed by every speaker in the Council at
the burning of the holy Al Aqsa Mosque on 21 August
1969. Men of good faith and goodwill everywhere have
joined in condemnation of that despicable act of arson,
which resulted in damage to one of the holiest places of
worship and reverence of Islam. On this occasion of
universal anguish, our overriding concern should be to

ensure that an objective and full investigation into the
matter is carried out and that a swift restoration of the
Mosque is effected. Steps should, of course, be taken to
prevent recurrence of such acts of vandalism.

those earlier resolutions. We do SO also because we have
noted with satisfaction the assurance that there had been
no allegation of complicity of the Government of Israel in
the incident of 21 August.

78. We have no direct and precise information about the
immediate circumstances surrounding the outbreak of the
fire. In the absence of an objective and full report on the
matter, the Security Council is naturally not in a position
to attach responsibility for that act of sacrilegeto one party
or another. I might add that, as far as my delegation is
concerned, we have regarded the expression of grief and
anguish by the Government of Israel and other elements of
public opinion as sincere. We have also noted the spirit of
fairness shown by the Government of Israel in the matter of
recognizing the special interest of Moslem States and
communities in the Holy Places and welcoming their
co-operation in the restoration work at the Al Aqsa
Mosque.

82. The burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque, despicable asit is,
has, nevertheless, brought all of us together in common
sorrow and grief on account of the damage caused to a part
of a universal human heritage. We are united in our sorrow,
so it is evident that our purpose would be best servedif we
unite in action, too, I realize that we, in the Council, must
strive for unity and unanimous resolutions that do not fail
to take into account all the elements of fact connected with
any given situation. Indeed, I would say that the solemnity
of the present occasion particularly calls for such a
decision, to which every member of the Council could lend
his support without any feelings of reservation o,r doubn,
however slight.
83. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian]: 1 thank
the representative of Nepal for the friendly words he has
addressed to my country.

79. At the same time, we cannot help reflecting that the
incident of 21 August occurred at a time when the entire
city of Jerusalem was under the military occupation of
Israel. Regrettably, the Government of Israel has failed to
comply with specific resolutions of both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. While the city remains
under military occupation, it is the duty of the Government
of Israel, under accepted norms of international law, not
only to respect religious sentiments but also to preserveand
protect public institutions and places of veneration and
worship and monuments of spiritual values in the occupied
territory. This duty is paramount. It is specially so because
the conditions of any military occupation are fraught with
unforeseen dangers. We are hoping that the 21 August
incident will turn out to be not a direct result of any
general feelings of hatred and fanaticism, but an act of a
madman, unrelated to the conditions which tend to give
rise to those feelings.

84. Mr. MORALES SUARES (Colombia) (tramlated fmm
Spanish): I should like . to express our admiration and
appreciation for the task performed with outstanding tact
and poise by the representative of Spain while he was
President of the Council.
8.5. At the same time, I also wish to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing a person possessingsuch
outstanding qualifications of character and intelligence
presiding over the work of the Council this month.
86. Colombia, as a country of deeply rooted religious
convictions, which constitute a basic feature of our national
character, has a profound respect for the beliefs of others.
Therefore we naturally demand the greatest reverencefor
places hallowed by the faith and traditions of peoples and a
full guarantee of complete freedom of access to and
worship in those places. That respect explains our sincere
distress at the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque and our
sorrow and sympathy with regard to the injury done to
feelings deserving of the greatest consideration.

80. Considering that the situation in the Middle East is a
continuing threat to world peace, any decision by the
Security Council must be primarily aimed at easing that
situation. Our concern now is, doubtless, the restoration
and restitution of the holy Mosque, with the necessary
co-operation of Moslem States and communities. I would
think that the attitude of the Government of Israel in this
regard would make this co-operation possible. On the other
hand, it is fitting that Israel should be reminded of its
obligations and responsibilities as an occupying Power and
further called upon to abide by the decisions of the United
Nations.

87. With regard to the eventual implications of this
unfortunate occurrence, my delegation believes that any
initiative or decision of the Council must be adopted jn the
light of all the necessary facts. Otherwise, more harm than
good will result.
88. My Government maintains cordial diplomatic relations
with a number of States where the Islamic religion is
professed. It also maintains diplomatic relations wi,th Israel,
although that has never hindered us from expressing, with
complete freedom of judgement and on various occasions,
views which do not coincide with either the theories or
interests of Israel. As an example, I may mention ‘whatnly
delegation said when changes in the status of Jer~salen~
were debated in this responsible body,

81. Respecting the draft resolution [S/9445] which was
introduced at the 1510th meeting on Friday by my friend,
Mr. Shahi, representative of Pakistan, with his usual eloquence and clarity, I might say that we have viewed it with
those considerations uppermost in our minds. In view of
our support for General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V)
and 2254 (ES-V) and Security Council resolutions
252 (1968) and 267 (1969), and sharing as we do the
universal concern for the situation in the Middle East and
particularly the fate of the city of Jerusalem, my delegation
will cast its vote in favour of the draft resolution, whose
principal purpose is the reaffirmation and reiteration of

89. In expressing those opinions, my delegation neverrails
to bear in mind that Colombia is a country WhOsC War
potential is extremely limited and whoseoffensive caps&’
8

is, perhaps fortunately, insignificant by comparison with
that of the great Powers. Our strength and our influence
must and do derive from the freedom of our judgement, the
balance which we want to be characteristic of our views,
and our allegiance to legal principles which are unchanging.

Mosque by electricity and the measures which will prevent
fire”.

90. In the specific case before us, a rational analysis of the
events described to the Council does not lead us to find
that there has been a deliberate intention on Israel’s part to
destroy or damage the Al Aqsa Mosque, On the contrary,
the present situation itself shows that Israel has no
advantage to gain from what has occurred but, rather, only
a grave cause for concern and uncertainty.

“It is remarkably difficult to believe . . . that the
Mosque was more vulnerable to a firebug, or accident,
under Israeli administration than Arab,”

97. Indeed, in the words of The Economist of 30 August
1969:

98. Three Christian leaders writing to the editor in The
New York Times of 10 September 1969 were even more
outspoken. Msgr. John M. Oesterricher, the Reverend
Edward II. Flannery and S. Rose Thering, O.P., declared:
“If negligence enabled the arsonist to do his job, it was not
Jewish negligence but that of the Moslem authorities.” In
fact, it is obvious that the prompt and energetic efforts by
the Israeli authorities restricted the damage caused by the
fire and saved the Mosque.

91. This tragic event, which the entire world must help to
redress-since the Mosque is part of the collective spiritual
and artistic heritage-should be investigated and punished
without allowing any indirect political after-effects to add
to the bitter facts and the dangers already existing in the
Middle East.

99. It is said in the Bible: “Jerusalem shall be called City
of Truth.” Indeed, Jerusalem asks for truth and reverence,
Its sacredness abhors falsehood and abuse.

92. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of Colombia for the kind words he has
addressed to me.

100. The unfounded nature of the accusations voiced
against Israel becomes even more striking when certain facts
about the attitude toward Holy Places of some of those
who level these accusations are recalled. The grim tale of
Jewish Holy Places, houses of worship and religious sites
desecrated, pillaged and destroyed by Jordan is well known.
Less publicized is the fact that only half a year ago, on 21
December 1968, an attempt was made by a terror squad
from Jordan to sabotage the Wailing Wall, Jewry’s most
sacred Holy Place. It will also be remembered that on 20
June 1969 three bombs were exploded in the path of
crowds of worshippers on their way to and from the Wall,
wounding three persons, including a child of 12. Disregard
for sacredness ,does not seem to be confined to Jewish
shrines.

93. The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
94. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): If it is the fire on 21 August
that really concerns us, polemics and acrimony are superfluous. In reply to statements made this morning by Arab
representatives, I should merely like to add that not only
have fires occurred in Jerusalem’s Holy Places prior to 1967
but that the hazard of fire in the shrines has been generally
recognized for years.
95. Thus, following the very serious fire at the Holy
Sepulchre which lasted for over 24 hours, The New York
Times of 29 November 1949 reported:

101. The Beirut daily AZ-Hayat wrote on 24 July 1969:

“The hereditary office of Doorkeeper of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem-always held by a
Moslem-has been restored by King Abdullah of Jordan,
it was announced. Chief responsibility of the Moslem
Custodian will be to maintain precautionary measures
against outbreaks of fire or other accidents likely to
endanger worshippers.”

“No one in the whole Moslem world can ever forget 24
January 1965, the day when, for the first time in history,
tanks penetrated into the Great Umayed Mosque in
Damascus and shelled the worshippers. Two hundred
worshippers were killed on that day. The Great Mosque
was closed for several days in order to enable the cleaning
of its walls, fences, roofs and the Mihrab which were
soiled by the blood of the slain.”

96. Similar concern has always existed regarding conditions in Al Aqsa. For instance the Beirut daily Al-HaW
wrote on 27 October 1957:

102. On 16 April 1964, a mosque in the city of Hama was
shelled by tanks in order to suppress a Moslem demonstration against the Baathist regime.

“In 1947, Mr. Abd-el-Fattah Hilmi, Director of the
Arab Antiquities Bureau in Cairo, wrote in his report
about the conditions which existed in Al Aqsa Mosque
the following.

103. The Iranian newspaper Chau Van Khoun reported on
7 August 1969:

“ ‘Factors which contribute to cracking prevail in the
Dome and it is imperative to take immediate steps in
order to preserve this magnificent Islamic heritage.’ ”

“According to DPA and Reuters, the Baathist regime of
Iraq intends to demolish the holy shrines of the Smah
Moslems in Iraq. The Shiah holy places consist of the
tombs of the shish Imams. They are held sacred by all
the Moslems of the world. The Imams were each
examples of perfect human beings. Not only the Sh.iah,

After a detailed description of the bad conditions which are
observed in the report, the correspondent stresses the fact
that “experts have recommended to plan the lighting of the
9

States, notably Jordan, which permitted widespread
desecration of Jewish sites in the 19 years that Jordan
controlled the Walled City and all of East Jerusalem.”

but all other Moslems also respect them and visit their
graves.“,
104. The Holy Places sacred to Islam, Christianity and
Judaism were of course of little import when the Jordanian
army shelled Jerusalem in 1948, while the world stood
silently by. They were of no import again on the morning
of 5 June 1967 when the Jordanian forces initiated the
indiscriminate bombardment of the city. The Arab terror
squads, organized and trained by the Arab Governments,
had no qualms at all when a few weeks ago they rained
rockets on Jerusalem with its Holy Places.
105. A distinguished American Christian leader, the Reverend A. Roy Eckardt, wrote to the editor of The New
York Times on 26 July 1969:
“Against bitter opposition from all other Arab States,
Jordan conquered and annexed, among other areas, the
eastern parl: of Jerusalem.

107. The Security Council’s deliberations on the Al Aqsa
fire are drawing to a close. We appeal to members, of the
Council not to end these deliberations on a note that would
add to the controversies of the Middle East. Our region leas
enough hostility. It does not require another injection of
acrimony. It pleads for voices of calm and understanding,
The draft resolution before you [S/9445] is not conceived
in that spirit. There is no reason whatever to reiterate al
this stage known but strongly contested views. It is what
unites us that we must seek and not that which separates
us. The draft resolution would exacerbate the conflict
without introducing a single constructive element, a single
impulse toward understanding and co-operation-and tllis
on a matter on which understanding is possible and
co-operation sorely needed.
108. The eyes of the world are again on the Security
Council, in hope, in expectation that perhaps this time it
will find it possible to give encouragement to those who do
not want to fan the flames.

“. . *
“In 1967 Jordan shelled West Jerusalem, killing and
maiming hundreds of people and forcing Israel to fight
back.

109. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Since I am speaking in
this debate for the first time, allow me, Mr, President, to
express the satisfaction of my delegation on your assump
tion of the high office of President of the Security Council
for the month of September. Given your long years of
experience in the field of international diplomacy, I have
no doubt that you will conduct our deliberations to our
utmost satisfaction. Our two countries, Mr. President, haa
always enjoyed extremely friendly and correct relations. 1
have no doubt that the visit of President Kaunda to the
Soviet Union next month will further strengthen our
relations.

“Jerusalem has never been the national capital of any
people save the Jews. For longer than the century that
culminated in the rebirth of the State of Israel, Jews were
the largest population in Jerusalem, and particularly the
Old City. When the Jordanians seized East Jerusalem they
destroyed the Jewish quarter and evicted its people,
killing many of them. Religious life and freedom for
Christians are flourishing in Israel and suffering in Arab
nations.”
106. An eyewitness report by Louis B. Fleming, published
in the Philadelphia Inquirer of 1 September 1969, described
Israel’s attitude to the Holy Places; it stated:

110. May I also pay due tribute to Ambassador Pini& oi
Spain, who skilfully presided over our Council last month.

“The Israeli Government has been credited by international experts with doing a good job of preserving the
antiquities and respecting the Holy Sites of all religions.

111. It was with shock and dismay that we learned of tll?
burning of the AI Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 Augasf
1969. People of different religions all over the world haw
joined in a condemnation of this despicable act of
vandalism. We are not Moslems but we do not have to be
Moslems to recognize the fact that the Al Aqsa Mosque iSa
sacred and revered place of worship in the Islamic world.

“. ..
“The Israeli Government has left the administration and
security of the Holy Places to each religion-Jewish,
Moslem and Christian,

112. It has always been our firmly held belief that the
burning of any holy place belonging to any religion is a
monstrous crime. We recognize that the issue before IIs 1~3s
much wider and deeper implications. It would be inconclusive to discuss this outrage in purely religious terms,
without taking into account the political circumstances
which surrounded the incident.

“The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization has taken an interest in the problem
through special representatives of the nations involved,
who make periodic inspections of historic and religious
sites through an agreement between Israel and its Arab
neighbours. H. J. Reinink, a Dutchman with long experience in the preservation of antiquities, spends eight to
ten days in the occupied territories every two months,
checking on Arab complaints. His reports are confidential, but persons familiar with the situation indicate
that most of the complaints are groundless.

113. It is not possible to conclude soberly that this
outrage would not have been committed without the Israeli
occupation of Arab Jerusalem; but the fact that it occurred
in circumstances of occupation and also without the
protection of the people to whom the Mosque belongs
compels us inescapably to conclude that it is a direct
consequence of the Israeli occupation of the Hoiy City of

“Experts have said privately that Israel’s record in
maintaining holy sites is better than the record of Arab
10

L

I

Jerusalem. The safety and sanctity of all religious places in
the City of .krUS:deIn
iS of vital concern to Zambia. There is
no doubt that the burning of the Mosque has aggravated the
already-grave situation in the Middle East, and mine is the
hope that the Council will adopt well-reasoned and meaningful measures that will be aimed at removing the root
causes of the conflict and that will create the necessary
atmosphere for removing the cloud of tension building up
over the Middle East horizon.

Jerusalemcan fail to affect the political atmospherein the
Middle East.

114. The PRESIDENT (translated frov~ Russian): 1 wish
to thank the representative of Zambia for the kind words
he has addressed to me. I also share his views on the
relations being developed between our countries, and fully
agree with his remark that the forthcoming official visit of
the President of Zambia to the Soviet Union will contribute
to the further development and strengthening of the
relations between the Soviet Union and Zambia,

121. In thesecircumstances
the SecurityCouncil, charged
with the responsibilityof maintaininginternational peace
and security and committed as it is to a searchfor a
peacefulsolutionof the conflict in the Middle East,should
in our view deal with the questionbefore usin a manner
designedto prevent a further deteriorationof the situation.
This will be the primary criterion by which my delegation
will determineits position on the draft resolution now
before the Council.

120. The waveof emotionthat sweptover Islamafter the
fire in the Al AqsaMosquehasfurther increasedthe tension
in the area where the strain was already close to the
breaking point. Nobody standsto gain from this unfortunate event. It is a tragedy for all the parties to the
conflict.

115. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): I am happy to have this
opportunity to pay tribute to the Ambassador of Spain,
who, as President for the month of August, conducted the
affairs of the Council with great skill and impartiality.

122. The PRESIDENT(translated@ornRussian):I thank
the representativeof Finland for the kind wordshe has
addressed
to me. For my part, I alsowish to expressfull
satisfactionat the developmentand further strengthening
of the friendly andgood-neighbourlyrelationsbetweenour
countries.

116. I am also happy, Mr. President, to be able to extend
to you the best wishes of the Finnish delegation and to
convey our great respects to you, both personally and as
representative of a country with which Finland, happily,
has relations of friendship and co-operation.

123. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay)(translated jFom
Mr. President,may I offer you my delegations’s
most cordial congratulationsasyou assumethe responsibilities of Presidentof the Security Council, which is now
entrusted to your well-known experienceand political
wisdom.You can count on my delegationto give you all
the necessaryco-operationin the dischargeof your duties.
Spanish):

117. The news of the fire in the Al Aqsa Mosque in
Jerusalem understandably caused shock and anxiety
throughout the world-and in particular, of course, among
the Moslem nations. The damage suffered by one of the
most important religious shrines of the world is a loss to
civilization as a whole. It is fortunate that the greater part
of the Mosque could be saved and that it continues to serve
as a centre OFworship.

124. Havingsaidthis, I shallnow refer to the deliberately
set fire which occurredon 21 August of this year at the Al
Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem,a fire which could have
destroyedit completely.Seldomhavewe beencalledon to
witnessthe spectacleof the expressionof a sentimentso
universalasthe unanimouscondemnationof the attempt to
destroy the Al Aqsa Mosque,which is sacrednot only to
thoseof the Moslemreligion,but alsoto thosewho, while
belongingto other faiths, considerthat holy placesrevered
by any religionmust be protected andsafeguarded
against
desecrationor sacrilegeand the possibility of deliberate
destruction.

118. The issue raised by the fire in the Al Aqsa Mosque is
the safety and protection of the Holy Places in Jerusalem.
That is a matter of universal concern. Accordingly, in
August 1967, the Personal Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr, Ernest0 A. Thahnann of Switzerland, when
receiving instructions for his fact-finding mission to Jerusalem, was specifically requested to gather information on
the situation of all of the 1-101~Places. His missions is worth
recalling as an example of an agreed procedure by which
the United Nations was able to obtain information about
the state of the Holy Places in Jerusalem.

125. My country and the GovernmentI represecthavefelt
and still feel the strongestrepugnanceat the attempted
burning to which I refer. We most sincerelyregret the
damagedone before that fire wasput out, and wish to
conveyto members
of all faiths, andespeciallyto the States
with predominantlyMoslempopulations,the expressionof
our unreservedcondemnationof the criminal act of 21
August.

119. On the question of the status of the city of
Jerusalem, to which many speakers have referred, my
delegation stated its position in July of this year [1484th
meeting]
when the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 267 (1969) making it quite clear that the
international community cannot accept as valid any mea+
ures or actions that might tend to change the status of the
City of Jerusalem. Obviously, nothing that happens in

126. The keen world-wide emotion once again demonstratesthe specialnature of and justified concernover the
problem of Jerusalem-that City which is unique in the
world, within whose jurisdictional confineslie the most
Holy Placesrevered by the faithful of three of the most
widespreadreligions on earth whosecombinedadherents
total hundredsof millionsof humanbeings.That emotion

3 See Official Records of the Security Council, %enty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September
1967, document
S/8146.

11

r

and the particular circumstances surrounding this debate
oblige me to state that, when that draft is put to thevote,
my delegation will fmd it necessary to abstain. This
abstention, I wish to repeat very clearly, in no way impliw
any change whatever in the position traditionally taken bq’
my delegation on the status of Jerusalem and the declara.
tion concerning the legislative and administrativa action
taken by Israel to change that status, specifically referred lo
in resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969) of this Cauncii.

also reflects the legitimate collective interest of the international community and of the Organization which best
represents it, namely, the United Nations, in the imperative
need to preserve the international legal status of Jerusalem
as defined by the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly.
127. Moreover, it again shows the importance of the status
of .&usalem as a part of the general problem of peace and
security in the Middle East, with which it is intimately and
inextricably linked. ‘l’he opinion of my delegation with
regard to that status Otis been expressed on many occasions,
of which the latest was very recent, during the debates
which led to the unanimous adoption of resolution 267
(1969) on 3 July. ‘Iherefore, I do not think I need to
reiterate it, since it is public knowledge, and is known also
to the United Nations in general and the Security Council
in particular.

130. I would not wish to conclude this statement without
paying a tribute of very warm and sinceregratitude 10
Mr. Jaime de Pini& of Spain for the exemplary way in
which, as President of the Council, he conducted our
deliberationsand work during the past month. His prssidency wasamongthosewhich do honour to the Council.
131. The PRESIDENT (translated jkom Russian):Thelist
of speakersfor today’s meeting of the Councilis exhausted.
The next meeting of the Council will be held, with the
consentof all the members,today at 3 p.m. There areonly
a few speakerson the list for that meeting, whichgivn
groundsto supposethat the Council will beable to goon to
consider the draft resolution which has been submitted
[S/9445], and conclude its considerationof this questian
at that meeting. Apart from everything else,the CourdJ
must also do sobecausethe GeneralAssemblywill lbegin its
twenty-fourth sessiontomorrow and manymembersof the
Security Council, and the representativesof thosecomltries
which brought this question before the Council, wishto
conclude the discussiontoday. If there are no objaclionj,
further commentsor additions, the meetingis adjourned.

128. At this hour of universal feelings of abhorrence for
the crime committed at the Al Aqsa Mosque on 21 August,
our thoughts turn to the need to intensify the efforts to
reach a stable and just peace in that region, based on the
unanimous resolution adopted on 22 November 1967 by
this Council [242 (1967)], including, of course, the question of the legal status of Jerusalem.
129. I have only a few more words to say. They refer to
the draft resolution [S/9445] submitted by the representative of Pakistan at the 1510th meeting on Friday, 12
September. That draft includes provisions which represent
our views, as we have indicated them by our vote in favour
of the adoption of resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969),
as well as the others to which I have referred in this
statement. Nevertheless, the inclusion of other provisions

The meeting roseat I2:55 p.m.

12

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED

publications

the world.
o, Geneva.

Consult

your

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may

be obtained

bookstore

or write

from
to:

LES PUBLICATIONS

bookstores

United

and

Notions,

DES NATIONS

distributors
Soles

Section,

throughout
New

York

UNIES

les publications
der Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
ler librairier
et les agenczr
dkpositoires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
ouprbs
de votre librairie
ou odrerrez+vour
6:
Notions
Unier, Section
der venter, New York ou Gem&.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Los publicociones
de los Nocianer
Unidor
est.+
en todor
porter
del mundo. Conrulte
o su librero
Ventar,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vcnta
en libreriar
y coscu distribuidoror
o dirijose
o: Nociones
Unidas,
Secri6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (of equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82240-December

1972-2,1D50
