United Nations

S/PV.6479

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6479th meeting
Friday, 11 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Patriota . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Alkalaj
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar
Mr. Araud
Mr. Bunduku-Latha
Mr. Westerwelle
Mr. Krishna
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Amado
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
The interdependence between security and development
Letter dated 2 February 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/50)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-23119 (E)

*1123119*

S/PV.6479

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The interdependence between security
and development
Letter dated 2 February 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Brazil to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/50)
The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Ministers present here
today.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I should like to invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Slovenia, the Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. EugeneRichard Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special
Representative and Director for the 2011 World
Development Report of the World Bank.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mrs. Alice A. Mungwa, Chargé
d’affaires of the Office of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

2

The Security Council will now
consideration of item 2 on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/50, transmitting the concept paper on
the item under consideration.
I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

His

The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Government of
Brazil for focusing on the crucial linkages between
peace, security and development.
Recent events around the world are a sharp
reminder of the need for political stability to be
anchored in peace, opportunity, decent standards of
living and the consent of the governed.
Peace,
security
and
development
interdependent. Evidence abounds.

are

Nine of the 10 countries with the lowest human
development indicators have experienced conflict over
the past 20 years. Countries facing stark inequalities
and weak institutions are at increased risk of conflict.
Poorly distributed wealth and lack of sufficient jobs,
opportunities and freedoms, particularly for a large
youth population, can also increase the risk of
instability. Drug trafficking and international organized
crime have found fertile ground in places that lack
basic services and economic opportunities, leading to
fear in the streets and insecurity across entire regions.
Just as the lack of development can feed the
flames of conflict, economic and social progress can
help to prevent it and secure peace. Sustained, broadly
based development can help to address the roots of
conflict through such steps as ensuring the equitable
sharing of wealth, providing better access to
agricultural lands, strengthening governance and
ensuring justice for all. Above all, development should
be inclusive. By definition, this means including
women, who can play a critical role in negotiations and
peace processes, and young people, who have vast
potential to contribute to the development of their
societies. In short, inclusive development on the basis
of consensus and consultation is perhaps the most
effective route to diminishing the risks of conflict and
enabling long-term stability.
In recent years, we have come a long way in
incorporating these insights into our work. The

11-23119

S/PV.6479

Peacebuilding Commission, for example, brings
together a wide variety of actors to develop common
approaches, including the members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, troop
contributors and key donors, with the participation of
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). The equally new Peacebuilding Fund works to
motivate and support the timely efforts of the full
United Nations family for peacebuilding.
I have also requested all United Nations
presences in places where there is both a United
Nations country team and a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation or political mission to identify
priority areas for peace consolidation and to develop
integrated strategic frameworks to guide their work in
these areas. It is increasingly recognized that these
strategic frameworks must be developed with the host
country to account for national priorities and to enable
ownership of the development process.
Furthermore, the 2008 United Nations-World
Bank Partnership Framework for Crisis and Post-Crisis
Situations provides a basis for developing coherent
approaches to post-conflict countries. These are
important steps, yet there is more we can do to ensure
truly integrated, mutually reinforcing approaches to
security and development. Let me highlight five areas.
First, if the United Nations is to act as one across
the security-development spectrum, we would benefit
from a “whole of Government” approach applied by
Member States across the multilateral system. In this
respect, I welcome the increasing emphasis placed by
Member States on strengthening coherence across
different multilateral institutions, including through
structured delivery and the engagement of the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations executive
boards and the governing boards of the World Bank
and the IMF.
Secondly, we need to better manage the process
of drawdown and withdrawal of Security Councilmandated operations, and provide a stronger basis for
seamless transitions of specific tasks to the United
Nations country team and other development actors.
Thirdly, we need to find innovative ways to build
and strengthen national institutions in fragile countries.
As last month’s Security Council debate on institutionbuilding made clear (see S/PV.6472), effective

11-23119

institutions and strong national ownership are central
to sustainable peace.
Fourthly, we must focus more on the climate
change-security-development nexus. Lack of energy
and the effects of climate change are having
increasingly serious impacts on development and
security. We cannot achieve security without securing
energy and managing climate risks.
Fifthly, we need to consider how to reduce
criminal violence — an ever greater security concern in
many parts of the world. In some regions, organized
crime is threatening both development gains and the
very fabric of international peace and security.
Organized crime is a challenge to a modern functioning
State.
I would also add that, in too many places around
the world, the proliferation of small arms and
ammunition is a standing threat to the security of
ordinary people. In this context, the Council may wish
to consider strengthening its collaboration with the
General Assembly to advance strategies to halt the
illicit proliferation of small arms and ammunition.
As highlighted in my recent report on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
development in Africa,
“the next generation of security challenges will
require added emphasis on crisis management,
disaster risk reduction strategies, stronger civilian
components
in
peace
operations
and
strengthening the rule of law” (S/2010/526*,
para. 101).
At the strategic level, it will be necessary to better
prioritize and sequence security, governance and
development efforts, and to reach out to new partners.
The forthcoming World Development Report will
provide important insights in these areas. We have
ample experience and convincing evidence illustrating
the close links between peace, security and
development.
I look forward to continuing to work with the
Security Council and the full range of partners in
bringing this knowledge to bear on our efforts to fulfil
our Charter-driven mandate to promote peace and
human well-being. I thank the members of the Security
Council for their continuing focus on these challenges.

3

S/PV.6479

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

sustaining peace. In that connection, allow me to share
with the Council three points for further reflection.

I now give the floor
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana.

First, the actions and measures designed to guide
the United Nations security and development
engagement with countries emerging from conflict
should be conceived and put in place early enough
following the cessation of hostilities, with the full
participation of national stakeholders. The earlier we
are able to agree on a common vision for what will
sustain peace in a specific context, the more likely we
will be able to ensure carefully sequenced and
mutually reinforcing actions focused predominantly on
security and socio-economic engagement in countries
emerging from conflict.

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Gasana: Within three weeks’ time, the
Security Council has gathered twice to address ways
and means for the United Nations to live up to its
pivotal role to build and sustain peace. This high
frequency of Security Council meetings in recent
months and weeks testifies to an increasing conviction
that sustaining peace is a multidimensional and
complex undertaking. It calls for broad partnership
among security, political and development actors. It
calls for bold and innovative approaches.
Three weeks ago, my predecessor and good
friend Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent Representative of
Germany, addressed the Council’s debate on
institution-building (see S/PV.6472) and affirmed that
the engagement of Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
offers a political forum necessary to facilitate among
national stakeholders the development of their own
prioritization
for
peacebuilding.
While
the
Commission’s record shows that some of these
priorities may be categorized under political or
security-related aspects of peacebuilding, such as
security sector reform, the rule of law, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and national
reconciliation, one can hardly fail to note the organic
linkages of these aspects with the overarching
objectives of the socio-economic transformation of the
societies concerned. In fact, the questions of health,
education,
infrastructure
development,
youth
employment and economic generation have been
repeatedly underscored as critical peacebuilding
priorities.
The facts and statistics presented earlier by the
Secretary-General on the linkage between the
challenges of post-conflict settings and achieving the
Millennium Development Goals speak of the
seriousness and urgency of the task at hand.
Peacebuilding is a term that we like to use in
describing the interlinkages between security and
development interventions in post-conflict situations.
The Peacebuilding Commission is the unique organ of
the United Nations that brings together security and
development actors to promote common, integrated
and mutually reinforcing approaches to building and

4

Secondly, the Council plays an important role in
fostering early and mutually reinforcing engagement
on the security and development ends of the postconflict spectrum, most prominently through
mandating multidimensional peacekeeping missions.
The investment we collectively make in those missions
can be further optimized by encouraging coherence and
more meaningful integration of efforts between
missions, United Nations country teams and other
development actors, including the World Bank.
(spoke in French)
Today’s presentation on the upcoming World
Development Report reflects the fact that the World
Bank is always evolving and that it is now an essential
partner of the United Nations in our joint search for
lasting peace in the world. In that regard, the PBC is a
flexible and inclusive political forum that can
strengthen that partnership with the Bank and with
other development actors on the ground. Moreover,
through its various country-specific configurations, the
PBC makes that partnership a crucial priority.
In reviewing the mandate, structure and
configuration of peacekeeping operations, the Council
can rely on the views of the Commission in optimizing
the contribution of those missions to reconstruction and
development. That also means ensuring that the
partnership on the ground functions with greater clarity
when it comes to the roles and responsibilities of
security and development actors. That would help us to
avoid redundancy and wasted energy, as well as to
more efficiently channel the necessary resources to
support development following conflict.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

Thirdly, the Council should benefit from an
ongoing and speedy assessment of the security
situation on the ground and an awareness of elements
for effective peacebuilding. An in-depth analysis of the
causes and factors contributing to conflict should serve
to highlight the manner in which security and
development actors coordinate their efforts on the
ground. In that regard, I believe that the PBC is the
body best suited to carry out such a holistic analysis, in
order to allow the Council to adapt its strategies on an
ongoing basis and come up with realistic criteria to
monitor and assess the progress made towards
peacebuilding and minimize the risk of a relapse into
conflict. Such an analysis would also help the Council
to develop a realistic exit strategy, whether for
peacekeeping or peacebuilding operations.
In conclusion, following the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, five years ago, the United
Nations as a whole now has sufficient experience as to
the links and interdependence between security and
development. That experience should now be translated
into a resolute political commitment and concrete
tailored actions on the ground. The populations of
countries emerging from conflict should not be doubly
affected, first by devastating conflicts and subsequently
by our difficulties in harmonizing and coordinating our
efforts to help them build their future. Those people
deserve our collective attention. The PBC is at the
Council’s disposal in achieving that goal.
The President: I thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sarah Cliffe.
Ms. Cliffe: I would like to thank the Government
of Brazil for the opportunity to participate in this
meeting and for the work of Ambassador Viotti in
consistently drawing attention to security and
development linkages in the discussions of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on Guinea-Bissau. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the
contribution of General dos Santos Cruz in the
Advisory Council of the World Development Report,
along with that of President Kagame, Minister Amado
and the many other leaders of the Member States
represented here.
I want to say at the outset that, as His Excellency
Mr. Gasana emphasized, we view this very much as a
joint process with the United Nations. The early
meetings with the General Assembly, the Economic

11-23119

and Social Council, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the input we
receive from United Nations departments, funds and
programmes, have been crucial in shaping the analysis
of the World Development Report. The main message
of the Report is that strengthening the national
institutions and governance that provide citizen
security, justice and jobs are crucial to avoiding
repeated cycles of violence and instability. I will touch
on four issues connected to that, namely, the ways in
which security and development linkages are changing,
national lessons, possible directions for international
policy and the urgency of the stakes.
With regard to changing security and
development linkages, the Report highlights that there
have been many successes in reducing global violence.
There has been an enormous reduction in inter-State
war. Civil wars, while still exacting an unacceptable
toll, directly cause only one quarter of the deaths that
they did 20 years ago. Much of that achievement
should be credited as a success of the international
architecture established after the Second World War —
and subsequently adapted — including, of course,
centrally, the intergovernmental bodies of the United
Nations.
Yet 1.5 billion people still live in areas where
violence limits their ability to live normally, to go to
work and to see their children educated. However,
many of those areas are no longer dominated by classic
inter-State threats or civil wars between Governments
and well-organized rebel movements, but by much
more fluid cycles of social protest and criminal and
political violence.
As the Secretary-General underlined, organized
criminal movements can undermine the gains made by
successful peace process, as we see in Central America.
Criminal gangs can be mobilized into larger political
violence during elections, as we saw in the case of
Kenya. Protests over food prices or unemployment can
spread into larger political unrest. The cross-border
impacts of violence are considerable, from drug
trafficking, which has affected even isolated West
African countries, to refugee flows and terrorist
attacks. Economic and political grievances often
combine, as with the demand for both jobs and justice
that we have seen in recent events in the Middle East
and North Africa.

5

S/PV.6479

What are the common elements among the
different ways in which security and development links
are manifested? New work completed for the World
Development Report shows that the risks of violence
are highest when institutional weaknesses in societies
combine with high levels of internal and external
stress. Societies are vulnerable when local institutions
are unable to protect their citizens from abuse, either
from their own security forces or from nonGovernment groups, or to provide equitable access to
justice and economic opportunities. Those institutional
vulnerabilities can then be exacerbated when countries
face the stresses of populations with a high percentage
of young people, high unemployment, growing
inequality, or external events such as the infiltration of
foreign fighting forces, trafficking networks or
economic shocks.
The specific triggers of crises vary by countries’
circumstances, but the risks of both political and
criminal violence are consistently linked to underlying
deficits in the ability of institutions to provide security,
justice and jobs. Government capacity obviously
matters greatly for violence prevention, but so do
accountability and the legitimacy of relations between
State and society. Societies with high levels of
corruption or human rights abuses, for example, face
greater risks of violence in future.
The World Development Report draws together
lessons from national reformers in preventing and
recovering from violence. These have provided a
number of interesting insights, which I will touch on
briefly. First, successful national transformations are the
result of multiple transitions, not one-off processes of
change. One need only think of the multiple transitions
in Ghana, in Chile, in Indonesia or in the Republic of
Korea in terms of security, justice, economic policy and
political reform. The Report has looked at the historical
timelines
for
institutional
and
governance
transformations. In the twentieth century, no country
accomplished this in less than 12 to 15 years, and the
average, for the fastest reformers, was between 20 and
30 years.
Secondly, leaders have built coalitions that are
inclusive enough to restore confidence, not necessarily
including all political or armed groups, but broad
enough to build national support for change and
provide a platform for working with local leaders in
violence-affected communities.

6

Thirdly, producing some early results has been
crucial to restoring confidence. These do not need to be
many in number. I would cite, for example, Liberia’s
programmes to restore basic security and some
electricity, and to take action on corruption, or
Colombia’s redeployment of the military to protect
civilian transit on roads.
Fourthly, countries have made tough choices over
priorities for institutional change. Experience
underlines the importance of early attention to the
institutions that provide basic security, justice and
employment, and has shown that new initiatives can
decrease corruption. Our work confirms previous
analysis by the Brahimi Panel, among others, that
elections, while often a crucial part of transitions, are
not a panacea for broader reform. They must be part of
a package of change.
Lastly, countries have historically innovated in
their institutional approaches rather than copying from
abroad. A focus on institutions and governance does
not mean convergence on Western institutions. There
are many examples demonstrating that the copying of
institutions does not work, from colonial legacies to
the transplant of models to Iraq. Even South-South
copying does not always work smoothly. The
institutions of South Africa’s transition, for example,
while highly effective in those political circumstances,
have not always been easily adapted to circumstances
in other countries.
At the national level, the Report also looks at a
number of practical programme tools that have been
used to restore confidence and transform institutions.
Some lessons here are the importance of early signals
on justice and inclusion that signal a break with the
past but manage expectations of the timing of change;
maintaining a focus on basic functions; making the
connections between security and justice reform;
pursuing community-based approaches, such as those
supported by the United Nations Development
Programme, the Department of Political Affairs and the
World Bank; establishing back-to-basics job-creation
programmes that give marginalized youth respect and
status; and involving women in both economic
empowerment and the hard areas of security and justice
reform.
The Report describes the successes of
international action, but it also highlights some areas of
deficit in linking security and development assistance,

11-23119

S/PV.6479

and four possible tracks for change. First, with respect
to increasing capacity to support citizens’ security,
justice and employment, we are underinvested in those
areas, although they are central to today’s risks of
violence. It is much harder, for example, for countries
to get assistance for their police forces and their courts
than for their military forces. It is much harder for
them to get assistance for employment generation than
for health, education or macroeconomic stability. It is
much harder for countries to get assistance when they
are struggling to prevent risks from rising than it is
after they have had a civil war. As President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia said to us in our discussions:
“After we have had a civil war, you guys provide us
with all the assistance; but when we are trying to
prevent it, there is very little that the international
community is able to do to help”.
In order to address this, we look at the potential
for greatly expanded initiatives to draw together
public- and private-sector investment in generating
employment in insecure areas. On police and justice
capacity, we note the value of a clear lead role for the
United Nations, and the need for flexible capacity that
links policing with courts and corrections assistance
and can provide a range of advisory, executive and
mandated mission functions. We also consider the need
to move from talking only about coordination to
combined operational support — for example, through
the World Bank supporting the lead of the United
Nations or regional institutions on mediated
agreements and security and justice reform; or United
Nations departments supporting the security and justice
aspects of local economic development initiatives.
Here, I would also like to reiterate what the SecretaryGeneral said on the importance of coherence across the
multilateral system and the ability, through signals
from Member States, to ensure that multilateral
agencies themselves have an integrated approach.
The second track of change we look at is on
internal agency reforms. International assistance,
whether in development aid or peacekeeping, is often
too slow to enter, too quick to exit, and insufficiently
able to support national institutional capacity. Our
systems and procedures in the international financial
institutions — but perhaps it is fair to say that the
United Nations and bilateral agencies face some of the
same problems — were originally designed for
environments that are stable, with strong institutional
capacity and competitive markets. These three

11-23119

conditions do not apply in the majority of the most
fragile situations. There is a need to rethink how
systems can be made fit for purpose to support rapid
confidence-building and institutional transformation,
including through faster and less volatile aid, flexible
peacekeeping, long-term mediation, and developing
budget, staffing and contract systems that acknowledge
the reality of insecure environments.
The third track for change concerns regional
approaches. International approaches are still primarily
focused on individual nation-States, and they encounter
difficulties in addressing regional challenges such as
those in West Africa and Central America. We suggest
scaling up action in two areas.
The first is to support the political convening
capacities of regional institutions to address crossborder economic and security issues in concert with the
global financial and technical capacities of institutions
such as the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. Practical examples would include
supporting the African Union border programme or the
needs for pooled capacity to address drug trafficking in
Central America.
The second area is tougher action to stem illicit
financial flows from trafficking, corruption and
money-laundering. This would include action through
more joint investigations and prosecutions between
developed and developing country jurisdictions.
The fourth track concerns marshalling the
combined resources of low-, middle- and high-income
countries, I will be a little more frank here than we are
in the text of the World Development Report.
In our country consultations, there were
considerable divisions over approaches among national
leaders in fragile situations, middle-income countries
and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) donors. Some of those
divisions were driven by disagreements over
governance models — which norms of responsible
leadership apply in fragile situations or situations of
risk, particularly in terms of the speed of governance
transformation and the models adopted, whether in the
context of political reform or corruption.
Different countries face different domestic
pressures related to the risks and results involved in
their international programmes — a problem we call
the dual accountability dilemma. It would be

7

S/PV.6479

presumptuous to claim to have complete answers on
this issue, but three starting points can bring
approaches closer.

Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

First would be to use factual and historical
evidence on the speed of governance transformations
to inform dialogue. Secondly, one could draw more on
South-South exchanges, but also on exchanges between
the South and the North that make it explicit that
OECD countries are not immune from the problems of
corruption and violence and that the challenge of
justice and jobs and the grievances they can provoke is
a shared challenge. Last, greater leadership must be
provided to regional institutions where they are well
positioned to convene both high- and middle-income,
non-regional partners. We suggest that the
Peacebuilding Commission’s unique composition may
also give it unexploited potential to facilitate part of
that dialogue on timetables for governance
transformation.

It is now my pleasure to give the floor to the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs and Deputy
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, His
Excellency Mr. Guido Westerwelle.

Let me conclude on the urgency of the stakes.
The impact of the failure to prevent new and repeated
cycles of violence and instability is considerable. Once
countries have fallen into a cycle of weak institutions
and violence, it is very hard for them to get out. The
economic and social impacts are immense. Civil
conflict costs 30 years of growth in gross domestic
product of the average developing country. No lowincome, fragile or conflict-affected country has yet
achieved a single Millennium Development Goal.
Countries that fall into protracted conflict and fragility
lag 20 percentage points behind in poverty reduction.
And as recent events have shown, deficits in the
institutions that provide security, justice and jobs for
citizens can spur conflict not only in the most fragile
States, but also in countries that were long viewed as
strong and stable.
I would like to close by mentioning again the
partnership between the United Nations and the World
Bank in developing the World Development Report. It
has been substantive, thoughtful, non-territorial and
focused on a shared peacebuilding agenda, and we very
much hope that this will continue in considering the
implications for action of the Report.
The President: I thank Ms. Sarah Cliffe for her
briefing.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

8

Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank the Brazilian presidency for preparing today’s
debate. Also, I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Sarah Cliffe and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for their briefings. They have set the stage
for our discussions.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.
Almost 10 years ago, the United Nations
Development Programme’s first Arab Human
Development Report identified three major obstacles to
development in the Arab world: first, a lack of political
participation, second, shortcomings in the education
system, and third, disadvantages for women in society,
the economy and politics. Those conclusions are still
valid today.
We are witnessing turbulent times in the Middle
East. The situation south of the Mediterranean Sea
perfectly fits the topic of our discussion today. Egypt is
a great country. The proud people of Egypt deserve to
enjoy the peaceful transformation of their society. It is
up to the Egyptian people to determine who will lead
their country. They must be given the chance to do so
now.
The people who are demonstrating in the streets
of Cairo are not demanding freedom or jobs; they want
both at the same time. Both belong together. People
want to decide themselves how to live their lives. They
want the opportunity to shape a better future. Where
people have little economic perspective and cannot
participate in the political life of their country, that
does not contribute to stability. On the contrary,
repression of political participation, human rights and
economic freedom will lead to instability. What the
international community can do is to offer its support
for democratic transition. Germany is ready to
cooperate. Europe has offered a partnership for
transformation. We are ready to give life to our offer.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

Progress towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals has been especially slow in fragile
or conflict-ridden countries. No fragile or conflictaffected country has yet achieved one of the
Millennium Development Goals. Because peace and
security and development are inseparable, this
discussion constitutes an essential part of our work
here in the Security Council. Human rights are key to
human dignity. They are the third element in the
equation. Peace and security, development and human
rights together shape a world worth living in.
Almost all conflicts illustrate the extent to which
these three elements are interlinked. Let me give some
examples.
In Afghanistan, it has never been enough to look
at the conflict with an eye only on security. In that
country, devastated by decades of war, development is
urgent. That is the reason why we invest in developing
the local economy and support creating a civilian
future for the people.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
abundant natural resources should provide an income
for the local population and reliable taxes for public
tasks. Instead, we are witnessing some of the most
abhorrent crimes of our time. Sanctions and
peacekeeping alone cannot solve those problems. We
need to invest more, and more intelligently, to achieve
peace. That is why Germany supports projects for the
certification of mineral resources. The economy of the
entire region will also benefit from our ongoing efforts
to rebuild the Goma airport.
Through the referendum in the Sudan, the people
have voiced their choice in an impressive manner. I
commend the authorities of the Sudan for publicly
accepting the outcome of the referendum. Now we
need to prepare for the post-referendum process and for
Southern Sudan’s independence. Germany stands ready
to assist and to counsel both sides, North and South.
We need both sides to be stable and to continue on the
road to democracy and economic progress.
Germany encourages the Security Council to
address the issue of peacebuilding as early as possible.
The idea of peacebuilding should guide our work when
we mandate, extend or downsize peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, the Peacebuilding
Commission, which my country has had the honour to
chair, can provide valuable advice to the Security
Council.

11-23119

Development always has to do with institutional
frameworks. Development presupposes a fair and
efficient tax system. Respect for the rule of law is
decisive. Development requires independent judges
and a reliable police force. Development needs a public
sector without corruption and as little red tape as
possible. But, in the end, these institutional
frameworks alone do not lead to the creation of jobs;
business does. Development depends on an active
private sector. On the one hand, we need to empower
private actors so that they can create opportunities for a
better future. On the other hand, business success
brings with it responsibility. Businesses should commit
to aligning their operations and strategies with the
principles of the United Nations Global Compact in the
areas of human rights, labour, the environment and the
fight against corruption.
Every conflict is unique. There is no one-sizefits-all-approach. In some cases climate change may be
a serious obstacle to development, and thus may
become a major cause of conflict. In other cases other
factors may be more decisive. In all stages of the
process of building peace, signing peace agreements
and introducing development programmes we need a
stronger role for women and greater protection of
children and their rights. The Security Council needs to
look at every specific case on its own merits.
Germany is and will continue to be a reliable
partner when it comes to safeguarding peace and
promoting development. This will not change. We will
live up to our responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Maria Ángela Holguín Cuéllar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February, as well
as to thank you for convening this thematic debate on
the interdependence between security and development
and for circulating the document that serves as the
basis for the discussion of this matter (S/2011/50).
I also convey my thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for being here today and for his
statement, as well as to the Chairperson of the Peace
Building Commission and Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
representative from the World Bank, for their reports
on their respective areas of responsibility.

9

S/PV.6479

We take note of the thematic continuation with
regard to the recent debate on institution building (see
S/PV.6472) held at the initiative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Recent United Nations reports give
accounts of the transformations that are being seen in
the activities of peacekeeping operations on the
ground. Police forces and civilian experts are
participating ever more frequently and in greater
numbers. This trend shows that activities of a strictly
military nature are not enough in themselves to take on
the task of achieving sustainable peace.
In making the Peacebuilding Commission
operational, the Security Council recognized that
development, peace and security were interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. Likewise, it agreed on the need
to take a coordinated, coherent and integrated approach
to peacebuilding.
Today’s debate on the interdependence between
security and development in the context of the
responsibilities and situations under the purview of the
Security Council is important for establishing the need
to consider ways to mainstream or give greater weight
to the development dimension in peacekeeping
operations.
We must not lose sight of the fact that
peacebuilding, as a long-term objective, is a crosscutting task that must start in the early phases of
peacekeeping. This is supported by the need to provide
long-term solutions, ensure the sustainability and
strengthening of democratic institutions, promote the
well-being of the population and prevent cycles of
dependence that discourage development.
In that regard, when drafting mandates, the
Council could place greater emphasis on the
strengthening of coordination activities and structures
that have a high impact on the development of national
capacities. Such activities are not new in the context of
peacekeeping operations. Activities aimed at the
strengthening of security institutions, the judicial
system and the rule of law, institutional provisions for
the protection of civilians and those aimed at
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration already
play a substantive role in laying the foundations for
development. For example, promoting working
methods for local employment recovery or adopting
business programmes that build on social organization,
with an immediate emphasis on women and youth, can

10

be seen as options that do not conflict with
peacekeeping goals.
Adequate coordination on development activities
among United Nations agencies present on the ground
is essential. The Council could adjust peacekeeping
operation mandates to address issues in this area and
avoid valuable long-term development going to waste.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral could, in each case, act as a coordinator
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding tasks. As part
of such a coordination effort, the President of the
Security Council could establish a strategic dialogue on
specific areas of concern with the Peacebuilding
Commission, and through it with the World Bank and
other actors.
It is clear that the Council is not the body to make
decisions regarding development. Nevertheless, we
must not ignore that its decisions have an impact on the
long-term development of countries and that this is a
fundamental component of any sustainable peace,
which is the preeminent purpose set out in the Charter
of the United Nations: to protect future generations
from the scourge of war.
The Council could therefore benefit, in its
activities related to peacekeeping, from the practice
and doctrine of the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, as well as from the lessons
learned from the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The presence of seven members of the
Commission in the Security Council could serve as a
bridge for establishing greater communication and
consultation on development best practices.
We understand that not all members of the
Council have the same financial means. This should
not become an obstacle to finding mechanisms that
offer long-term solutions. After 65 years of existence,
the United Nations must be able to provide for the
configuration of comprehensive mechanisms to
promote peacebuilding.
The United Nations of the twenty-first century
will be relevant as long it responds to the development
needs of great sections of the world population. In this
regard, it is imperative that the activities of its main
organs effect real change, make a meaningful
contribution to the well-being of populations and have
a genuine impact on situations that have been on their
agendas for decades.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sven Alkalaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Minister Patriota, for convening
this meeting to discuss such an important topic. My
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Sarah Cliffe of the World Bank and His
Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Chairperson
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their insightful
remarks.
It is our view that the objectives of security and
development go hand in hand, which means that
security is a prerequisite for development. Discussions
about security therefore lead us inevitably to a
discussion of development, indicating an inherent link
between these two issues. Improvements in one area
enhance the chances of progress in the other, while
failure to provide either security or development could
jeopardize success in both fields.
Various dimensions of development and security
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing, which
suggests that the link between them requires a
coordinated approach. It is therefore important to have
a clear understanding of the mechanisms that govern
the security-development nexus. That nexus also calls
for a reassessment of the boundaries between those two
issues. At the core of the matter is the ability to
contribute on the ground to conflict prevention and the
creation of an atmosphere conducive to sustainable
peace.

should be sensitive to the connection between
development and security agendas. It is also important
that strategies regarding security and development are
integrated and implemented alongside the other
priorities in a coherent peacebuilding framework.
Security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as parts of
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies, can be
successfully implemented only in an environment that
offers economic opportunity and favours development.
When early peace dividends are evident and accepted,
the security sector is well-managed and democratic
norms are in place, opportunities for development are
present in the true sense.
Weak national institutions, whether they are in
the political, security or development domains, can
increase the risk of a relapse into conflict. Bosnia and
Herzegovina believes that one way of addressing the
security-development link is to focus on building and
strengthening institutions that are indispensable to
security and development. That issue was the topic of
our thematic debate held in the Security Council last
month (see S/PV.6472).
Governments and societies need proper funding
and assistance in consolidating their efforts to provide
security for their populations and to improve economic
conditions. Much has been achieved through the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. Yet, more remains to be done.

The peacebuilding process entails overlapping
agendas for peace and development aimed at
preventing and managing conflicts and encouraging
post-conflict reconstruction. The United Nations has a
central role in promoting such agendas. In order to
address the deep-rooted causes of violent conflicts,
new and innovative approaches must be found to
generate resources for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. In addition, the various actors within
the United Nations system must seek out the best
possible ways to contribute to their common purpose of
development and security.

With regard to the donor community, it is
essential to establish better cooperation between
donors and international financial institutions. United
Nations agencies and international organizations need
more specialized expertise in areas such as natural
resource management and wealth-sharing. They must
also coordinate their efforts towards achieving
meaningful results and adjust their responses to the
specific situation in a given country. A wellimplemented and integrated strategy on the parts of
agencies, funds and international financial institutions
can significantly increase prospects for the success of
efforts to ensure peace and security.

It is crucial to extend assistance to countries in a
wide range of sectors, including governance, human
rights,
justice,
reconciliation,
demilitarization,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. Assistance programmes in those areas

With all of that in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina
emphasizes the importance of an integrated,
comprehensive and coordinated approach that includes
the establishment of good governance, the rule of law,
the promotion of human rights, institution-building,

11-23119

11

S/PV.6479

security sector reform, economic reconstruction and
development in order to achieve irreversible peace.
Furthermore, we firmly believe that particular
emphasis should be placed on empowering women and
on their greater involvement in peacebuilding efforts,
including in development processes.
Finally, we are fully aware that the Security
Council is not responsible for making decisions
directly related to the issue of development. However,
we believe that the Council can and should contribute
through its work to the transformation of post-conflict
settings into environments that foster long-term
development. Given the correlation between security
and development and the Council’s primary role in
maintaining international peace and security, it is safe
to say that this body already invests significant efforts
to that end. Nevertheless, in the course of its
deliberations, the Security Council should also
endeavour to address development issues with the
attention they warrant, in order to ensure a smooth and
effective transition to lasting and sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Luís Filipe Marques Amado, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Portugal.
Mr. Amado (Portugal): Let me congratulate
Brazil on its presidency of the Council. Let me also
thank you, Sir, for the organization of this debate and
the concept paper (see S/2011/50) that was distributed
beforehand. Allow me to also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement, as well as Ms. Sarah Cliffe
and Ambassador Gasana for their contributions to this
debate.
As this is the first time that I have the privilege to
address the Security Council, permit me to forgo
reading out the text that has been circulated and instead
share with the Council some reflections related to the
problem being debated today.
I would like first of all to make a general remark
on the situation we face globally. We live in times of
change and deep transformations. I think that we are
living in one of those periods when history suddenly
accelerates and human reason has difficulty keeping up
with, adapting and responding to the situations created
by that speeding up of history.
In such a time, we have to assume our particular
responsibilities. We act as politicians and, in this
particular place, we have that responsibility. As the

12

great recession of 2009 showed, we are in the midst of
a huge process of transformation, of restructuring of
the global economy and of change in the distribution of
resources and wealth all over the world, as well as a
rebalancing of power among nations and among
regions. Peace processes have a huge geopolitical
impact, which we cannot ignore. I think we are also in
the midst of a long, complex, difficult and very
dangerous process of reconfiguration of the
geopolitical order. I think that the Security Council will
be at the centre of that process, and we have to assume
that responsibility.
To control that process and avoid a global
confrontation, we need to address every tension,
conflict and situation of unrest with particular
sensitivity and, more than ever, collective commitment.
That is why I completely concur with Guido
Westerwelle’s remarks about the determining role that
the Peacebuilding Commission has to play in the
context of the United Nations system.
I think that we also need to address the different
situations that we face all over the world in a more
comprehensive way. In that regard, we certainly also
need to address the interdependence of the political,
security and development dimensions with a
comprehensive approach. We need to address the
complexities of these situations, which are really vital
in managing the difficulties that we need to manage.
The timing in choosing this issue for our debate
is also appropriate from the perspective of the global
challenges that we face, with which we need to deal in
a more comprehensive way. And to do that the
political, security and development dimensions have to
be addressed in an appropriate way.
At the end of the 1990s, I served as Development
Minister, and during that time I saw how difficult it
was to conciliate the security and political dimensions
with development policy. On the ground, it was always
difficult not only to coordinate, but also to promote
interaction among the security, military and
development sectors. There were many preconceived
ideas among the various agencies on the ground.
Fortunately, it seems that those times have
passed. There has been a long-standing debate within
the United Nations, mainly on how to manage conflicts
in Africa, and a comprehensive process is evolving. I
think it is also important in today’s debate to have had
the opportunity to listen to Sarah Cliffe from the World

11-23119

S/PV.6479

Bank. I had the privilege of participating in some
sessions in the preparation of that very important
report, which I believe for the first time will address all
these issues in the comprehensive way needed to face
today’s reality.
Finally, I would like to make the following point
on what is happening in the Middle East. Minister
Westerwelle addressed the Council on this particular
issue, but I would also like to stress this point. Given
the dynamic of the events flourishing there, it is our
fundamental responsibility to manage the geopolitical
tension between war and peace. I would like to add to
what Mr. Westerwelle said.
More than ever, we need a very comprehensive
approach to the realities of the Middle East. It is a
mistake to look at the conflict, unrest and tension in a
fragmented way. If we do not address them in the next
couple of months or years in a comprehensive way,
interlinking the political, security and development
challenges of the region, I would say that we will be
facing a tragic situation. I am sure that the Security
Council will have to play a much more difficult role if
we are not able to handle these situations, as I said, in a
more comprehensive way, engaging the whole of the
international community, including the Security
Council.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
External Affairs of India, His Excellency Mr. S. M.
Krishna.
Mr. Krishna (India): I would like to begin by
thanking the Brazilian presidency for organizing this
debate. Brazil and India have a very special
relationship. It is a great honour for me to make my
first appearance in this Council under the Brazilian
presidency. India returns to the Security Council after
19 years. These years have been transformational for
India. We believe that an effective and efficient
Security Council is in our common interest and we will
work towards strengthening it.
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation, said
that “poverty is the worst form of violence”. The
Charter of the United Nations, recognizing that
violence and the lack of development are interrelated,
commits the United Nations to promoting social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
The international community, over the past two
decades, has invested a large amount of human and

11-23119

material capital in peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding initiatives. Our collective experience in
dealing with these conflicts shows that without peace,
development suffers. At the same time, the lack of
development and prospects for economic progress
creates fertile ground for violence and instability,
which further set back development.
The unevenness of the development process and
the disparities prevailing on a regional, national, and
global scale feed into a vicious cycle. Our efforts
should therefore focus on promoting development for
all by encouraging economic activity and enhancing
livelihood security.
India brings to this table almost 60 years of
experience in overcoming many of the challenges of
transforming a colonial legacy into a modern dynamic
nation of a billion people who are trying to meet their
aspirations within a democratic system dedicated to the
rule of law. India has taken significant steps designed
to accelerate the range and depth of welfare and social
justice programmes. In recent years, they include the
assurance of 100 days of employment to every person
living in rural areas, the enactment of the Right to
Information Act to help our citizens to become more
aware, the right to education to help every Indian share
in the benefits of the country’s economic progress and
also to contribute to it, and the initiative for reservation
for women in Parliament and in state legislatures to
ensure equal partnership of women in our progress and
the increase in reservation for women to 50 per cent in
local bodies.
Development has to be accompanied by
inclusivity and tolerance. In that context, I quote the
Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh:
“The goal of the development process must be to
include every last member of our society,
particularly those who are at the margins. This not
only broadens the support base for development,
it also strengthens the Government’s ability to
perform its core developmental roles.”
The lessons of inclusivity can also be applied to
international efforts in the maintenance of peace and
security. The process of implementing a peace
agreement must run along with the provision of
humanitarian and emergency assistance, resumption of
economic activity and the creation of political and
administrative institutions that improve governance

13

S/PV.6479

and include all stakeholders, particularly the weak and
the underprivileged.
We are greatly encouraged by the African Union’s
efforts to develop post-conflict reconstruction
capacities. The success of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development — NEPAD — and the African
Peer Review Mechanism has lessons that are relevant
to national ownership.
The international community needs to ensure a
predictable and enhanced flow of resources. It is
instructive to note that the United Nations
peacekeeping budget, which is about $8 billion
annually, is more than the combined budgets of the
United Nations Development Programme and UNICEF.
It is obvious that development expenditures need to be
enhanced greatly if they are to make a dent on security
problems. We also need to ensure that collective
security mechanisms intersect with our collective
efforts for economic progress to mitigate the causes of
persistent insecurity at a global level.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi once said that “A
nation’s strength ultimately consists in what it can do
on its own, and not in what it can borrow from others”.
The international community can encourage, motivate
and facilitate. It cannot impose solutions. The
temptation to create a new orthodoxy, of talking down
rather than of listening, must be avoided at all costs.
No country has contributed as many peacekeepers
to as many peacekeeping operations as India. Our
peacekeepers have been early peacebuilders. We are
also committed to contribute, bilaterally and
multilaterally, to development initiatives. To that end,
we are working through the IBSA — India, Brazil and
South Africa — mechanism, with the African Union
and with regional African groupings to promote SouthSouth perspectives on development and security.
The international structure for maintaining peace
and security and peacebuilding needs to be reformed.
Global powers and the capacities to address problems
are much more dispersed than they were six decades
ago. The current framework must address these
realities.
We understand the expectations that accompany
our Council membership. We are acutely conscious of
the need for effective coordination between the
Permanent Five and the elected members, especially
those whose credentials for permanent membership

14

stand
acknowledged.
On
issues
concerning
international peace and security, all of us are on the
same page. I am happy to note that this process of
closer cooperation is making headway.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming India’s
commitment to making its vast experience in more than
six decades of nation-building available to global
efforts towards greater development and improved
security.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Paul Bunduku-Latha, Vice Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Bunduku-Latha (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to pay tribute to you, Mr. President,
and to your country, Brazil, for the initiative of holding
this ministerial debate on the interdependence between
security and development in the framework of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
On behalf of the delegation of Gabon and its
Government, I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, the Secretary-General, for his steady
commitment to peace and development in the world. I
also wish to thank my friend, Mr. Eugene-Richard
Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his statement, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for the quality of
her report on conflicts and for the relevance of her
statement.
The end of the cold war announced a new era of
international peace and security, but since then new
forms of conflict have appeared. Those new conflicts
have taken the form of internal crises to which are
added threats to peace and security such as terrorism,
drugs, international organized crime and the
proliferation of small arms.
In that context, we wish to point out that during
his term of office President Omar Bongo Ondimba
spared no effort in devoting himself, through diverse
mediation efforts, to resolving conflicts in the
subregion of Central Africa and the Great Lakes. The
success of his action was based on a consistent method
of constant encouragement of dialogue, tolerance and
peace. Moreover, Gabon, with its counterparts in
Central Africa, has contributed to setting up
instruments to prevent and resolve conflicts and build
peace.
Following the same lines, the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, is

11-23119

S/PV.6479

continuing the work of his illustrious predecessor. In
that regard, his social programme, based on the triad of
peace, development and sharing, remains the perfect
illustration of the inseparable link between security and
development. It is illusory to imagine development
without solidarity. Likewise, no State can achieve
development without taking the concepts of peace and
security into account.
As Pope Paul VI once stated, the new name of
peace is development. This is therefore the opportunity
to underscore that it is in the best interest of States to
support social cohesion by promoting the well-being of
populations and policies conducive to strengthening
basic infrastructure and improving living conditions.
Indeed, the populations of the world aspire not
only to live in peace and security, but also to a
prosperous existence through their active participation
in the economic and social development of their
nations. The unemployment of young people,
shortcomings in the education and heath-care systems,
and the absence of economic prospects and a reliable
social security can become destabilizing factors in the
long term. Equally disturbing, in many countries
terrorism continues to feed on the distress of
populations and today is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security.
Recent events clearly show the extent to which
insecurity can give rise to demands for deep-seated
social and political change. Thus, in many countries,
we have seen hunger strikes degenerate into popular
uprisings with destabilizing effects on peace and
security.
Security and development are not therefore only
requirements, but remain closely linked and are two
sides of the same reality. In that regard, if we accept
that poverty or the absence of development is the cause
of conflicts, we can also assert that wide-spread
destitution significantly increases the risks of
instability and violence. Furthermore, while crises and
violence alone do not explain the absence of economic
and social development in nations, nevertheless they
hinder development.
On behalf of the Government of Gabon, I am
therefore delighted to note that the topic chosen here,
the interdependence between security and development
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
is in line with the policy advocated by President Ali
Bongo Ondimba, who also attaches particular

11-23119

importance to issues regarding the improvement of the
status of women, widows, orphans and people with
disabilities, the fight against pandemics and the
environment. In parallel, good governance, social
justice, the rule of law, respect for national laws and
human rights, freedom of expression, pluralistic
democracy, the fight against corruption, as well as the
acceptance of the results of free and transparent
elections, are certainly essential factors for stable
States and dynamic development.
With regard to State ownership in post-conflict
situations, the conclusions of the debate on institutionbuilding of 21 January, under the presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, (see S/PV.6472), stressed its
importance. Indeed, national ownership of the peace
process is essential to restoring security and promoting
development. The restoration of such States will be
even more sustainable if it is based on the capacities of
their populations and on the credibility of their
institutions. Moreover, such States must ensure the
effective control over their natural resources, since the
illegal exploitation and trade of such resources hinder
development and peace.
My delegation remains convinced of the need to
include in political processes all national actors, public
and private, including civil society. Likewise, close
cooperation among all national and international actors
is essential to the successful efforts of our States. That
is why we are convinced that better coordination
among all bodies of the United Nations system will
enable States to achieve the economic and social
development crucial to lasting peace.
Security and development are two concepts that
share close dynamic links, both conceptually and in
practice. One aims to increase the freedom of choice,
while the other allows those choices to be made in a
secure environment. It would therefore seem crucial for
the United Nations to give a more central role to
conflict prevention in their international policy and
security strategy. Our debate today shares that logic.
That is why my country, Gabon, remains firmly
committed to conflict prevention as the preferred
instrument to promote harmonious peace, security and
development among nations.
Finally, before concluding, allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for the draft presidential statement
submitted for adoption and for which I reiterate my
delegation’s support.

15

S/PV.6479

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish to
congratulate the delegation of Brazil for organizing this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security focusing on interdependence between security
and development. We welcome His Excellency
Minister Antonio Patriota to the Council, and are
pleased to see him presiding over this meeting. We
acknowledge the presence and participation of the
Foreign Ministers of India, Germany, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Portugal, and the Vice
Minister of Gabon at this meeting. Unfortunately, my
Foreign Minister, Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane, could not
be with us today. She sends her best wishes, and is
confident of the positive outcomes of this meeting.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
the Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
His Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana,
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, and the World
Bank Special Representative, Ms. Cliffe, for their
informative contributions.
We thank the delegation of Brazil for its concept
paper for this debate (S/2011/50, annex). My
delegation will focus on five key areas, namely, the
changing nature of conflicts and the nexus between
security and development, the role of regional
organizations, South-South cooperation, integrated
approaches,
and
resource
mobilization
and
coordination.
Since 1945, the United Nations has been seized
with the task and responsibility of addressing the
critical issues of peace, security, human rights and
development
within
the
framework
of
the
Organization’s Charter.
The United Nations report “In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all”, highlighted that:
“Not only are development, security and
human rights all imperative; they also reinforce
each other … [W]e will not enjoy development
without security, we will not enjoy security
without development, and we will not enjoy
either without respect for human rights. Unless
all these causes are advanced, none will succeed”.
(A/59/2005, paras. 16 and 17)

16

In that context, South Africa is convinced that
peace and stability in the world will remain elusive if
we do not address the nexus between security and
development. As a result of that conviction, we see our
own development as inextricably linked to the peace
and security of the southern African region, the African
continent and the rest of the world.
The nature of contemporary conflicts reveals that
such conflicts are, to a large extent, precipitated by
dispute-related
economic
development
issues,
including
access to
mineral
resources, the
disproportionate distribution of wealth and power, bad
governance, the lack of people’s participation in
democratic processes, and corruption, to mention but a
few. In the context of Africa, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources has contributed to the fuelling of
conflicts. As a consequence of that reality, it is
important to assist countries emerging from conflict to
manage and redistribute the revenues derived from
those resources in a manner that enhances people’s
livelihoods.
Consideration of the interdependence of security
and development in the work of the Security Council
on the maintenance of international peace and security
does not necessarily mean the Council taking over the
developmental functions undertaken by other bodies
within the United Nations system. It simply means that
the Council should take social and development issues
into account in relevant deliberations within its Charter
mandate.
South Africa is of the view that it is vital to
integrate developmental aspects in international efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
management and post-conflict peacebuilding. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the United Nations
interdepartmental Framework Team on Early Warning
and Prevention and the ongoing review of the
Economic and Social Council.
We also welcome the work of other members of
the
international
community,
including
the
international financial institutions, in particular the
World Bank, as important and critical partners in
sustaining peace efforts with development in countries
emerging from conflicts. Equally, we emphasize the
importance of context-specific and nationally owned
interventions, such as the poverty reduction strategies.
In addition, the international private sector and
institutions should be involved in development efforts to

11-23119

S/PV.6479

reinvigorate the lives of the populace by providing jobs,
especially for vulnerable groups, such as young people
and demobilized and demilitarized armed groups, in an
attempt to create sustainable livelihoods. In this
connection, the importance of building sustainable
social safety systems cannot be overemphasized.
Development requires a significant amount of
resources that most post-conflict countries do not have.
In light of this fact, we encourage the international
community to make available sufficient, timely and
predictable resources for post-conflict peacebuilding
and development programmes.
The establishment of the PBC in 2005 was a
recognition of the need to fill the gap between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, thus complementing
the
interdependence
between
security
and
development. Similarly, we welcome the recognition
by the Security Council of the link between peace,
security and development, which is reflected in the
integrated approaches to peacekeeping today. In this
context, we appreciate the fact that some United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions, including
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and others,
have civilian components that are structured under
development and security pillars.
The Council is unified in welcoming the outcome
of the historic Southern Sudan referendum. The
international community should be cognizant of the
huge development needs of a new, independent South
Sudan. A future successor mission to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan will have to incorporate
a strong element of State-, institution- and capacitybuilding in its mandate, while addressing issues of
security,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration, and security sector reform, among others.
South Africa also calls for a strengthened and
enhanced cooperation and information-sharing between
the Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
such as the PBC, the Economic and Social Council and
the United Nations Development Programme, aimed at
concretizing the crucial interdependence between
security and development. My delegation strongly
supports the call for greater coherence, coordination
and interaction between various United Nations organs
and agencies.

11-23119

We encourage the Council to seize the
opportunity and make optimum use of the advisory role
of the PBC in relation to socio-economic and other
peacebuilding matters. We also encourage close
coordination between all stakeholders, including the
inclusion of women and civil society in peacebuilding
and development issues.
Regional and subregional organizations have a
crucial role to play in efforts aimed at promoting the
nexus between security and development. The African
Union (AU) has, over the years, shown commitment to
resolving
African
conflicts
and
promoting
socio-economic development on the continent. In this
context, the stabilization of Africa needs to be
anchored in concrete socio-economic development
programmes. The AU has adopted the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development as a key mechanism for the
achievement of this socio-economic development
paradigm.
Further, the AU has adopted a post-conflict,
reconstruction and development programme as one tool
to promote reconstructive development programmes in
countries emerging from conflict and to offer peace
dividends that hold better hope for anchoring peace
and stability. The creation of regional economic
communities at the subregional level and the
development of conflict-resolution mechanisms within
these structures are crucial steps towards sustainable
peace through sustainable economic development.
South Africa continues to work through bilateral,
trilateral and multilateral forums towards the
advancement of development as a long-term measure
for preventing conflicts. Within the South-South realm,
the India, Brazil and South Africa mechanism plays an
important development role through projects in Haiti,
Palestine, Guinea-Bissau, Burundi and Sierra Leone,
among other countries. Additionally, South Africa is
currently in the process of establishing a South African
development partnership agency, which will play a
significant role in supporting socio-economic and
human resource development in the countries of the
South, particularly in Africa, including through
trilateral cooperation with the countries of the North.
In conclusion, my delegation supports the
adoption of the draft presidential statement on this
crucial topic at the end of this meeting. We hope that
today’s debate will highlight the importance of
development aspects in dealing with conflict situations

17

S/PV.6479

that the Council is seized with, and thus enhance the
work of this body.
The President: I
representative of China.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Brazil for its initiative to
convene this open debate on the important issue of the
interdependence between security and development. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency Foreign
Minister Patriota in the Council Chamber to preside
over this meeting.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ambassador Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and Ms. Cliffe, Special
Representative of the World Bank, for their statements.
Security and development are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. Security is a prerequisite for
development, and development is possible only in a
peaceful and stable environment. Development is a
guarantee of security. Sustainable peace is possible
only through the maintenance of development
momentum. The maintenance of peace and the
promotion of development are important, Charterdriven mandates of the United Nations. The Security
Council must attach great importance to the nexus
between security and development. I wish to
emphasize the following five points.
First, we must increase input into development
and eradicate the sources of conflict. Poverty and
underdevelopment are the major root causes that
trigger conflict and breed terrorism. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular, must
place greater emphasize on promoting the international
development agenda. Developed countries must further
increase their development assistance, provide debt
relief to developing countries, open their markets,
transfer technology, and help developing countries to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals as soon as
possible.
Secondly, development must be anchored in
environments free of war and turbulence. The United
Nations and the Security Council should vigourously
promote the culture of peace and encourage and
support the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation. The
use or threat of use of force must be avoided in
international relations.

18

Thirdly, greater emphasis must be placed on
peacebuilding so as to prevent relapses into conflict. In
post-conflict countries or regions, progress must be
made simultaneously on the political, security and
development fronts throughout the development and
reconstruction process. Capacity-building efforts must
be expedited in post-conflict countries in order to
enhance governance, provide basic services and
advance development and reconstruction so that the
population can enjoy peace dividends at the earliest
opportunity. That will help to consolidate the political
reconciliation process and to stabilize post-conflict
situations. United Nations peacekeeping operations can
make greater contributions to early recovery,
development and reconstruction.
Fourthly, relevant United Nations agencies and
international organizations responsible for security and
development must enhance their coordination and form
synergies. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but in strengthening peacebuilding
and development the PBC, the United Nations
development agencies and the Bretton Woods
institutions must play their roles to the full.
Fifthly, the United Nations and the Security
Council should pay greater attention to Africa. Seventy
per cent of the items on the Council’s agenda involve
Africa. The interconnections between peace and
development are most pronounced in Africa. There can
be no international prosperity or stability without peace
and development in Africa. The international
community must provide greater support to Africa’s
development and greater assistance to individual
African countries, the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations in order to maintain
peace and security in Africa.
The President: I
representative of Nigeria.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank the Brazilian presidency for the choice of theme
for this debate. Since the 1992 Rio Summit, Brazil has
demonstrated undisputed leadership on the question of
security and development. We believe that leadership
remains strong as we prepare for the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The
Council has often called for an integrated approach to
issues of peace, security and development. This debate
takes us a step closer to realizing that aspiration.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
useful briefing, as well as Ms. Cliffe for the insight she
has provided on this complex and multi-faceted issue. I
also welcome and thank my colleague Ambassador
Gasana for his significant contribution.
Although development is not strictly within the
scope of the Security Council’s remit, we recognize not
only the inextricable linkage but also the
interdependence between security and development.
Our work, whether it relates to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding or preventive diplomacy, does not and
should not operate within a vacuum. In his 2005 report
entitled “In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), then
Secretary-General Kofi Annan told us, as the South
African Ambassador has already pointed out, that we
would not enjoy development without security, we
would not enjoy security without development and we
would not enjoy either without respect for human
rights. At the 2005 World Summit, our leaders stressed
the need to translate that conceptual understanding into
concrete actions in the field and in the Security
Council — which, I must point out, is well-placed to
promote that process. In championing development
efforts in tandem with activities related directly to
peace and security, we in fact further our conflictprevention objectives, which go to the very core of our
Charter obligations.
The draft presidential statement before us today
recognizes that allowing space for national actors to
determine security and development priorities early
enough will no doubt ensure sustained goodwill and
sustained impact alike. It is our duty to remember that,
in securing any society, we are but one actor among
many committed to the long-term stability of that
nation.
That long-term perspective is crucial, as guarding
against a relapse into conflict preserves the gains from
development, which are frequently among the first
casualties of war. Indeed, the complementarity between
security and development can also lead to more
efficient deployment of efforts and resources towards
achieving development and security. Moreover, by
standing on points of principle such as the full
participation of women in peace and governance
processes, the provision of youth employment and the
promotion of human rights we can assist a society
emerging from conflict in achieving lasting peace. Our
work here in the Council is very pivotal to

11-23119

strengthening Governments, civil society and the
private sector in readiness for an orderly transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and, ultimately, to
a timely exit and the sustenance of peace.
Although the task of maintaining a peaceful and
just society is the primary responsibility of national
Governments, the expertise that the United Nations
system can provide to societies at a tipping point can
make an immense difference. I wish to highlight the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as a key interlocutor
in that regard. Sierra Leone is a concrete example of
how the PBC can bring all relevant international and
national actors together to settle upon a long-term
peacebuilding strategy. The momentum following last
year’s PBC review must not be lost. It is our sincere
hope that the Security Council will have a stronger
relationship with the PBC.
Many developing countries, including those
experiencing recent unrest, are home to large youth
populations that place pressure on already strained
labour markets, which is a point well made in the
concept note to the World Bank’s 2011 World
Development Report. Such problems are exacerbated
by the march of globalization, which has not only
increased overall global wealth but has also led to more
uneven distribution of wealth within countries, regions
and the world as a whole. The challenges of the
security-development paradigm are starkly in evidence
in Somalia, for example, where it is widely recognized
that youth unemployment, poverty and weak
governance are the major contributing factors in the
persistent piracy problem. Development activities can
help to rehabilitate economies, thereby playing a
critical conflict-prevention role. It is therefore
important that United Nations agencies directly
engaged in development possess the resources and
political backing to be effective.
Nigeria takes very seriously its responsibility to
facilitate peace through development. In 2009, 0.7
million units of account of debt relief under the Nigeria
Trust Fund was approved for Burundi and Togo. Easing
fiscal pressure in that way may create room for homegrown development activities. In addition, within the
Economic Community of West African States, we have
provided enormous support to Guinea-Bissau and other
members in diverse ways, including concessionary
sales of crude oil. Those measures are aimed at
promoting subregional economic integration as the
bedrock for lasting peace in our subregion.

19

S/PV.6479

The Security Council has the challenge and
opportunity to promote security policies that integrate
development in order to progressively rid humankind
of the scourge of war. Through our work in that regard
we can help countries avoid conflict altogether and
reap the benefits of development. All peoples deserve
freedom from want as well as freedom from violence.
Development is therefore in itself freedom. However, if
we fail to recognize the impact that our policies have
on a society’s path to development and larger freedom,
I submit that we leave our task only half done.
Let me emphasize that the consideration of the
development-security paradigm in the Council today
should by no means be regarded as an attempt to
duplicate the work of either the General Assembly or
the Economic and Social Council. Rather, it provides
the missing political link that is so essential to
promoting synergy in the United Nations partnership
for peace, security and development. In supporting the
call for a new security consensus based on the
interdependence of security and development, we must
recognize that development is indeed a foundation for
peace. We hope that the Council will build on today’s
debate to harness its role in helping countries transition
from war to irreversible and sustained peace. That is a
plea for genuine cooperation, and indeed an appeal to
make good on our commitment to deliver as one in the
United Nations family.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States would like to express its appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s meeting on
this important issue. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gasana and Ms. Cliffe
for their thoughtful remarks.
The links between security and development are
complex but compelling. Stalled development and
violent conflict deal a double blow to far too many
people and countries. Conflict and violence impoverish
and severely undermine development gains through
displacement, disease and desperation. While there has
been an unparalleled drop in global poverty in recent
years, countries devastated by conflict and violence
have been left out of that trend. The statistics are stark,
as we understand from the World Bank’s and other
recent studies. A person from a country in conflict,
compared to one from any other developing country, is

20

more than twice as likely to be undernourished; more
than three times as likely to be unable to send her
children to school; twice as likely to see her children
die before they reach the age of five and twice as likely
to lack access to clean water. And no low-income,
conflict-affected country is on track to meet a single
Millennium Development Goal.
Poverty and the lack of economic opportunities
also contribute to violence, as President Obama said at
the Millennium Development summit last September
(see A/65/PV.9). When millions of fathers cannot
provide for their families, it feeds the despair that can
fuel instability and violent extremism. We have heard
today that combating both poverty and conflict requires
us to prioritize core State capacities, especially the rule
of law, justice and security, and to create jobs and
immediate economic opportunities. We have also heard
about the need to bring women into decision-making
on key political, security and economic issues.
The United States could not agree more. We see
these issues at play in almost every conflict situation
before the Council. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, one of the chief priorities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission is to help
strengthen the justice sector through training
Congolese police officers and supporting magistrates in
courts. In Liberia, we strongly supported the
Government’s attention to rural electrification as a key
confidence-building measure, and also welcomed the
Peacebuilding Commission’s support for Monrovia’s
initial efforts to improve rural communities’ access to
trained police and magistrates. In Afghanistan, we have
urged for international efforts to focus on reviving the
country’s once-vibrant agricultural sector, in order to
create sustained economic alternatives to narcotics
production. In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission has done important work with the Haitian
national police to build community confidence and
strengthen the rule of law. We have urged consistently
that attention be paid to building core national
capacities because we see that, until the basic
infrastructure of peace is in place, countries will be
blocked from progress.
Twenty years ago we were just beginning to
understand the links between security and
development. A little more than 10 years ago, we began
systematically incorporating peacebuilding elements
into peacekeeping mandates. Five years ago, we
created the Peacebuilding Commission to promote

11-23119

S/PV.6479

coherence and coordination between security and
development actors. And, in the past two years, we
have held eight separate thematic debates on
peacebuilding and related issues. And yet we are still
not where we need to be. Ninety per cent of today’s
conflicts arise in countries where we have been
unsuccessful in consolidating peace after prior wars.
There are no easy answers here, and we should not
overestimate the international community’s role in
rectifying deep-seated problems that may have festered
for decades. Peace is ultimately in a country’s own
hands.
But we must do more. A few areas are particularly
ripe for fresh thinking. First, while national actors bear
the primary responsibility for rebuilding their countries,
they often seek timely assistance from genuine
international experts. We have been encouraged by
early briefings about the forthcoming international
review of civilian capacity, which emphasizes more
diverse and flexible arrangements for international
civilian support to crucial State-building tasks. We look
forward to considering the report’s recommendations as
we review peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, we see scope for new ways for United
Nations peace operations to have a positive impact on
daily life within their host communities: for example,
by using spare engineering capacity to fix a road or
clear debris, or increasing local procurement to help
revitalize the local economy. We need to be open to
such ideas, while also not insisting that peacekeepers
undertake key development tasks that others may be
more qualified or mandated to do.
Thirdly, the United Nations on its own does not
have the resources or capacity to help fully rebuild
Government institutions in the aftermath of conflict.
We are therefore pleased that the World Bank was
invited to brief us today. The Security Council needs a
robust and continuing dialogue with the Bretton Woods
institutions, multilateral development banks and major
donors, which will often underwrite key dimensions of
recovery.
Last December, the United States presided over a
special Security Council event on voices of a new
generation. Young people from around the world sent
in e-mails and videos repeating a common refrain: they
long for peace, they worry about conditions that could
ignite conflict and they see a clear link between
security and development. Through the debate you

11-23119

have convened today, Mr. President, the Security
Council is demonstrating that their voices are being
heard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council.
In today’s interdependent world, development
issues are closely linked to security issues. The Russian
Federation views sustainable social and economic
development as an essential element of today’s
collective security system. Global challenges and
problems in the area of development — such as
destitution and poverty, population migration, limited
access to water, energy and food resources, the illegal
arms trade, infectious disease pandemics, natural
catastrophes and environmental and man-made
disasters — can all have negative consequences for
peace, stability and security, and, in some cases, the
potential for international conflict. These problems
should of course be dealt with in depth by the relevant
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and
its partners.
In addition, something else that could be essential
is the possibility set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations for presenting to the Security Council special
reports of the Economic and Social Council, which is
responsible for coordinating activities in the
socio-economic sector of our universal Organization. It
is our view that the basic prerogative of the Security
Council is maintaining international peace and security
using the tools it has at its disposal. It would thus help
the Council carry out its tasks relating to dealing with
the items on its agenda if it received the most complete
and timely information possible from the other
agencies of the United Nations system that are
responsible
for
addressing
socio-economic
development processes at the global, regional and
national levels.
Interlinkages between security and development
are particularly relevant for States that have
experienced conflict. The development processes
taking place in such countries in the areas of postconflict stabilization and building State institutions and
law-enforcement, judicial and penal systems all require
adequate efforts in the areas of economic recovery and
the rebuilding of physical and social infrastructure —

21

S/PV.6479

in other words, creating a kind of safety net to protect
against the recurrence of conflict.
Taking those circumstances into account, the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
peacekeeping missions — in particular in Haiti, the
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Afghanistan, Timor-Leste and Liberia — include early
peacebuilding tasks, which United Nations bodies deal
with well on the whole. Experience shows that the
orderly drawdown of a peacekeeping presence as a
situation normalizes in many cases requires concurrent
active and targeted actions in the area of peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding
activities
and
development
planning rely on the principle of national responsibility
for determining priorities and approaches to
implementation. A key component of successful postconflict peacebuilding is the creation and strengthening
of national institutional capacity. The United Nations
plays a special role in coordinating international efforts
at post-conflict and socio-economic recovery. The
Organization has acquired vast experience in this area,
although this activity gives rise to new challenges,
requires the existence of well-trained and qualified
personnel and dictates the need for coordinated
activities by the Secretariat, United Nations funds and
programmes, Member States, regional organizations
and international financial institutions at United
Nations Headquarters, its various offices and in the
field. In that regard, a particularly relevant factor
would be to strengthen the coordinating functions of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
who head United Nations peacekeeping operations and
political missions. Another aspect whose potential
should be fully utilized is the Peacebuilding
Commission, in close cooperation with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation to the delegation of Brazil for preparing
the draft presidential statement on the subject of
today’s meeting, which is a useful contribution to our
joint work in this important area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank the
delegation of Brazil for organizing this important
debate, the first of its kind in the Security Council.
Today represents a valuable opportunity to discuss the

22

question of interdependence between security and
development. Therefore, allow me to thank Their
Excellencies the Ministers from Germany, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portugal, India and Gabon for
joining us, and as well to thank Ambassador Gasana
and Ms. Cliffe for their valuable contributions.
The United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions, the African Union, the European Union
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference have
all
acknowledged
that
in
an
increasingly
interconnected world, there is no security without
development and no development without security.
Despite that broad conceptual acknowledgment,
the political debate continues, first, on the nature of the
security-development nexus; secondly, on the types of
policies that should be pursued to achieve durable
peace, security and sustainable development, including
to address the root causes and drivers of conflicts; and
thirdly, on the way forward for the Security Council to
prevent the eruption or protraction of, or relapse into,
violence, given the changing nature of conflicts and the
security-development nexus, as well expressed in the
concept note prepared by the Mission of Brazil
(S/2011/50, annex).
Since the end of the cold war, conflicts have been
affecting more civilians, as they have become
increasingly entangled with the collapse of State
structures, ethnic rivalries, human rights violations and
acts of terrorism. Therefore, since 1990 the Council
has authorized the deployment of 49 peacekeeping
missions, compared with only 18 between 1945 and
1989.
These missions have faced many challenges on
the ground, including the severe developmental
consequences of armed conflict, particularly among
vulnerable populations, whereby societies experiencing
civil war and large-scale, violent crime generally
achieve lower development outcomes, as expressed in
the Concept Note for the World Development Report
2011. The Note also sheds light on some of the root
causes of conflict, many of which have developmental
dimensions. Indeed, environments with high risks of
violence are typically characterized by corruption,
inequalities, conflict over natural resources, poverty,
high unemployment, weak socio-economic institutions
and governance, and vulnerability to shocks.
Furthermore, climate change and its environmental
consequences are likely to increase the risk of war and

11-23119

S/PV.6479

conflict, due to the stress they exert on already scarce
resources.
Given the interdependence between security and
development, peacebuilding has emerged as an
important tool for bridging the gap between them. In
this context, the Security Council noted as early as
2001 “the need for enhancing peace-building activities
by formulating a strategy based on the interdependence
between sustainable peace, security and development
in all its dimensions” (S/PRST/2001/5, seventh para.).
For example, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, peacekeeping mandates have increasingly
incorporated peacebuilding tasks. The seminar on
United Nations peacekeeping held in Rio de Janeiro in
June 2010 recognized that peacebuilding and
peacekeeping efforts should be implemented in parallel
and that peacebuilding should include socio-economic
activities, such as youth employment generation, the
development of infrastructure and the provision of
basic services, which can reduce the risk of relapse into
conflict and help maintain stability.
For all the reasons mentioned thus far, one cannot
deny the need to promote sustainable development to
achieve sustainable peace. Development is a key
component in conflict prevention, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding. Peace cannot be sustained
without job creation, equitable ownership of assets,
empowerment of women and adequate allocation of
resources. Moreover, peace cannot be sustained without
enabling a country’s leadership, through appropriate
resources, technical capacity and the support of the
international community, to unlock those dividends. In
that context, we note the example of Burundi. As the
Secretary-General clearly stated in his latest report,
“Peace, justice and the rule of law cannot be sustained
without development.” (S/2010/608, para. 71)
Let me also mention that the Taif Accord of
1989 — which helped put an end to 15 years of war
and violence in my country, Lebanon — illustrates how
development can play an important role in post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding. Indeed, one of the
foundations of that Accord is the principle of balanced
development. Furthermore, key agreed-upon reforms
included the need to draw a comprehensive and
balanced development plan to foster socio-economic
development. The Accord also provided for the
creation of a socio-economic council for development
to enable greater participation of the various socio-

11-23119

economic actors. Another key reform is the
commitment to provide education for all, including
mandatory primary education and restructuring of the
public education system to meet the country’s
developmental needs and foster social cohesion.
Experience in Haiti and with other peacekeeping
missions has led some troop-contributing countries to
the conclusion that mandates need to be adjusted to
better reflect the development mission. Once more, the
seminar held in Rio supported that conclusion and
acknowledged that peacekeepers ought to be involved
in socio-economic development activities. Therefore,
when socio-economic issues are identified as drivers of
conflicts, or as threats to the consolidation of peace, it
becomes of the utmost importance for the Council to
address those issues. That will indeed require greater
cooperation with other United Nations bodies and
organs, the international financial institutions and
regional and subregional organizations, based on the
principle of comparative advantage.
The President: I give the
representative of the United Kingdom.

floor

to

the

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
are grateful to you, Sir, and to the Brazilian presidency
for bringing to the Council today the issue of the
relationship between security and development. It was
good to see the many honourable Ministers in the
Council, as well as Ambassador Gasana in his first
appearance in his role as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Sarah Cliffe from the World Bank for their
briefings.
The links between security and development are
clear cut. Countries affected by conflict and violence
have fallen far behind in development. No low-income,
fragile or conflict-affected country has yet achieved a
single one of the Millennium Development Goals. And
as we discussed last month in the debate on institutionbuilding (see S/PV.6472 and Resumption 1), under the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, fragility and
conflict are symptoms of institutional failure to manage
stress, whether that be high unemployment, organized
crime, political disputes or climate change. Building
stronger links between security and development is
therefore critical for preventing conflict and building
sustainable peace.
We have been grappling with these issues in the
United Nations for many years, particularly in the

23

S/PV.6479

peacebuilding arena. The creation of the peacebuilding
architecture was the result of the failure to bring
critical political, security and development components
of the international community together to address the
needs of a country emerging from conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission has started to
provide this glue for the countries on its agenda, and
we need to continue to strengthen the Commission. The
Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386*) has also
helped to highlight the need for improved leadership,
planning and financing. And we are waiting for the
review of civilian capacities. But are we now getting
the right response on the ground, in places such as the
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
We need to be assured that the United Nations is
geared up to deliver assistance, so that there is a rapid
progress to build people’s confidence in the peace
process and in State authorities. We have heard from
Sarah Cliffe this morning that creating confidence and
trust is key. That requires building institutions that can
generate security, justice and jobs. We also need to
ensure that longer-term institutional reform gets under
way quickly so that the causes of conflict are
addressed, mechanisms to resolve disputes peacefully
are in place and States are both able to respond to
public expectations and are accountable. If we are to
achieve this, I believe we should focus on four issues
in particular in the coming months.
First, we need better integration of efforts.
Peacekeeping missions and the United Nations funds
and programmes should plan together. We need a clear
sense of who is doing what, based on a realistic
assessment of capacities, competence and the
sequencing of action.
Secondly, there must be a clearer delineation of
roles and responsibilities for the core peacebuilding
sectors. Without this, we will not get the right
investment to ensure predictable and professional
response. This is ever more important in an
environment where resources are constrained. We do
not want peacekeepers drifting into development work.
That is neither their mandate nor their field of
expertise.
Third, and in response to this, development
partners should engage earlier. This means Member
States themselves sending consistent signals about
priorities in their engagement in the boards of the

24

funds and programmes We should ensure that the
agencies have the flexibility to be able to scale up
action quickly enough to meet demands on the ground.
Lastly, we look forward to the release of the
World Development Report. This will give critical
insights into the issue we are discussing today. We
hope that it will also stimulate better links between the
United Nations and the World Bank in fragile and postconflict countries. We need the World Bank to come
actively alongside the United Nations to support
peacebuilding. Perhaps one way to help realize this is
for the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
President of the World Bank to undertake a joint visit
to a number of post-conflict countries.
The United Kingdom stands ready to support the
Secretary-General in this important endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate. I will
address two points: first, the particular links between
security and development, and then the specific case of
peacekeeping operations.
First, the links between security and
development. While there is no unequivocal
relationship
between
economic
growth
and
international security, the unequal distribution of
wealth and the marginalization of particular groups or
vulnerable regions are often factors in a conflict,
particularly intrastate conflict. Other factors can be
sources of conflict, including competition for access to
basic resources such as water or agricultural land and
rivalry for control over precious raw materials and
energy resources.
More recently, new threats to security have
emerged. I will cite two examples. First is climate
change, which can have tragic consequences for people
and countries. This is why France and the European
Union urge the community of nations to redouble
efforts on the basis of the momentum launched at
Cancún last December. Second is the issue of food
security and the volatility of agricultural prices, which
have destabilizing effects. That is one of France’s
priorities during its presidency of the Group of 20. The
French Minister of Agriculture will be in New York
next week for the General Assembly before organizing
a ministerial meeting of the G-20 on this topic.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

In turn, the need for security as a prerequisite for
development is well established. In post-conflict
situations, national capacity-building in the area of
security in keeping with norms for the rule of law is
essential in order to establish favourable conditions for
development. For example, in a number of countries
where the economy relies almost entirely on the work
of women, there is a direct link between security and
development. When insecurity prevents women from
going out to the fields, the ability of families to survive
is compromised. That in turn can lead to further
escalation in violence. Development actors must
therefore take the safeguarding of security into account
in their strategies.
For all of those reasons, it is the responsibility of
the international community to establish conditions for
shared and sustainable development that limit the risk
of conflicts breaking out, or continuing. Thus the
Peacebuilding Commission, in the countries on its
agenda, has made the emancipation of young people
and women one of its priorities, alongside security
sector reform, as both factors contribute to stability. In
the same spirit, the agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations must all play their role in seeking to
improve effectiveness and coordination of their
activities on the ground.
Here we note the important contribution of the
European Union, the leading donor of development aid,
accounting for almost 60 per cent of the aid provided
by the member States of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
totalling approximately €50 billion. To take a wellknown example, the European Union spends in
Somalia one quarter of the €215 million devoted to
development just on security capacity support.
Nonetheless, we must not lose sight of the
responsibilities of States themselves. Respect for the
law, good governance, the strengthening of civil society
and the economic integration of marginalized
populations — which can be achieved first and foremost
through decisions taken by national authorities — are
determining factors for peace and security.
I shall now turn to the specific case of
peacekeeping operations, where we must draw on three
principles for action.
First, we must give greater attention at an earlier
stage to the link between security and development.
This Council has several times affirmed the need not

11-23119

only to ensure the security of a given area but also to
support the political processes as soon as possible and
to support the national institutions, particularly in the
areas of the rule of law and security. We therefore
believe that the links between security and
development needs must be taken into consideration as
early as possible, starting with the drafting of the
mandate for the operation by the Security Council. The
implementation of security sector reform and of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes will be effective only if they are carried
out in the framework of an improvement of the living
conditions of the population.
Secondly, there is the adaptation of tools to
situations. We are convinced of the need to give greater
attention to development aspects in the peacekeeping
mandates. I will refer to two examples. The Blue
Helmets of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, among whom the Brazilian contingent plays a
remarkable role, ensure security and take on a number
of civilian tasks in logistics and health support, which
are necessary in reconstruction and development. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is supporting the authorities in
their efforts to clean up the mining sector in order to
prevent the plunder of resources.
At the same time, the central factor of
peacekeeping operations must remain that of
maintaining peace and security. Other stakeholders,
including United Nations agencies and bilateral
partners, have as their mission to take on the tasks
more directly related to development. It is therefore
essential to clarify the tasks and responsibilities of
each party in the framework of a coherent and
comprehensive strategy.
Thirdly, let me address the coordination of
partners and national ownership. Aid provided the
international community, be it multilateral, regional or
bilateral, must be coordinated and integrated as part of
a strategy set out in close coordination with the host
country. National ownership by the country concerned
in that strategy is the fundamental prerequisite for
addressing the underlying causes of instability.
The Peacebuilding Commission carries out such
activities through integrated strategies in collaboration
with the countries on its agenda. Such coordination is
crucial in the transition phases when responsibilities

25

S/PV.6479

are transferred to host countries once they are capable
of taking on again all the prerogatives linked to
sovereignty. That is a condition for achieving lasting
peace on the ground.
The links between security and development are
proven, numerous and complex, calling not only for a
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated strategy but
also for determination and subtlety on our part.
I therefore once again thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate, which will allow us to
further our reflection on strengthening international
peace and security.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister of External Relations of Brazil.
I am greatly pleased that Council members have
adopted such a positive response to our proposed
debate on the interdependence among peace, security
and development. In addition to thanking the
Secretary-General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the representative of the World Bank
for their statements, I would particularly like to thank
the Ministers of Germany, Colombia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Portugal and India and the Vice Minister
of Gabon for their presence among us today.
Allow me to start by making a brief historical
digression before looking at some of today’s challenges
and suggesting courses of action.
As we are all keenly aware, the United Nations
was created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war by avoiding a repetition of the mistakes
made after World War I. An important aspect of that
approach involved parallel initiatives aimed at creating
improved economic and social conditions for the
recovery of the countries that had been most severely
ravaged by World War II, whether they had been the
victors or not. Instrumental in the success of that effort
was the Marshall Plan, which embodied the notion that
a more stable and peaceful international order required
not only a credible system of collective security, but
also what we might call a recovery or development
agenda.
Even though the term “development” was not in
use then, the Charter of the United Nations already
incorporated the idea of interdependence between
peace, security and development. Article 55, on
international economic and social cooperation, states
that:

26

“With a view to the creation of conditions
of stability and well-being which are necessary
for peaceful and friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, the United
Nations shall promote: a) higher standards of
living, full employment, and conditions of
economic and social progress and development”.
In subsequent years, the concept of development
was further refined through the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean — ECLAC —
and the first United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, UNCTAD. In the aftermath of the
decolonization process, demands for improved terms of
trade and increased development assistance would
motivate, in the 1970s, the adoption of a General
Assembly resolution calling for a new international
economic order (resolution S-VI/3201). The right to
development was recognized in a General Assembly
declaration in 1986 (resolution 41/128, annex), and in
2000, the General Assembly established the
Millennium Development Goals, thereby calling
attention to the centrality of combating poverty to our
overall agenda.
Over the past two decades, challenges to peace
and security brought before this Council have followed
new patterns. Once the East-West rivalry was
superseded, many situations placed before the Council
involved parts of the developing world recently
emerged from colonialism in vulnerable conditions. In
some cases, their plight was made worse through the
proxy wars of the bipolar period.
I am not implying that the most serious threats to
peace are to be found today in comparatively poorer
and less developed places. That would be a serious
misreading of both the current international scenario
and historic trends. Many of the situations we are
called upon to deal with in the Security Council —
from East Timor to Haiti, from Liberia to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — involve societies
that do not, in and of themselves, represent a global
threat to peace and security. Yet these are countries that
have, to varying degrees, suffered conflict and
instability in the context of pre-existing situations of
poverty, unemployment and fragile institutions, among
other conditions, and that deserve our differentiated
attention.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

We are convinced that purely military or security
strategies will not, by themselves, be able to
adequately deal with the overwhelming majority of
today’s situations of conflict. The Security Council has
indeed already recognized this by incorporating
reconstruction tasks into peacekeeping mandates. As
early as 2001, the Council noted the need to enhance
peacebuilding activities by formulating a strategy
based on the interdependence among sustainable peace,
security and development in all its dimensions.
But the main point I would like to make in our
debate today is that we can do more and we should be
able to do better. We are not proposing to reconfigure
the responsibilities of different United Nations organs
or agencies, or to transform this Council into a
development programme. Today’s debate will, in our
view, achieve its objective if it contributes to raising
awareness of the importance of associating
development with the security strategies we conceive
for sustainable peace. This is particularly relevant
when dealing with situations in Africa and the Middle
East and the one situation in the Americas that is part
of our agenda, namely, that of Haiti.
From the early stages of the development of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Brazil,
with the invaluable support our Latin American
partners and others, has argued for mandates that
incorporate reconstruction and peacebuilding activities
in parallel with peacekeeping actions. I am particularly
gratified that we are in the Council with India and
South Africa, which through IBSA (India, Brazil and
South Africa) have been making a very important
contribution — as our friend from South Africa
mentioned earlier — to Haiti, the occupied Palestinian
territories and several other places.
The same perception has guided us in leading, for
the past three years, the Peacebuilding Commission’s
configuration for Guinea-Bissau, a sister lusophone
country, where the linkage between security and
development is very plain to see.
Sustainable peace implies a comprehensive
approach to security. Without economic opportunity,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in and
of themselves rarely lead to the desired results.
Peacebuilding activities such as support to youth
employment and the provision of basic services play an
essential role in increasing support for peacekeeping

11-23119

missions, and therefore they have a bearing on the
missions’ political sustainability on the ground.
Unfortunately, we are all aware of the worrying
levels of frustration sometimes associated with the
presence of the United Nations in certain parts of the
world. We believe this situation could improve if the
Council were also to focus on the positive impacts of a
well executed, integrated strategy on the part of the
agencies, funds, programmes and international
financial institutions.
With these considerations in mind, increased
cooperation by this Council with the Economic and
Social Council is clearly needed, as is greater
interaction between this body and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
The PBC came into being to fill an institutional
gap in the United Nations. It was born out of the many
bitter lessons the United Nations learned from countries
lapsing and relapsing into conflict and instability. Its
mission is to act as a catalyst or coordinator, within and
beyond the United Nations system, for support and
dedicated efforts in consolidating peace and promoting
development in countries emerging from conflict, apart
from its mandate as a source of advice when there is a
risk of conflict.
I hope today’s debate will enhance the ability of
the United Nations, and this Council in particular, to
help post-conflict societies move from a vicious circle
of violence and instability into a virtuous circle of
peace, security and development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security and its readiness to strive for
sustainable peace in all situations under its
consideration.
“The Security Council underlines that
security and development are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and are key to attaining
sustainable peace. The Council recognizes that
their relationship is complex, multifaceted and
case-specific.

27

S/PV.6479

“The Security Council reiterates that, in
order to support a country to emerge sustainably
from conflict, there is a need for a comprehensive
and integrated approach that incorporates and
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law
activities and addresses the underlying causes of
each conflict. In this regard, the Council affirms
the necessity to consider relevant economic,
political and social dimensions of conflict.
“The Security Council affirms that national
ownership and national responsibility are key to
establishing sustainable peace. The Council
reaffirms the primary responsibility of national
authorities in identifying their priorities and
strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding, with a
view to ensuring national ownership.
“The Security Council reemphasizes the
importance of considering and initiating
peacebuilding activities from the earliest stages
of planning and implementation of peacekeeping
operations, including through clear and
achievable mandates. The Council stresses the
importance of clarity of roles and responsibilities
of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
the United Nations country team and other
relevant actors for the delivery of prioritized
support to a country consistent with its specific
peacebuilding needs and priorities, as outlined by
national authorities, in order to ensure effective
integration of effort. The Council recommends
that particular focus be given to improved
integration of United Nations effort where
peacekeeping missions are operating together
with peacebuilding activities of other United
Nations actors, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.
“The Security Council notes that successful
implementation of the many tasks that
peacekeeping operations could be mandated to
undertake in the areas of security sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
rule of law and human rights requires an
understanding of and acting with a perspective
which takes into account the close interlinkage
between security and development. In this
context, the Council notes with appreciation the
contribution that peacekeepers and peacekeeping
missions make to early peacebuilding, including

28

through creating a conducive environment which
enables economic recovery and the provision of
basic services. The Council acknowledges that
this contribution can help to establish and build
confidence in the mission.
“The Security Council undertakes to
consider how peacekeeping operations can best
support national authorities, as appropriate, to
articulate peacebuilding priorities, and acting in
accordance with these priorities, can both support
other national and international actors to
implement peacebuilding activities and undertake
certain early peacebuilding tasks themselves. The
Council underlines that reconstruction, economic
revitalization and capacity-building constitute
crucial elements for the long-term development
of post-conflict societies and in generating
sustainable peace, and, in this regard, attaches
special importance to national ownership and
stresses the significance of international
assistance.
“The Security Council notes that in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security under its consideration, conflict
analysis and contextual information on, inter alia,
social and economic issues is important, when
such issues are drivers of conflict, represent a
challenge to the implementation of Council
mandates or endanger the process of
consolidation of peace. “In this regard, the
Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that his reporting to the Council contains such
contextual information.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance it attaches to the sustainability of
peace in post-conflict situations. In this regard, it
reaffirms that the overarching objective of
peacekeeping missions should be to achieve
success through creating the conditions for
security and sustainable peace on the ground,
thereby allowing for reconfiguration or
withdrawal of the mission.
“The Security Council recalls the role
played by the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in fuelling some past and current
conflicts. In this regard, it recognizes that the
United Nations can play a role in helping the
States concerned, as appropriate, upon their

11-23119

S/PV.6479

request and with full respect for their sovereignty
over natural resources and under national
ownership, to prevent illegal access to those
resources and to lay the basis for their legal
exploitation with a view to promoting
development,
in
particular
through
the
empowerment of Governments in post-conflict
situations to better manage their resources.
“The Security Council encourages close
cooperation within the United Nations system and
with
regional,
subregional
and
other
organizations on the ground and at Headquarters
in order to properly engage in conflict and postconflict situations, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations, and expresses its willingness to consider
ways to improve such cooperation.
“The Security Council underlines that
integrated action on the ground by security and
development actors needs to be coordinated with
the national authorities and can significantly
contribute to stabilizing and improving the
security situation and ensuring the protection of
civilians. The Council also notes the importance
of cooperation with civil society in this context.
The Council affirms that sustainable peace and
development cannot be achieved without the
inclusion of all relevant stakeholders and
underlines that women must be included as active
participants in all stages of peacebuilding, peace
agreements and development programmes. The
Council expresses its willingness to engage in
dialogue, where necessary, on specific situations
on its agenda with other actors, including United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
international financial institutions.
“The Security Council encourages Member
States, particularly those represented on the
governance structures of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, to promote
coherence in the United Nations work in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
“The Security Council reiterates its support
for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and its readiness to make greater use of the
Commission’s advisory role. The Council further
recognizes the need for coordination and dialogue
with the Commission. The Council calls upon the

11-23119

Commission to continue to promote an integrated
and coherent approach to peacebuilding and to
seek to ensure that development and securityrelated activities supported by the Commission
are mutually reinforcing.
“The Security Council highlights the
contribution that the Economic and Social
Council can make in addressing economic, social,
cultural and humanitarian issues and underlines
the importance of close cooperation in
accordance with Article 65 of the Charter of the
United Nations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2011/4.
I recognize the presence of the Foreign Ministers
of Costa Rica and Slovenia.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. René
Castro Salazar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Castro Salazar (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like thank the delegation of Brazil
for convening this open debate. My country commends
this initiative, which reflects Brazil’s international
leadership and its relevant contributions to global
discussions. I would like to thank the representative of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the representative
of the World Bank.
I should also like to highlight the linkages between
the subject of our discussion today and the debate on
institution-building as a means of peacebuilding (see
S/PV.6472), which was held on 21 January at the
initiative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That is consistent with of our commitment to
human security. We therefore associate ourselves with
the statement to be made by Ambassador Norachit
Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of Thailand, on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
Costa Rica is convinced that a better approach to
the challenges of development will generate greater
security, just as a more balanced and civilian-oriented
approach to security generates development.
The most urgent problems related to violence and
insecurity more easily take root, and grow especially
unmanageable, in countries and regions with a
pronounced lack of opportunities. Problems such as
piracy in various parts of the Indian Ocean and the

29

S/PV.6479

recruitment of young people into violent gangs linked
to drug trafficking in some Latin American countries
are, in great measure, consequences of that lack of
options.
Furthermore, the lack of solid democratic
institutions and respect for civil and political rights, the
distortion of national priorities and the lack of
connections between those who govern and those who
are governed hinder development, produce insecurity
and generate conflicts that can have global
repercussions. A consideration of the link between
development and security, including coherent actions,
should therefore also include dimensions relating to the
rule of law, improving institutions, a culture of
tolerance and democratic practices.
The problems of development and security in the
developing world are stunning, but their contributing
factors are not solely home-grown. A large number of
the weapons that kill and mutilate innocent people in
developing countries and also serve to increase
violence and generate conflict in those countries are
manufactured in developed countries, including some
with long-standing democratic institutions and
Governments characterized by a high level of integrity.
Some of those countries also serve as the main markets
for drugs and as facilitators for money laundering.
Others practice immigration policies that often
encourage human trafficking.
Having referred to those issues, it is not my
intention to fix blame. Costa Rica believes that we
ourselves are primarily responsible for our successes
and failures. However, we are convinced that
entrenching security requires that we promote
development, good governance and a comprehensive
approach to conflict — all of which require greater
coordination at the global level, better legal
instruments and more focused multilateral action. To
achieve that, the United Nations needs to take several
courses of action. I should like to refer to a few. They
are to work on both preventive diplomacy and
preventive development; to move from peace processes
towards development processes, including institutional
development; to set up integrated and multidimensional
missions; to ensure the organic involvement of civil
society and non-governmental organizations; and to
work seriously on disarmament and arms control
policies. No less important are efforts at sustainable
development, with a clear human dimension.

30

In some of those tasks, the Security Council has
very clear mandates and resources, and has issued very
significant statements. In others, responsibilities and
action belong to other bodies, ranging from the General
Assembly or the Secretariat to specialized
organizations. We must also bear in mind the
contribution of entities outside the framework of the
United Nations.
During the past 10 years, global military
expenditures increased by 45 per cent to the outrageous
sum of $1.531 trillion in 2009. If 10 per cent of those
resources had been devoted to attaining the Millennium
Development Goals, we would be very close to their
achievement. Costa Rica therefore emphasizes efforts
such as the negotiation and adoption of an arms trade
treaty. My country’s interest in international peace and
disarmament instruments stems from considerable
experience of the close interdependence between
security and development. Sixty-two years ago, when
Costa Rica abolished its army as a standing institution
and earmarked the majority of Government resources
for the well-being of its citizens, it put into practice a
security paradigm linked to development.
Our security system is founded on two basic
pillars. Domestically, it is based on social cohesion and
implicit agreement on collective adherence to
democracy, human rights, opportunities, sustainable
development and capacity-building. We have entrusted
the second, external, pillar to international law, in
particular to collective security systems and
international tribunals.
That paradigm has produced significant progress
on human development, within a context of peace and
democracy. Nothing will divert us from that path,
which is currently being severely tested. Little more
than 100 days ago, our country suffered a foreign
armed intervention. Part of our territory is still
occupied.
In the face of that serious situation, Costa Rica
has maintained its good sense and its faith in
international law and the multilateral system. We trust
in their effectiveness and in international solidarity to
protect peace and to promote the development of
Central America. If international security is not
grounded in respect for the law, it can be based only on
balancing force, which is as fragile for peace as it is
unproductive for the development and well-being of
peoples.

11-23119

S/PV.6479

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Samuel Žbogar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Slovenia.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): At the outset, allow me
to thank Brazil and my friend Foreign Minister Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota for convening today’s important and
timely debate on the interdependence between security
and development. I welcome the decision to build upon
the relevant conclusions of recent Security Council
debates addressing peace and security from different
angles. The adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/4) is a significant contribution to that
end.
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks, which gave us a clearer idea of the
problems and opportunities. At the same time, I
appreciate the respective contributions by the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and by the
representative of the World Bank.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
the new non-permanent members of the Security
Council, namely, Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal
and South Africa. I also wish to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its very successful presidency in
January.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union and of
the Human Security Network.
Over the past few years, increasingly more
attention has been paid to conflict prevention and to
the security-development nexus, including the
complementarity, coordination and coherence of
multilateral cooperation. We have come to realize that
in today’s globalized world, distance has lost its
meaning. A country may be situated on the other side
of the world, but its problems reach us all. We know
that there can be neither peace nor security without
sustainable development, and vice versa. It is more
likely for conflicts to break out in countries with a
large population living in poverty and inequality of
wealth and in those where human rights and the rights
of minorities and ethnic groups are not respected.
We therefore need to focus on addressing the root
causes of conflicts, achieving sustainable development,
good governance and the rule of law and promoting
respect for human rights and a culture of tolerance.
Preventing unnecessary deaths and ensuring that all

11-23119

people live free of fear and want and in dignity are a
matter of solidarity and moral imperative. Over 1
billion people live in fragile and conflict-affected
States. We need to help build effective and resilient
national institutions that prevent a country from
slipping back into conflict. We need to invest more in
prevention. The costs of conflicts are high, and the
unrest can spill over to neighbouring countries and the
wider region. Economic development reduces the risk
of the onset of a conflict, while deprivation from
economic and political participation can catalyse one.
Unstable security situations and armed violence
and conflict, which lead to a breakdown of the rule of
law and, very often, to massive human rights
violations, pose a serious threat to human development
and the progress made on the Millennium Development
Goals. We need to effectively manage the crucial phase
of transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Peacekeepers should be able to contribute to the early
phases of peacebuilding where they are in a position to
do so.
A well-coordinated and timely combination of
political, development, security and humanitarian
measures is needed in order to provide an efficient
response to such situations. The Peacebuilding
Commission plays an important role in that respect.
Slovenia supports the strengthening of institutional
arrangements between the various United Nations
actors, along with closer cooperation and dialogue
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We welcome ongoing efforts to enhance
coordination between the United Nations and the
World Bank. There is a need to strengthen international
civilian capacities for post-conflict peacebuilding, and
we welcome the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the review of international civilian
capacities in that respect.
Slovenia has been an active participant in
peacebuilding and institution-building efforts. Slovenia
implements various humanitarian and development
cooperation projects to provide help in areas affected
by war or other security challenges — for example,
demining projects carried out by the International Trust
Fund for Demining and Mine Victims Assistance and
the project for the rehabilitation of children affected by
the recent conflict in Gaza.
Humanitarian
demining
and
mine-victim
assistance contribute to security in post-conflict

31

S/PV.6479

societies and enable the restoration of economically
viable land and institutions, thus helping victims and
their families while, at the same time, lessening the
suffering and contributing to the rebuilding of social
structures. Based on Slovenia’s experiences in the
Western Balkans, we can affirm that humanitarian
demining can offer the parties a technical platform for
dialogue, which can consequently lead to regional
cooperation.
In societies where the local population suffers the
consequences of conflict, the understanding of national
and local contexts is crucial to effective conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. However, one must not
forget that political conditions are country-specific and
that blueprint solutions may not be universally
applicable. For successful human, economic and social
development, the dependence of a society on
international assistance has to be gradually but
steadfastly reduced, and its self-reliance promoted.
That has to be a step-by-step process. Nevertheless, it
is vital to increase the local population’s stake and
ownership as the guiding principles of partnerships
between security and development actors on the
ground.

32

Therefore, the participation of civil society,
including the most vulnerable groups, in the
development and implementation of peacebuilding and
post-conflict processes is of major importance. That is
why we must consistently promote the significant role
of women and encourage their participation and full
involvement in post-conflict activities and societies,
especially because women are important drivers of
social, family and economic lives in conflict and postconflict situations.
Allow me to conclude by saying that the
partnership between security and development needs to
be strengthened and must include global, international,
regional and local actors and civil society. There is no
development without security, and a lack of security
can seriously undermine development.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, therefore, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

11-23119
