IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

date an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment
of its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals
of Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General2° and those expressed
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee; 21
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its next session the texts of the
conventions drafted by international and regional organizations on mercenaries, as well as any other relevant
documentation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment. Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries" .
85th plenary meeting
4 December /98/

36/106.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution I 77 (II) of 2 I November 1947.
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International
Law Commission and submitted to the General Assembly
in 1954, 22
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of a code of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and security
and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/97 of 16 December
1978, by which it decided to accord priority and the fullest
consideration to the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind",
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General2 3
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/49
of 4 December 1980,
Considering that the International Law Commission has
just accomplished an important part of its work devoted to
the succession of States in respect of State property, archives

20

See A/35/366 and Add.1-3 and A/361438.
Official Records of the General As.,emblv, Thirrv-sixrh Session, Sixth
Committee, 16th-23rd and 57th meetings; and ibid., Sixth Committee,
Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
22
Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/2693). para. 54.
23
A/36/416.
21

239

and debts and that the programme of work is thus at present
lightened,
Taking into consideration that the membership of the
International Law Commission was increased during the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly 24 and that it
has at its disposal a new mandate of five years to organize
its future work,
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate
on this item at the current session,
Taking note of paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 36/114 of 10 December I 981 on the report of the
International Law Commission,
I. Invites the International Law Commission to resume
its work with a view to elaborating the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind and to
examine it with the required priority in order to review it,
taking duly into account the results achieved by the process
of the progressive development of international law;
2. Requests the International Law Commission to consider at its thirty-fourth session the question of the draft
Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
in the context of its five-year programme and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
priority it deems advisable to accord to the draft Code, and
the possibility of presenting a preliminary report to the Assembly at its thirty-eighth session bearing, inter alia, on the
scope and the structure of the draft Code;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to present or update their
comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind, and to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the International Law Commission all the necessary documentation, comments and observations presented by Member
States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations on the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind" and to
accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
92nd plenary meeting
/0 December 1981

36/107.

Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of

the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ 150 of 17 December 1979
and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation
'" See sect. II, resolution 36/39.

240

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and progressive development of the principles and norms
of international economic law relating in particular to the
legal aspects of the new international economic order' ' ,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General25 and
the study prepared by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research entitled "List of existing and evolving
principles and norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order concerning the economic relations among States, international organizations and other
entities of pyblic international law, and the activities of
transnational corporations" 26 and its compendium 27 and of
the views submitted by some States in response to General
Assembly resolution 35/166, 28
Taking note, in particular, of the recommendation that
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
should complete the study by preparing the analytical study
on the progressive development of the principles and norms
of international law relating to the new international economic order, in accordance with paragraph l (b) of resolution 35/166,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
l. Takes note of the study prepared by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research; 26
2. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to prepare tht: study referred to in the fifth
preambular paragraph above and to complete it in time for
the Secretary-General to submit it to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session;
3. Urges Member States to submit relevant information
with respect to the study not later than 31 July 1982;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional commissions, the
United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and
other relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in this field, as determined by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, to submit relevant information and to co-operate fully with the Institute
in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
study made by the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research for its consideration, on a priority basis, under the
item entitled "Progressive development of the principles
and norms of international law relating to the new international economic order'' to be included in the provisional
agenda of that session.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/108.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination
and Wider Appreciation of International Law 29 and the recN36/143 and Add. I and 2.
N36/143, sect. II.
27
UNITAR/DS/4.
2
• See N36/143/Add.1 and 2.
,. N36/633.
25

20

ommendations made to the Secretary-General by the Advisory Committee on the United, Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at all
universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States at
the bilateral level to provide assistance in the teaching and
study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to give further
support to the Programme and to increase their activities to
promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities
which are of special benefit to persons from developing
countries,
Recalling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it is
desirable to use as far as possible the resources and facilities
made available by Member States, international organizations and others,
I. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in 1982
and 1983 the activities specified in his report, including the
provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships each in 1982 and
1983, at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) A minimum of one scholarship each in 1982 and
1983 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship
on the Law of the Sea, 30 to be financed by the voluntary
contributions specifically made for the endowment of the
Fellowship as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs
9 and 10 below;
(c) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country who will he invited to the regional courses to be organized in 1982 and
1983;
and to finance the above activities from provisions in the
regular budget and also voluntary financial contributions
which would be received as a result of the requests set out
in paragraphs 9 and 10 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his constructive efforts to promote training and assistance
in international law within the framework of the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
in 1980 and 1981;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, in particular for the efforts
made to support the teaching of international law;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Institute for Training and Research for its participation in the
Programme, particularly in the organization of regional
courses and in the conduct of the fellowship programme in
international law sponsored jointly by the United Nations
and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Egypt for providing host facilities for the regional training
and refresher courses held at Cairo in 1981;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy
of International Law for its valuable contributions to the
Programme by enabling international law fellows under the
sponsorship of the United Nations and the United Nations

'

0

See sect. II. resolution 36179.
