S/2017/249*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 April 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence1
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2016, is
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), in which the Council
requested me to report annually on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) and to recommend strategic actions. Developments
during the reporting period, including the rise in violent extremism and mass
migration, drew attention to the attendant risk of trafficking in persons for the purpose
of sexual violence/exploitation. Among the perpetrators are hybrid criminal -terrorist
networks, which have used the bodies of women and girls as a form of currency in
the political economy of war. In response, the Council adopted resolution 2331
(2016), the first to address the nexus between such trafficking, sexual violence,
terrorism and transnational organized crime. This paves the way for more systematic
monitoring and reporting, as well as enhanced information-sharing and judicial
cooperation. It further affirmed that victims of trafficking and sexual violence
committed by terrorist groups should be eligible for official redress as victims of
terrorism. The acknowledgement of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism, integral
to recruitment, resourcing and radicalization strategies, links this issue formally to
global action aimed at curbing terrorist financing, including the work of relevant
sanctions regimes.
2.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence”, as used in the present report, refers
to rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion,
enforced sterilization, forced marriage, and any other form of sexual violence of
comparable gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or
indirectly linked to a conflict. This link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator
(often affiliated with a State or non-State armed group, including a terrorist entity or
network), the profile of the victim (who is frequently an actual or perceived member
of a persecuted political, ethnic or religious minority, or is targeted on the basis of
actual or perceived sexual orientation and gender identity), the climate of impunity
(which is generally associated with State collapse), cross-border consequences (such
as displacement or trafficking in persons) and/or violations of the provisions of a
__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 December 2017.

17-05090* (E)

191217

*1705090*

S/2017/249

ceasefire agreement. The term also encompasses trafficking in persons when
committed in situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence/exploitation.
3.
While many countries are affected by the threat, occurrence or legacy of
conflict-related sexual violence, the present report is focused on 19 countries for
which credible information is available. It should be read in conjunction with my
previous annual reports on conflict-related sexual violence, which provide a
cumulative basis for the listing of 46 parties (see annex). The majority of listed parties
are non-State actors, with seven of these having been designated as terrorist groups
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Regarding national military and police
forces, those that are listed are required to engage with my Special Representative in
order to develop specific, time-bound commitments and action plans to address
violations and, since 2010, several have done so. Effective implementation of
commitments is a key requirement for the delisting of parties. All States repeatedly
listed for grave violations against children and/or conflict-related sexual violence will
be prohibited from participating in United Nations peace operations.
4.
The report is based on information collected by the United Nations. In this
regard, the increased presence of women’s protection advisers, who are responsible
for convening the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict -related
sexual violence in the field, has improved the availability and quality of information.
Currently, 34 women’s protection advisers are deployed in eight mission settings. All
six peacekeeping missions with mandates that include the protection of civilians have
established the monitoring arrangements and incorporated the matrix of early warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence into their broader protection
structures. Two special political missions have also begun to establish these
monitoring arrangements. A concerted effort to enhance prevention, early warning
and swift responses to this historically hidden crime will require dedicated human and
financial resources commensurate with the scale of the challenge. The prevention of
sexual violence is an integral part of wider conflict prevention and, as stated in my
inaugural address to the Security Council, prevention is not merely a priority, but the
priority.
5.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions is critical to ensuring
accountability for past crimes, as well as prevention and deterrence for the future. In
this regard, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
in accordance with its mandate under Security Council resolution 1888 (2009), has
assisted governments with criminal investigation and prosecution, military justice,
legislative reform, protection of victims and witnesses and reparations. Reporting
directly to my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, th e Team of
Experts is composed of specialists from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), supplemented by a roster
of experts with a range of specializations. With dedicated assistance, Governments
can effectively adjudicate such crimes, as demonstrated by the case of Guinea, where
the technical support provided by the Team of Experts to a national panel of judges
investigating mass rape and other crimes committed in September 2009, resulted in
the indictments of 17 high-ranking military and political officials, including the
former President, Moussa Dadis Camara. These efforts also led to the arrest of key
suspects through enhanced judicial cooperation with neighbouring countries. During
the reporting period, the Team continued to promote the sharing of experiences
between countries facing similar challenges and to assist in developing policies and
2/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

tools such as guidelines for armed forces in Africa. By virtue of its structure and
composition, the Team has contributed to enhanced coherence among its constituent
entities. To date, it has engaged in the Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Somalia
and South Sudan.
6.
The United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict network, which
consists of 13 entities and is chaired by my Special Representative, is aimed at
strengthening sexual violence prevention and response through a coordinated,
coherent and comprehensive approach. In 2016, through the United Nations Action
multi-partner trust fund, catalytic funding was provided for the deployment of the
first women’s protection adviser to Iraq. An international expert was deployed to Mali
on secondment from the Government of Switzerland to support the development of a
national strategy on gender-based violence/sexual violence in conflict. In 2016, the
network also funded five projects in the Middle East and North Africa, which support
primarily Syrian and Iraqi survivors, including refugees in Lebanon and Jordan.
United Nations Action further conducted a workshop in Jordan to foster synergies
between the different projects, and to support the developme nt of results-based
monitoring and evaluation frameworks. Joint technical support missions were
conducted to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Côte d’Ivoire, Jordan and Mali in 2016. A
number of tools and knowledge products were produced to improve practice in the
field, including a mapping of the global policy landscape on conflict -related sexual
violence, in which gaps and opportunities linked to the implementation of the mandate
on conflict-related sexual violence are assessed.
7.
Recognizing that the United Nations has individuals among its ranks who
engage in egregious acts of sexual exploitation and abuse, I have pledged to
dramatically improve the way the United Nations prevents and responds to sexual
exploitation and abuse by our own personnel and those deployed under the auspices
of the United Nations. In my recent report on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse: a new approach (A/71/818), I have undertaken
measures within my own authority. I have set out a strategic framework to prioritize
the rights and dignity of victims and to end impunity. I have also called on Member
States to join me in a unified effort to detect, control and prevent incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse in order to make zero tolerance a reality.

II. Sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism:
Overview of current trends and emerging concerns
8.
In 2016, sexual violence continued to be employed as a tactic of war, with
widespread and strategic rapes, including mass rapes, allegedly committed by several
parties to armed conflict, mostly in conjunction with other crimes such as killing,
looting, pillage, forced displacement and arbitrary detention. The strategic nature of
the violence was evident in the selective targeting of victims from opposing ethnic,
religious or political groups, mirroring the fault lines of the wider conflict or crisis.
Patterns of sexual violence have also been seen in the context of urban warfare, during
house searches, operations in residential areas and at checkpoints. Moreover, since
2014, the United Nations has intensified its focus on the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism by a range of violent extremist groups. For these actors, sexual
violence advances not only such objectives as incentivizing recruitment, terrorizing
populations into compliance, displacing civilians from strategic areas, eliciting

17-05090

3/32

S/2017/249

operational intelligence and forcing conversions through marriage, but also
entrenches an ideology based on suppressing women’s rights and controlling their
sexuality and reproduction. It is further used to generate revenue, as part of the
shadow economy of conflict and terrorism, through sex trafficking, sexual slavery,
enforced prostitution and the extortion of ransoms from desperate families. In some
circumstances, women and girls are themselves treated as the “wages of war”, being
gifted as a form of in-kind compensation or payment to fighters, who are then entitled
to resell or exploit them as they wish. The past year has also seen the use of women
and girls held in sexual slavery as human shields and suicide bombers, denoting their
status as expendable “resources” in the machinery of terrorism. In the context of mass
migration, women and children affected by conflict, displacement or violent
extremism are particularly at risk of falling prey to traffickers owing to the collapse
of protective political, legal, economic and social systems.
9.
At the same time, certain counter-terrorism measures have also infringed
women’s rights and freedoms, such as the practice of detaining those released from
the captivity of violent extremist groups as potential affiliates or intelligence assets,
rather than supporting them as victims and referring them to humanitarian actors.
Such measures can signal to communities that such women and girls are complicit in
the violence and should therefore be shunned. Sexual violence has also been used in
the context of counterinsurgency operations, whereby the rape of a wife or daughter
is intended to punish her absent husband, father or relative, often to pressure him to
surrender to the authorities during efforts to capture actual or percei ved opponents.
10. A strikingly consistent concern, across the varied contexts examined in the
present report, is the intense stigma suffered by survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence. Survivors risk being twice traumatized: first by the action of t he perpetrator,
then again by the reaction of society and the State, which is often unresponsive or
even punitive and discriminatory. Shame and stigma are integral to the logic of sexual
violence being employed as a tactic of war or terrorism: aggressors u nderstand that
this type of crime can turn victims into outcasts, thus unravelling the family and
kinship ties that hold communities together. The effect may be diminished
reproductive capacity and prospects for group survival. Just as there are many
manifestations of conflict-related sexual violence, there are multiple and intersecting
stigmas that follow in its wake. These include the stigma of “guilt by association”
with the perpetrator and their group; fear of suspected sexually transmitted infections
such as HIV; the perceived dishonour of lost chastity or virginity; the stigma of
maternity out of wedlock, especially where children conceived through rape are
considered “children of the enemy”; homosexuality taboos, in the case of male rape;
and the shame of being unable to defend oneself and loved ones. Children born of
rape may themselves face a lifetime of marginalization, owing to stigma and uncertain
legal status. Sociocultural stigma compounds the problem of universal underreporting
of sexual violence in times of war. Survivors who have no opportunity to disclose
abuse or are forced to delay disclosure due to safety concerns and a lack of services
have been found to suffer higher rates of post-traumatic stress and depression. While
stigma is often framed as a persistent, long-term problem, it must be addressed in a
strategic manner, because stigma can kill. As documented in many contexts, it has led
to lethal retaliation, “honour” crimes, suicide, untreated diseases, unsafe abortion,
economic exclusion and indigence.
11. To change conduct at the level of individuals and institutions alike, it is critical
to challenge the underlying social norms that prescribe and proscribe behaviour and
perpetuate victim-blame. This entails bridging the formal and informal sphere to
4/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

ensure that legal and policy approaches and community-driven responses are
mutually-reinforcing. There is a discernible trend of outdated and incomplete
definitions of sexual violence at the level of national law, which often fail to
criminalize rape in marriage, ignore coercive circumstances, and exclude males from
the scope of protection, leading to permissive attitudes in wartime about sexual
violence in the context of forced marriage, slavery or detention. These practices tend
to be justified as “legitimate” by certain belligerent and extremist groups, and can
become “normalized” and more deeply entrenched in the post-conflict phase.
Similarly, legislative immunity for members of the armed and security forces can
translate in wartime to a “licence to rape”. Male control over women’s production and
reproduction can pave the way for sexual violence being deemed an acceptable and
effective military strategy: a reward, an entitlement and a form of group bonding.
This indicates a need for both government officials and traditional leaders to make
clear through their public pronouncements and behaviour that the prohibition of
sexual violence is categorical and that the stigma of culpability rests squarely with
the perpetrator. Transitional justice can provide an opportunity to transform both
inadequate laws and harmful social norms, by ensuring that the gravity of sexual
violence is registered on the historical record and in the public memory.
12. For peacebuilding and reconciliation to take root, j ustice must be done, and be
seen to be done, for sexual violence survivors. Otherwise, the trauma, disease,
perceived dishonour, and desire for vengeance will fester within communities. Unless
those who have suffered sexual violence and the children born o f rape are reintegrated
into their societies and economies, they will remain susceptible to exploitation and
recruitment. In some cases, women and girls released from armed groups have been
shunned by their communities, including on account of sexual viole nce, and left with
no option but to rejoin the group that they had fled. Some women and girls who were
ostracized following their release from violent extremist groups have fallen victim to
sex trafficking, both internally and across borders. To guard agai nst these risks, safe
houses and economic livelihood programmes are urgently required for individuals
released from circumstances of captivity, abduction, forced marriage, forced
prostitution and/or sexual slavery.
13. There is a demonstrated link between economic security and autonomy, and
physical security and autonomy. The present report finds that the vast majority of
victims of conflict-related sexual violence come from marginalized, destitute and
often displaced communities. Cross-national patterns show a strong correlation
between economic desperation and exposure to sexual violence/exploitation,
including trafficking, forced prostitution, and resort to harmful coping mechanisms,
such as child marriage. The effect of sexual violence employed as a tact ic of war or
terrorism is to spread fear among the civilian population, with a range of economic
consequences, including facilitating the capture of land and property by forcibly
displacing residents, with high levels of sexual violence seen during flight and in
displacement settings. In addition, this fear restricts women’s freedom of movement
to continue vital economic activities. The suppression of women’s employment and
education increases their risk of being exposed to sexual violence, whereas
economically empowered women have been shown to provide a buffer against the
recruitment and radicalization of their children and other family members and thus
against widening and repeating cycles of violence. Livelihood support and
structurally transformative reparations can help to break the cyclical connection
between poverty and sexual violence. However, despite being the measures that

17-05090

5/32

S/2017/249

survivors themselves most often demand, they are precisely those least seen in
responses to date.
14. Although the challenges remain daunting, convictions remain rare and new
protection crises continue to emerge, the paradigm has shifted. Sexual violence is no
longer treated as merely a by-product of insecurity, but rather as a significant form of
insecurity in itself. The era of silence at the level of national and international
institutions has given way to a sense of urgency to bring all the tools of diplomacy to
bear on the issue. There is greater knowledge today than ever before about what works
to prevent and deter this scourge, following operational engagements with a range of
justice and security actors. Specific, time-bound commitments have been adopted by
State security forces in Côte d’Ivoire, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and South Sudan, in accordance with resolutions
1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). This includes: the issuance of orders through chains of
command and the adoption of codes of conduct prohibiting sexual violence; the
investigation of alleged incidents in order to hold perpetrators accountable; the
identification and release of those vulnerable to sexual violence from their ranks; the
designation of high-level interlocutors to ensure implementation; and, in the case of
police services, the formation of specialized units capable of addressing sexual
violence. Notably, the measures taken by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire have
resulted in the first delisting pursuant to this mandate, namely that of the Forces
armées de Côte d’Ivoire. Continued monitoring and technical assistance will be
required to consolidate these gains. To sustainably transform the culture of security
institutions, consistent accountability is needed at all levels of the chain of command.
Under these circumstances, the enforcement of justice has been shown to have a
cascade effect, whereby the prosecution of past violations deters future crimes,
particularly when combined with strategies of awareness-raising, education and
training.
15. Other positive developments during the reporting period included the activation
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which supports the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and
succeeding resolutions in the context of specific countries on the agenda of the
Security Council’s. The Government of the United Kingdo m of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, through its Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, launched a
campaign to tackle the stigma associated with sexual violence in conflict. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha, who survived sexual enslavement by ISIL, was named Uni ted
Nations Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human Trafficking,
and has used that platform to give hope and voice to countless sexual violence
survivors. Historic verdicts were handed down by the International Criminal Court in
the case against Jean-Pierre Bemba, the Extraordinary African Chambers in the
Senegalese courts against Hissène Habré, and the Supreme Court of Guatemala in the
Sepur Zarco case, reaffirming global commitments to hold individuals accountable
for conflict-related sexual violence at the highest levels. At the World Humanitarian
Summit, leaders pledged to make protection from sexual violence and access to
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health care the norm in humanitarian
programming. Yet, even where laws, policies and response protocols are in place, a
resurgence of hostilities, fuelled by the proliferation of arms and the proximity of
combatants to civilian populations, leads unfailingly to renewed patterns of sexual
violence. Peacebuilding, which entails restoring civic trust in national institutions and
between communities, therefore remains one of the most critical indirect strategies
for preventing conflict-related sexual violence and addressing its root causes. I thus

6/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

consider the systematic engagement of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
to be a crucial aspect of this agenda.

III. Sexual violence in conflict-affected settings
Afghanistan
16. Chronic instability, combined with impunity, discriminatory cultural practices,
and access constraints contribute to the underreporting of sexual violence across
Afghanistan. In 2016, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) verified 11 cases of conflict-related sexual violence against women, girls
and boys committed by parties to the conflict including the Afghan National Border
Police, the Afghan Local Police and the Taliban. Of these cases, just two perpetrators
(members of the Afghan National Border Police) were convicted and sentenced to
imprisonment in accordance with the Elimination of Violence against Women Law.
The 11 incidents include four documented cases of bachah bazi, involving the sexual
abuse and enslavement of boys by men in positions of power, many of whom are
linked to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. Efforts led by the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission to criminalize this practice
resulted in draft legislation in March 2016, which remains under review.
17. The limited presence of women in the Afghan National Police (1.8 per cent),
contributes to the underreporting of sexual violence. As part of efforts to recruit and
retain more women, the Ministry of Interior Affairs established a mechanism to curb
sexual harassment against female officers. On 31 January, the Presid ent inaugurated
a fund to sponsor emergency services for women survivors of life -threatening
violence, such as medical treatment and shelters. The revised Penal Code incorporates
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court on sexual violence
as a war crime, a crime against humanity and an act of genocide. Following the 2015
launch of its national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government has adopted measures to implement and monitor its commitments,
although funding for those activities has yet to be specified.
Recommendation
18. I urge the Government to reinforce the capacity of its justice system to provide
accountability and remedies for sexual violence crimes, to allocate adequate resources
for the implementation of its national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and to adopt legislation to criminalize bachah bazi.
Central African Republic
19. In early 2016, a new Government was democratically elected in the Central
African Republic, yet the security situation remained volatile across large swaths of
the country. Several prefectures were shaken by clashes in the second half o f the year,
leading to the displacement of thousands of civilians and a pattern of conflict -related
sexual violence of an ethnic and sectarian nature. During the reporting period, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) recorded 179 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
committed primarily by ex-Séléka, anti-balaka and Révolution et Justice elements and
by the Lord’s Resistance Army. These incidents included 151 rapes, of which 54 we re
gang rapes, as well as six forced marriages and four cases of sexual slavery. The

17-05090

7/32

S/2017/249

victims included 92 women, 86 girls and one boy, although the actual number is
suspected to be far higher than the figures reported.
20. Victims of conflict-related sexual violence were generally assaulted in their
homes, en route to markets or fields, and in and around displacement camps. Most
incidents took place in the course of essential livelihood activities, such as farming or
firewood collection. Sexual violence also occurred in the context of intercommunal
clashes aimed at humiliating or punishing the target population, as well as against
women suspected of engaging in trade across the sectarian divide. In Ouham -Pendé,
where conflict intensified in 2016, 14 cases of sexual violence were committed by
ex-Séléka and Révolution et Justice elements, as well as by anti-balaka forces, against
victims ranging from 14 to 40 years. In Kaga Bandoro, several cases of sexual violence,
including gang rapes, were allegedly committed by armed Fulani herders during clashes
on 12 October. At least 25 per cent of the 1,685 cases of sexual violence recorded
countrywide by humanitarian agencies occurred in Kaga Bandoro, where women
reported that sexual violence was being used by ex-Séléka elements to demean and
destabilize communities. In mid-2016 in Ngaounday, armed elements, reportedly from
Chad, raped 19 women and girls in a single night during attacks on several villages.
The Lord’s Resistance Army continued its decade-old pattern of abduction, rape, forced
marriage, forced impregnation and sexual slavery. Cases of conflict-related sexual
violence committed by members of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, which are
based in Obo as part of operations against the Lord’s Resistance Army, were also
documented in 2016.
21. Children conceived as a result of rape are rarely accepted by society. A large
number of rape victims resort to unsafe abortion, which is the leading cause of
maternal mortality. In Yalinga, a woman who had been raped by the Lord’s Resistance
Army reported that she was rejected and forced to leave her family once her child was
born. In Obo, three children born of rapes by Lord’s Resistance Army commanders
and their mothers were subjected to discrimination. The community dubb ed these
children tonkotonko, a local term for the Lord’s Resistance Army. However, according
to their mothers, the prejudice diminished over time.
22. Barriers to reporting sexual violence are as much socioeconomic as they are
logistical. In addition to war-ravaged infrastructure, poor transportation and
communications networks, there are cultural taboos and a general lack of awareness
that rape is a serious crime. In terms of service provision, only 32 per cent of recorded
victims received emergency assistance within 72 hours of the incident, owing to the
lack of available health services and the prohibitive cost of travel from remote
locations. Income-generating activities have been shown to enhance both self-reliance
and safety. For example, the United Nations Police has supported the creation of
women’s associations in displacement camps, enabling women to acquire livelihood
skills in order to reduce the risk of sexual exploitation.
23. Continuing insecurity has paralysed the justice system, resulting i n most rape
cases being resolved through “amicable settlements”, such as promises of marriage,
including the payment of a dowry or other financial compensation. Forced marriage,
as a negative coping mechanism to protect the victim’s “honour”, has also incr eased.
The Ministry of Justice issued a circular in March 2016 requiring sentences for sexual
violence crimes to be upgraded from “correctional” to criminal sanctions, to provide
a stronger deterrent. However, the lack of forensic capacity, with just one m edical
examiner in the country, constrains investigation. Nonetheless, progress has been
made to activate the joint rapid response unit to combat sexual violence, in accordance

8/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

with the recommendation of my previous report (S/2016/361). The Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict visited Bangui in June and urged
the Government to accelerate efforts to appoint national police and gendarmerie
officers to the unit. In November, the United Nations Police supported training for
members of the unit. The Team of Experts has endeavoured to ensure that conflict related sexual violence will be central to the work of a special criminal court
established by law in 2015. The process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, due to start in 2017, will include support for women combatants and
those associated with armed groups, and a specific budget has been allocated to
address conflict-related sexual violence concerns.
Recommendation
24. I encourage the Government to activate the joint rapid response unit to combat
sexual violence and ensure that its staff are trained and equipped, as well as to extend
cost-free services to sexual violence survivors and to accelerate efforts to establish
the special criminal court.
Colombia
25. In November 2016, four years of negotiations between the Government and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP)
culminated in a final peace accord. This marked an end to five decades of conflict in
which, as the Constitutional Court of Colombia affirmed in 2008, sexual violence was
widespread and systematic. Informal peace dialogues between the Government and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, the second-largest guerilla group in Colombia,
also continued during the reporting period.
26. During a joint visit to the Havana talks in July by my Special Representative and
the Executive Director of UN-Women, the Government and FARC-EP publicly
committed to delivering justice and support to sexual violence survivors. In terms of
transitional justice, the final peace accord provides for the establishment of a truth
commission and a special jurisdiction for peace, which identifies sexual violence as a
grave violation that cannot be amnestied. The agreement contains strong commit ments
on gender and the request that my Special Representative, UN-Women, the Government
of Sweden, and the Women’s International Democratic Federation support their
implementation. On 25 January, the Security Council established a special political
mission of unarmed international observers to monitor and verify the ceasefire,
cessation of hostilities and process of disarmament (see Council resolution 2261
(2016)). The gender-based violence subcluster supported predeployment training on
conflict-related sexual violence for the observers.
27. Colombia has developed an exemplary legal framework for addressing conflict related sexual violence, including Law 1719 on access to justice for victims and
various Constitutional Court orders urging the authorities to address such crimes. In
response, the Office of the Attorney-General has adopted an investigation protocol
for sexual violence and deployed legal teams to 17 affected provinces. Nonetheless,
just 2 per cent of the 634 cases of conflict-related sexual violence documented by the
Constitutional Court have been translated into convictions to date.
28. While gaps in the data persist, primarily due to underreporting, the
Ombudsman’s Early Warning System indicated that the risk of sexual violence
remained high in at least 12 departments throughout 2016. The Ombudsman’s Women
and Gender Delegate registered 2,914 incidents of gender-based violence for the
17-05090

9/32

S/2017/249

period from January to October, of which 466 were conflict -related sexual violence.
This represents an increase in reports of gender-based violence overall, but a lower
proportion of conflict-related sexual violence relative to previous years. The Office
of the Ombudsman warned of a heightened risk of such violence as former combatants
return to communities. The National Victims’ Unit registered 85 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence between January and November, in 31 per cent of which Afro Colombian women were targeted.
29. The United Nations documented 79 cases of sexual violence during sporadic
operations by armed groups in 2016, including forced prostitution, sexual torture,
sexual slavery and harassment by armed groups and forces. In approximately 90 per
cent of cases, the perpetrators numbered three or more and the victims had previously
suffered conflict-related sexual violence, with the first assault generally taking place
in childhood. United Nations partners are also monitoring the response to a number
of emblematic sexual violence incidents, which are part of the legacy of conflict. For
example, in Santander province, a pattern of sexual violence against schoolgirls by
post-demobilization groups was documented, with a former principal and a former
police inspector both facing trial for facilitating sexual slavery and forced
recruitment. Since 2015, OHCHR has tracked the case of 10 girls who were subjected
to sexual abuse by members of the post-demobilization group, Clan del Golfo, in
Antioquia province. To date, just one individual has been brought to justice for the
crimes. In Putumayo province, UNHCR documented the case of a 12 -year-old
displaced girl who was sexually exploited for two years, allegedly by a member of
FARC-EP. Her schoolteacher, who had reported the incident, was forced to flee the
area following threats and intimidation.
30. In response to a pattern of sexual harassment targeting women activists,
including those who championed gender justice during the peace proc ess, the
Government conducted security-risk assessments for 1,164 women leaders, finding
675 to be facing an elevated risk of violence by armed actors. While the authorities
have put in place risk-mitigation measures, the Ombudsman notes that protection
must be better adapted to specific needs and contexts. There is still a paucity of
psychosocial support services available and an insufficient number of shelters for
survivors, particularly in remote areas.
Recommendation
31. I commend the Government of Colombia and FARC-EP on their historic
achievement to place gender justice at the heart of the Colombian peace process, and
urge them to ensure that it remains central during implementation. This precedent
should inform the ongoing peace dialogues between the Government and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional. I call for the work of transitional justice mechanisms to pay
specific attention to the plight and rights of women, girls and all survivors of sexual
violence; for verification of the ceasefire to include monitoring of sexual violence;
and for risk-reduction measures to be embedded in the process of laying down arms.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
32. In 2016, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) verified 514 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence. The victims included 340 women, 170 girls, three men and
one boy. During the same period, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
reported 2,593 cases of sexual violence in conflict-affected provinces.

10/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

33. The majority of perpetrators were non-State armed groups, who were
responsible for 68 per cent of verified incidents. Among these groups, the Force de
résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri was responsible for 20 per cent of incidents occurring
mainly during attacks on villages and ambushes in Ituri Province. Mai Mai Raia
Mutomboki combatants were responsible for 18 per cent of reported cases overall,
raping 90 women and girls in four separate attacks between January and November
in North and South Kivu provinces. Mai Mai Simba factions remained active at
mining sites in the Mambasa territory of Ituri province and were liable for 4 per cent
of reported incidents of conflict-related sexual violence. MONUSCO separated 40
girls from armed groups, all of whom reported being subjected to rape, sexual slavery,
forced marriage or other forms of sexual violence.
34. Government security forces were responsible for the remainder of verified
incidents, with 27 per cent of these violations attrib uted to the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC). The Congolese national police and
members of the Congolese national intelligence agency were responsible for 5 per
cent of cases. In order to foster prevention and improve the respon se, FARDC
continues to implement its action plan to combat sexual violence. In 2016, 193
military field commanders signed undertakings to prevent and address sexual
violence and 200 commanders were trained on their legal obligations.
35. The United Nations documented 100 convictions of members of the State
security forces for sexual violence crimes in 2016. Verdicts were also handed down
in cases involving four combatants affiliated with the then Mouvement du 23 Mars
for rape and three Nyatura combatants for sexual slavery. Arrests were also made in
cases of sexual violence against children in Kavumu, South Kivu. On 17 March, a
witness was assassinated following his testimony in the case. Human rights defenders
supporting sexual violence trials have also reported intimidation by the authorities in
South Kivu province. The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and military judicial
authorities, with the assistance of the Team of Experts, UNDP, MONUSCO and the
International Center for Transitional Justice, prioritized 26 of the gravest cases of
conflict-related sexual violence for prosecution.
36. Several mass rape incidents dating back to 2010, such as the Walikale, Bushani,
and Kalambahiro cases, remain unresolved, with arrest warrants still unexecuted, with
the exception of that for Séraphin Lionso, whom the Government arrested in
connection with the Walikale mass rape of 387 victims. Other members of his group,
the Mai Mai Cheka, remain active in the conflict and continued to commit rapes in
2016. On 29 July, my Special Representative again urged the Government to act on
the arrest warrant against Ntabo Ntaberi Cheka, the leader of the group. Judicial
awards of reparations to rape victims, for which the State is liable, remain unpaid.
37. With respect to service delivery, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
and partners in North and South Kivu provided medical, psychosocial, legal and
socioeconomic reintegration support to 1,410 survivors of rape by combatants.
Despite ongoing efforts by the Government and partners, challenges remain in
providing multisectoral assistance to survivors in the east, owing to the limited reach
of national institutions. In particular, access to post-exposure prophylaxis, treatment
for sexually transmitted infections and mental health support is inadequate. In
October, the Personal Representative of the President on Sexual Violence, in
partnership with the United Nations, convened a high-level conference in Kinshasa
to evaluate progress made on implementing the joint communiqué by my Special

17-05090

11/32

S/2017/249

Representative and the Government on sexual violence in conflict, resulting in a
three-year road map of national priorities (2017-2019).
Recommendation
38. I urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to sustain its
efforts to combat sexual violence, including by bringing perpetrators to justice
irrespective of rank or affiliation, ensuring that victims and witnesses are protected
and that reparations are paid. I call on the authorities to implement action plans for
the army and police, as well as the road map of priorities, and to scale up services,
including socioeconomic reintegration support.
Iraq
39. Since the rise of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) in 2014,
civilians have been subjected to sexual violence on a horrific scale, notably during
the brutal attacks by ISIL on Mosul, Sinjar, Tall’Afar and the Ninewa plains in the
north. In the context of ongoing military operations, launched in October 2016, to
reclaim Mosul and its environs, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
continues to receive reports of such violations committed by ISIL, primarily against
women and girls from ethnic and religious minority groups. According to declaration
in October by the Director of Yazidi Affairs in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, 971 Yazidi
women and girls have been freed from ISIL, while 1,882 remain enslaved in territories
under its control in both Iraq and Syria. Another official noted that ISIL has forcibly
transferred a number of Yazidis from Mosul to Raqqah (Syria). Such statements
corroborate reports of trafficking, including the sale and trade of women and children,
as well as the use of sexually enslaved women as human shields by ISIL during the
Mosul operations.
40. Obtaining data on such crimes is complicated by ongoing military operations
and social factors such as fear of stigmatization. New challenges have emerged,
including the need to address the status of children born to rape survivors and to
reintegrate survivors into their communities. Meeting these challenges will require
both legislative action and engagement with religious and community leaders to
encourage the acceptance of survivors and their children. This will be a critical
component of broader intracommunity and intercommunity reconciliation.
Addressing the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence will require a
scaling-up of resources for psychosocial services and for the proper documentation
of crimes, as the reign of terror by ISIL recedes and its impact on commun ities
becomes clearer.
41. To this end, several United Nations agencies are supporting the authorities to
address conflict-related sexual violence in three key areas, namely: building capacity
for the delivery of multisectoral services; fostering community resilience to prevent
and mitigate violence and harmful traditional practices; and strengthening
coordination and advocacy. To complement these efforts, on 23 September, the United
Nations signed a joint communiqué with the Government to prevent and addre ss
conflict-related sexual violence. The joint communiqué covers six priority areas:
legislative and policy reform; accountability; services and reparations; engaging
religious and tribal leaders, civil society and women’s groups; integrating gender
considerations into counter-terrorism measures; and awareness-raising. My Special
Representative visited Iraq in February 2017 to advance the implementation of those
commitments.

12/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

Recommendation
42. I call upon the Government of Iraq to ensure that allegatio ns of sexual violence
are investigated and prosecuted and that services are scaled up to meet the needs of
survivors, including through the establishment of safe houses and shelters, operated
in collaboration with women’s civil society groups. I further ur ge the authorities to
integrate a gender perspective into counter-terrorism strategies.
Libya
43. Sustained violence and conflict across Libya, in a context of acute political
instability, continued to exacerbate the plight of civilians, with the situ ation of
migrants raising particular concerns. Libya remains a country of transit, with 162,895
arrivals to Italy by sea recorded by UNHCR in 2016. In the course of their journey,
women and girls are often exposed to sexual violence by some parties to the conflict,
as well as by smugglers, traffickers and other criminal groups. They also face threats
and incidents of sexual violence when held, sometimes for months, in detention
centres under poor conditions. Groups pledging allegiance to ISIL have been invo lved
in the abduction and sexual abuse of women and children. Testimony from women
released from ISIL captivity, following military operations in Sirte, reveals a pattern
of sexual assault and slavery, particularly against migrants. Some of the survivors a re
pregnant as a result of rape. Women and children rescued from ISIL captivity have
routinely been detained by the authorities in Jawiya prison in Misrata, in precarious
conditions of overcrowding, without women guards. In this context, a 16 -year-old
Eritrean girl reported that the detaining authorities denied her access to an abortion,
despite her informing them that she had been raped by an ISIL fighter.
44. According to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, women’s rights
defenders, both in Libya and in exile, have received threats of sexual and other
violence. A video showing the gang rape of a woman by a militia operating in Tripoli
known as the Awashir Brigade, was widely circulated, provoking public outrage. The
suspected perpetrator has since been detained; however, the failure to prevent such
acts of sexual violence was among the reasons cited by the former Deputy Prime
Minister, Musa al-Koni, for his resignation in early 2017.
Recommendation
45. I call upon the authorities to review the migration policy of Libya and adopt
protection measures to mitigate the risk of sexual violence in the context of
immigration detention; to implement Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) by
ensuring that those who escape from ISIL captivity are recognized and supported as
victims of terrorism; and to prosecute perpetrators of conflict -related sexual violence
and provide reparations to victims in line with Decree No. 119 (2014).
Mali
46. The ongoing crisis in the northern and central regions, combined with a lack of
services, limited humanitarian access, stigma and fear of reprisals continues to
impede reporting of conflict-related sexual violence. Few survivors file legal
complaints or seek care, owing to a lack of confidence in legal and medical
institutions following instances of rapists being released from custody and
complainants being pressured to drop their cases. In January 2016, the suspect in a
case concerning the alleged sexual assault of 19 children was released from custody.
17-05090

13/32

S/2017/249

In the region of Gao, the parents of a young victim were forced by the examining
magistrate to withdraw their complaint and settle the case out of court. In the case of
a gang rape allegedly committed by three members of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces in Timbuktu, the victim’s father initially filed a complaint, but
withdrew it shortly afterwards without explanation.
47. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) investigated 23 cases of conflict-related sexual violence in 2016,
including rape, gang rape, forced prostitution, sexual slavery and forced marriage.
One of the cases was perpetrated by three members of the M alian Defence and
Security Forces, four by elements of the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad
et leurs alliés, and the others by civilians. Ten of the victims were members of the
Bella community, an ethnic group that has long suffered discrimination. The incidents
took place in the regions of Gao, Timbuktu and Kidal and in a refugee camp in
Mauritania. Humanitarian service providers also recorded five sexual assaults by
elements of the Malian Defence and Security Forces, a case of sexual violence by
members of the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest, and
another by the Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad.
48. Efforts were made to engage the parties in 2016. In April, my Special
Representative visited Mali to assess the situation and agree on a joint communiqué
with the Government as a basis for cooperation in addressing sexual violence. The
joint communiqué has not yet been agreed by the authorities. However, on 30 June,
the President of the Plateforme des mouvements du 14 juin 2014 d’ Alger signed a
unilateral communiqué in which he committed to work with the leaders of the
Coordination des mouvements et forces patriotiques de résistance, Mouvement arabe
de l’Azawad and the Groupe d’autodéfense Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés to
accelerate efforts to prevent and punish sexual violence within their ranks.
49. Resistance to changing traditional practices continues to hamper efforts to
criminalize all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. The Government has
therefore worked with the United Nations to conduct sensitization sessions with
religious leaders, prompting some to commit publicly to supporting new laws and to
speaking out against sexual violence. Support provided by MINUSMA to the Ministry
of Justice has led to the investigation of a number of alleged rapes. Nonetheless,
progress remains slow in relation to cases of sexual violence committed by extremist
groups in 2012, with just 37 of the 80 victims having been heard by a magistrate.
Initiatives by the Peacebuilding Fund have enhanced confidence in the justice system,
resulting in an increase in the cases of sexual violence that are brought to court in
Gao and Timbuktu from just 1 per cent to almost 14 per cent. The Fund has supported
the establishment of cases de la paix (peace huts) in northern Mali, which provide
safe havens where survivors can receive psychosocial and medical support. In 2016,
MINUSMA initiated several projects to facilitate the economic reintegration of
survivors, including quick impact projects to impart income-generating skills.
Recommendation
50. I urge the Government of Mali to adopt legislation prohibiting all forms of
sexual violence; to ensure the timely investigation of cases, the protection of victims,
witnesses and their families, the vetting of past perpetrators from the armed and
security forces; and to sign a joint communiqué with my Special Representative to
enable a more structured response.

14/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

Myanmar
51. Sexual violence continues to be underreported in Myanmar owing to entrenched
discrimination, fear of retaliation, limited access to services, and a lack of trust and
confidence in the police and judicial system. Barriers to accountability are even
greater when sexual violence is committed by members of the national security forces.
On 9 October 2016, operations were launched in North ern Rakhine State in response
to attacks against border guard police in the region, with numerous allegations of
human rights violations, including sexual violence, reported against the Rohingyas
(an ethnic Muslim minority) by the Myanmar Armed Forces (the Tatmadaw), the
Border Guard Police Force, and the Police Force of Myanmar. An estimated 66,000
civilians have fled to Bangladesh following the operations. On the basis of first -hand
information from those who had crossed the border, OHCHR reported in Febr uary
2017 that more than 50 of the 100 women and girls interviewed described having
been subjected to rape, gang rape or other forms of sexual violence, apparently
employed systematically to humiliate and terrorize their community. Some of the
rapes were carried out in front of relatives, as well as to punish women for their
perceived support for “insurgents”, who are often male family members. Only those
survivors who managed to cross the border have been able to access care.
52. Despite the Emergency Treatment of Patients Law (2014), which waived
mandatory reporting by service providers to the police in cases of sexual violence,
the practice persists, further inhibiting reporting and response. The risk of sexual
violence linked with conflict and displacement, notably in Kachin and Northern Shan
States, is compounded by a lack of educational and employment opportunities. This
physical and economic insecurity leaves civilians, particularly those who are
internally displaced, at heightened risk of trafficking, including for the purposes of
forced marriage and sexual exploitation.
Recommendation
53. I urge the Government of Myanmar to facilitate humanitarian access to Northern
Rakhine State, including to assist survivors of sexual violence. To ensure that t here is
no impunity for such crimes, I reiterate calls made by the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 2016 to repeal immunity provisions
for members of the security forces. I also call upon the authorities to ensure the
implementation of the Emergency Treatment of Patients Law (2014), and to
harmonize the domestic definition of rape, which derives from the Penal Code of
1860, with current international standards.
Somalia
54. Widespread sexual violence continues to be a feature of protracted conflict in
Somalia. Internally displaced women and girls and members of minority clans remain
the most vulnerable, owing to a lack of preventive measures, limited access to justice
and weak clan protection. Large population movements, such as the return of over
30,000 Somali refugees from Kenya, have also increased the vulnerability of women
and girls on the move.
55. Between January and September 2016, the United Nations verified information
on conflict-related sexual violence against 200 girls and 1 boy. The violations were
attributed to unknown armed elements (55), clan militia (60), Al -Shabaab (21), Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (3), and the Somali National Army (59). Three rapes of girls

17-05090

15/32

S/2017/249

were also attributed to the African Union Mission to Somalia, as addressed in my
report (A/71/818). In the last quarter of 2016, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia documented 14 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, including
five gang rapes, allegedly committed by Al-Shabaab, the Interim South-West
Administration of the Puntland Army, and the Somali national police. The
perpetrators were prosecuted in two of those cases, while in three others the suspects
were released owing to clan pressure or lack of evidence. Al -Shabaab responded to
the rape of a boy by one of its fighters by summarily stoning the perpetrator to death.
56. The pattern of forced marriage of women and girls to militants persisted in 2016,
with 13 incidents documented involving Al-Shabaab, Ahl Sunna Wal-Jama‘a, and
soldiers of the Somali National Army. An emerging trend during the reporting period
involved the authorities subjecting the relatives and wives of alleged Al -Shabaab
members to collective punishment, including extrajudicial executions, sexual
violence and arbitrary arrests. The authorities justify such treatment on the grounds
that the relatives of Al-Shabaab members support the insurgency by providing
information and thus constitute a threat. A similar phenomenon is affecting children
separated from Al-Shabaab, as reported by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea (see S/2016/919), which documented allegations of sexual abuse against
detainees at the Mogadishu Serendi camp, including in the context of intelligence gathering. Reported threats of sexual assault in settings such as the Mogadishu central
prison and facilities overseen by the National Intelligence and Security Agency were
also received by the United Nations.
57. A sexual offences act was adopted in Puntland on 20 August, and sexual
offences bills are awaiting passage by Parliament in Somalia and Somaliland. A
protocol for the clinical management of rape is in place to enhance the quality of care
and 17 “one-stop centres” have been established across the country. The protocol
includes referrals to safe houses, which provided temporary protection to 61 survivors
during the first half of 2016. Other efforts to address sexual violence include the
provision of free legal services and the establishment of mobile courts. Despite these
improvements, obtaining convictions remains a challenge: families tend to withdraw
complaints in favour of reaching settlements outside the formal system, which
benefits clans rather than survivors. In response, the Government has developed a
traditional dispute resolution policy to encourage sexual violence cases to be brought
before the courts. The establishment in 2016 of the Women and Child Protection Unit
within the police, in line with a new approach that aims to bolster gender balance and
capacity, is another positive development.
Recommendation
58. I urge the Government to adopt the sexual offences bills and to strengthen
reporting mechanisms on sexual violence. I also urge the Government to implement
Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) by ensuring that women and children
separated from Al-Shabaab receive support as victims of terrorism, rather than being
treated as threats or intelligence assets.
South Sudan
59. Since December 2013, South Sudan has been riven by conflict. Widespread and
systematic sexual violence has been used as a tactic of war to terrorize and persecute
populations in a manner that indicates its ethnic, as well as political, undertones. The
latest wave of unrest resulted in almost two million people being displaced internally

16/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

and over one million fleeing across borders, exacerbating the risk of sexual violence
by militias, armed youth and elements of the security forces. Fear spread by sexual
violence causes women to restrict their move ments, impeding livelihood activities.
The situation is exacerbated by the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
Pervasive impunity has normalized extreme patterns of violence, as national
institutions are unable to effectively prosecute rape or provide remedies. The
weakness of the formal justice system has increased reliance on traditional
mechanisms, which generally do not regard rape as a grave crime, and routinely settle
cases by ordering victims to marry perpetrators.
60. In 2016, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) documented
577 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, including rape, gang rape and sexual
slavery. The survivors included 57 girls, several of whom were below 10 years of age,
with two being less than one year old. In addition, service providers recorded 376
cases of sexual violence, of which 157 were forced marriage, with State and non -State
armed actors among the alleged perpetrators. Overall trends point to an alarming
increase in the number of rapes, with 20 per cent more victims seeking services
following sexual assault. The period under review also saw a 32 per cent increase in
the number of cases of gender-based violence perpetrated by men in uniform, as
compared with 2015. In addition, cases of abduction for the purpose of sexual slavery
more than doubled. The pattern of perpetrators and victims coming from rival ethnic
groups persists, with insults often levelled, during attacks, at the victim’s ethnicity or
perceived allegiance.
61. The greatest frequency and severity of recorded crimes occurred in July 2016,
in connection with active hostilities. Ethnic targeting, together with that of pregnant
women, children and the elderly, in violation of social taboos, indicates that sexual
violence is being used as part of retaliation strategies intended to punish communities.
Reports also implicate the South Sudanese National Police Service in a number of
violations. Of the cases of conflict-related sexual violence recorded by UNMISS, 217
were committed between 8 and 25 July, with most occurring at Sudan People’s
Liberation Army checkpoints near camps, which are designated as protection of
civilians sites. Those affected were generally displaced Nuer women and girls, with
the majority of perpetrators being members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army,
although some women also reported attacks by armed youth affiliated with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition. One mass rape incident
involving 16 women and 12 girls occurred at a Sudan People’s Liberation Army
checkpoint two kilometres from United Nations House. Survivors reported that, in
some villages, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army used sexual violence to punish
women who refused to provide information on the whereabouts of their male
relatives, accusing them of supporting the opposition. In this connection, UNMISS
documented three cases of gang rape, involving three women, with one of the victims
being 70 years of age. Also linked with the July clashes in Juba was an episode that
generated widespread media attention, in which Sudan People’s Liberation Army
soldiers attacked the Terrain compound housing international humanitarian workers,
looting, threatening and harassing residents. Several women were dragged out of
hiding and raped or gang-raped by soldiers, some of whom were just 15 years of age.
The effect of intimidation against female humanitarian workers has been to limit
outreach and service delivery. In September, 30 women were sexually assaulted in
Juba near protection of civilians sites. Several incidents were also documented in
November in Central Equatoria State, allegedly perpetrated by Sudan People’s
Liberation Army soldiers.

17-05090

17/32

S/2017/249

62. Despite preventive measures by UNMISS, conflict-related sexual violence
persists in proximity to protection of civilians sites. Arms bearers prey upon displaced
women when they leave camps to fetch firewood, tend fields or access marketplaces,
often raping them and confiscating their goods. In one such incident, in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal State, a pregnant woman was gang-raped at gunpoint by four Sudan
People’s Liberation Army soldiers, who attacked her at night while she was returning
to camp. Other allegations of sexual violence against internally displaced women by
Sudan People’s Liberation Army soldiers were recorded during hostilities in Central
Equatoria. Women were sexually harassed and enslaved, with some reportedly held
for over four months, during which time they witnessed the killing of other sexually
enslaved women. In a challenging operational environment, UNMISS has enhanced
early-warning systems, facilitated the supply of food and fuel, patrolled high -risk
areas, established weapons-free zones around camps, and negotiated the replacement
of soldiers at checkpoints with police officers, which has reduced the frequency of
sexual assault. The United Nations has also made efforts to ensure that rape kits are
stocked and medical personnel are trained on the clinical management of rape. My
Special Representative and her Team of Experts have engaged with the parties to
reinforce individual and command responsibility for preventing and punishing sexual
violence and to develop an implementation plan focused on accountability and the
protection of victims, witnesses and service providers. Despite commitm ents made
by both parties, sexual violence has increased in severity and scale. Successive
ceasefire agreements since 2014 have failed to curb the behaviour of combatants, and
sexual violence continues to deepen insecurity, delaying peace and reconciliatio n.
Recommendation
63. I urge parties to the conflict in South Sudan to implement the commitments
made in their respective communiqués to end conflict-related sexual violence, to
ensure the effective functioning of special protection units on sexual an d genderbased violence in the police, to hold perpetrators to account and to respect the sanctity
of protection of civilians sites.
Sudan (Darfur)
64. Patterns of widespread and systematic sexual violence have devastated the lives
and livelihoods of women and girls in Darfur over the past 13 years, and the
perpetrators continue to operate in a climate of impunity. As a consequence, the threat
and terror of sexual violence continues to cast a shadow over everyday life, restricting
women’s freedom of movement. As in previous years, most attacks took place when
women ventured to isolated areas to farm or collect firewood. While the active
conflict is now primarily focused in the Jebel Marra area, localized intercommunal
violence, militia activity and banditry have continued in the five states of Darfur.
Sexual and gender-based violence remains a serious concern, in particular for
vulnerable populations at camps for internally displaced persons.
65. In 2016, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) documented 100 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting
222 victims, specifically 102 women, 119 girls and one boy. As in previous years,
more than half the victims were children. The incidents included rape, ga ng rape,
attempted rape, abduction for the purpose of sexual assault and sexual harassment.
Ten per cent of these cases occurred during displacement. In 15 per cent of cases, the
victims numbered two or more, as women and girls have tried to improve their safety
by travelling in groups, although this seems to provide minimal deterrence with
18/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

regard to armed men. The incidents occurred primarily in North Darfur, Sortony,
Tawilla, and Shangil Tobayi, coinciding with the presence of armed militia.
66. The largest number of cases (63 per cent) was recorded between January and
June, as a result of hostilities between the Government and the Abdul Wahid faction
of the Sudan Liberation rebel movement in Jebel Marra. During these operations,
women were raped and abducted, with internally displaced women accounting for 67
per cent of the victims. In terms of the overall profile of the perpetrators, 96 per cent
were described by victims and witnesses as armed men, of which 76 per cent were
identified by victims as “armed Arab men” or “militia”. Twenty per cent were
identified as members of the security forces, namely the Sudanese Armed Forces, the
Rapid Support Forces, the Central Reserve Police and border guards, including police
officials. The remaining cases were attributed to unidentified assailants or civilians.
The available data does not reflect the actual scale and magnitude of violations, which
are underreported owing to stigma, fear of reprisals, community pressure, weak
institutions and significant access restrictions.
67. Some important response initiatives were undertaken by the Government,
including amendment of the Criminal Act to make a clear distinction between rape
and adultery, and the expansion of the mandate of the Darfur Special Court to include
rape. UNAMID has enhanced interactions with local communities, tailoring
patrolling schedules to women’s livelihood activities. UNICEF continued to support
family and child protection units within the Sudan Police in Darfur, and UNFPA
trained local service providers on the clinical management of rape and distributed
rape kits through the Ministry of Health. The legally discontinued, but still widely
upheld, requirement that victims obtain a specific form (“form 8”) from the police in
order to receive medical care deters reporting. In 2016, the United Nations verified
50 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, concerning 105 victims, reported to law
enforcement officials. Investigations were opened in 6 of the cases, resulting in four
arrests, of which three proceeded to trial. Government data indicates 112 reported
cases of sexual and gender-based violence during 2016, of which 40 were brought to
court, with 13 convictions. In 2015, the United Nations verified 45 cases reported to
the police, leading to eight trials, and in 2014, 63 reports generated two convictions.
As sexual violence cases are not consistently prosecuted, many communities resort to
traditional settlements, which often decree that the victim should marry the
perpetrator. In an encouraging development, in 2016, a court in West Darfur
successfully convicted a police officer for the sexual exploitation of a minor. Despite
the lasting impact of sexual violence on survivors, including those with children born
as a result of rape, no reparations have been paid.
Recommendation
68. I urge the Government of Sudan to ensure unhindered humanitarian access for
the United Nations and its partners to affected communities, and to strengthen
national institutions to deliver survivor-centred justice and services. Further to the
listing of parties in the Sudan in the annex, I reiterate calls for the Government to
facilitate a visit by my Special Representative and to develop a framework of
cooperation to address conflict-related sexual violence.

17-05090

19/32

S/2017/249

Syrian Arab Republic
69. Sexual violence continues to be used by parties to the Syrian conflict as a
systematic tactic of warfare, terrorism and torture. Women and girls have been most
vulnerable in the context of house searches, at checkpoints, in detention faciliti es,
after kidnapping by pro-Government forces, and at border crossings, while men and
boys have been subjected to sexual violence during interrogations in Government -run
detention centres. In areas controlled by ISIL, Syrian women and girls languish under
severe restrictions, with their access to education and employment curtailed.
Thousands of Yazidi women and girls who were captured in Iraq in August 2014 and
trafficked to Syria continue to be held in sexual slavery, while new reports have
surfaced of additional women and children being forcibly transferred from Iraq to
Syria since the start of military operations in Mosul. As the conflict enters its seventh
year, forced marriage, including successive temporary marriages, has become
increasingly prevalent, placing adolescent girls at particular risk of rape, early and
unwanted pregnancy and trauma. Women and children, who represent the vast
majority of those internally displaced, have also experienced sexual exploitation in
camps. Given social norms around honour and shame, the stigma associated with
sexual violence causes acute humiliation to survivors, their families and communities.
The parents or husbands of survivors often reject them in the wake of rape or because
they assume that women and girls were raped while in detention. The lack of services
and fear of retaliation has compelled many survivors to flee the country.
70. In neighbouring countries, which host approximately 80 per cent of Syrian
refugees, financial resources have been largely depleted. Families have turned to
harmful coping strategies, such as exploitative labour and the withdrawal of children
from education to enter into employment or early marriage. While these coping
mechanisms may help a family to meet its immediate needs, they oft en come at the
cost of increased exposure to sexual violence. It also remains a challenge to register
children whose fathers are missing, including children born to survivors of rape,
which places them at heightened risk of statelessness. Women, adolescent girls and
unaccompanied minors are also at risk of sexual exploitation and abuse by informal
employers, landlords and criminal organizations, including forced prostitution and
trafficking networks. Limited services are available to male survivors of sexua l
violence, who may be at risk of arrest pursuant to laws that criminalize same -sex
relations.
71. The establishment in 2016 of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, to provide
recommendations to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria throughout
the political process, recognized the importance of women’s participation. In the
intra-Syrian talks of 2016, the proportion of women in the main delegation was 20
per cent. In terms of accountability, although not a single sexual violence crime
committed by parties to the conflict has been prosecuted, either in Syria or abroad,
the adoption in December 2016 of resolution 71/248 by the General Assembly, in
which it calls for the establishment of an international, impartial and independent
mechanism to support prosecution for the most serious crimes under international
law, is an important development. In the terms of reference for the mechanism the
need for dedicated expertise on sexual violence is noted.
Recommendation
72. I call on all parties to the Syrian conflict to immediately cease the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war or terrorism, and urge such crimes to be taken into account

20/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

in ceasefire agreements, political negotiations, peace processes and accountability
initiatives. I encourage refugee-receiving countries to protect and support Syrian
refugees who may have suffered sexual violence or be at risk of exploitation.
Yemen
73. Reports of sexual and gender-based violence increased in 2016, exacerbated by
the protracted nature of the conflict, widespread insecurity and militarization, the
breakdown of formal and informal protection mechanisms, as well as large -scale
displacement. The massive internal displacement has given rise to negat ive survival
strategies, in both displaced and host communities, such as child marriage and forced
prostitution. Internally displaced women and girls, as well as migrants, refugees and
asylum-seekers, are acutely vulnerable to sexual violence. Daily threat s to their
safety, including sexual harassment, restrict women’s mobility and their ability to
conduct livelihood tasks. There are concerns about possible linkages between
migration, trafficking, and conflict-related sexual violence by armed groups,
including violent extremist groups, operating in Yemen. However, such incidents are
challenging to document as sexual violence in general is vastly underreported owing
to shame, stigma and fear of retaliation, lack of service coverage, and the requirement
that service providers refer cases to the police. The risk of honour crimes or tribal
solutions to rape perpetuates the silence and underreporting.
Recommendation
74. I urge the Yemeni authorities, with support from the international community,
to address sexual violence, including forced/child marriage and forced prostitution,
by establishing safe houses and providing material support to displaced households
headed by women, girls or war widows.

IV. Addressing sexual violence crimes in post-conflict settings
Bosnia and Herzegovina
75. More than two decades after the end of the conflict, survivors of wartime sexual
violence continue to suffer the enduring effects of that crime, including
socioeconomic marginalization and stigma. This leaves many reluctant to register as
victims and thus unable to access redress. The Government and the United Nations
continue to implement the joint programme “Seeking Care, Support and Justice for
Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence”, which is aimed at enhancing the
capacity of service providers, establishing a multisectoral referral system,
harmonizing legislation and combating stigma. The new draft law on victims of
torture in Republika Srpska in 2016 marked a major step forward for securing the
rights of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence to services, justice and
reparations, although safeguards need to be established to prevent registration from
giving rise to stigma. The Decision on Civilian Victims of War of Brcko District was
amended to remove the requirement that survivors must se cure a criminal judgment
before being eligible to access services. The past year also saw the integration of
stigma-prevention efforts into the training of health and psychosocial support
professionals, as well as innovative responses to stigma engaging re ligious groups. In
2016, 80 survivors of wartime sexual violence benefited from economic
empowerment programmes. More than 60 survivors, including internally displaced
persons and returnees, accessed free legal aid as a result of mobile teams being
17-05090

21/32

S/2017/249

deployed to remote areas. Entitlements still vary across entities and cantons, and the
legal obligation to provide economic opportunities, including preferential
employment, to sexual violence survivors remains largely unimplemented. Greater
efforts are also needed to prevent retraumatization. In 2016, several survivors
expressed fear of public identification and intimidation when requests to appear in
court were sent to them via the regular postal system in a small village where the
perpetrators also live.
Recommendation
76. I urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to strengthen national
institutions to uphold the rights of survivors of conflict -related sexual violence to
services, including free legal assistance, reparations, housing and education fo r the
children of rape survivors, and to allocate adequate resources for this purpose. I
further encourage efforts to harmonize legislation to ensure that the rights of survivors
and their children are consistently recognized, irrespective of where they re side.
Côte d’Ivoire
77. The wounds inflicted by the civil war in Côte d’Ivoire, and brought to light
during the post-electoral crisis in 2010-2011, which saw a resurgence of sexual
violence, have yet to fully heal. Nonetheless, the political situation has stabilized. The
constitutional referendum of 30 October, and the parliamentary elections of
18 December both transpired peacefully, with no incidents of sexual violence
reported. During a deployment of the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire to the Bouakan i
region, in response to intercommunal clashes, a soldier attempted to rape an 11 -yearold girl. The military High Command responded immediately, requesting the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) to provide in-situ training to the troops
on the army’s zero-tolerance policy. Following this intervention, no further incidents
were reported in the region. Overall, across the country, UNOCI verified seven cases
of sexual violence committed by FACI soldiers in 2016. In each instance, the victim
was referred to a centre for medical and psychosocial support and judicial action was
taken, resulting in three convictions.
78. Challenges remain with respect to prosecuting sexual violence crimes connected
with the post-electoral crisis. None of the 196 cases of sexual violence documented
by the National Commission of Inquiry, which occurred between October 2010 and
May 2011, have been adjudicated. The only cases that are currently subject to national
or international justice concern individuals affiliated with the former President,
Laurent Gbagbo. For example, the trial of former first lady Simone Ehivet Gbagbo
on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including her alleged role in
rapes and killings by pro-Gbagbo forces, commenced on 31 May in Abidjan. The
perception of partial justice has contributed to entrenching and perpetuating sexual
and gender-based violence across the country. During the reporting period, UNOCI
recorded 62 cases of rape: 13 were gang-rapes and 46 of the victims were children.
Forty-two of the alleged perpetrators were arrested, but only 15 have been tried and
convicted. The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights issued two circulars in 2016
calling on judicial authorities to refrain from classifying rape as a lesser crime
(misdemeanour), and reminding law enforcement officials that medical certificates
are not mandatory. The report of the National Commission for Reconciliation and
Compensation of Victims, presented to the President, Alassane Ouattara, on 19 April,
included a consolidated list of victims of successive crises between 1990 and 2012,
sparking concern that returning refugees, including survivors of conflict -related
22/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

sexual violence, may be denied victim status owing to their omission from the list.
More broadly, there are continuing concerns that women in general, and sexual
violence survivors in particular, may be forgotten victims in the design and delivery
of reparations.
79. As part of efforts to advance implementation of the national programme on
sexual and gender-based violence, United Nations Action convened a workshop in
Abidjan in September to assess implementation gaps and strengthen coordination. In
October, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
organized a conference in Grand-Bassam, which provided a forum for senior military
officers from the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Sudan to exchange good practices and
identify elements for new guidelines geared towards African armies. My Special
Representative also visited the country in May to review the progress achieved and
challenges remaining since the inclusion of the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire in the
list annexed to the present report. Following this visit, President Ouattara signed a
decree, dated 3 June, authorizing the creation of a national committee to combat
conflict-related sexual violence, which would coordinate the Government’s
operational response. Pursuant to the decree, 30 officials of the Forces armées de Côte
d’Ivoire and eight commanders of the Gendarmerie Nationale signed personal
commitments to take action against sexual violence in their ranks. Such measures
have translated into a reduced number of violations attributable to the military. As a
consequence of having taken all reasonable measures in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions, I am pleased to remove the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire from
the list.
Recommendation
80. I commend the commitment of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to address
conflict-related sexual violence and, as a condition of delisting, request the continued
implementation of action plans for the defence and security forces, to ensure that all
perpetrators are held accountable and that survivors receive services, justice and
reparations. The United Nations will assess implementation one year following
delisting.
Nepal
81. A decade after the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, survivors of
conflict-era sexual violence in Nepal continue to face barriers to access to services,
justice and reparations, despite overall progress in the consolidation of peace.
February 2016 marked the end of the first phase of implementation of the na tional
action plan on Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The
Government recognized gaps in meeting its obligations under resolution 1820 (2008)
and committed to allocating a dedicated budget, strengthening coordination and more
closely involving victims’ associations moving forward. The United Nations trained
survivors of wartime sexual violence in advocacy, leadership and resourcemobilization skills, which encouraged many to share their stories, and organized a
peer-counselling workshop for survivors, facilitated by women from Guatemala and
Cambodia. UNICEF partnered with the Ministry of Women, Children and Social
Welfare to ensure that “conflict-affected children”, a category that includes children
born as a result of rape by armed forces or groups during the insurgency, would be
eligible for services and protection from the State. T he country’s transitional justice
commissions, which are operating under severe delays, have received approximately
17-05090

23/32

S/2017/249

250 complaints of conflict-related sexual violence, and will require adequate
resources to process them.
Recommendation
82. I urge the Government of Nepal to formally recognize survivors of conflict related sexual violence as victims of war, enabling them to access national relief and
recovery programmes and helping to reduce stigma; to support the transitional justice
commissions to administer survivor-centred justice; and to focus the second phase of
its national action plan on services and reparations.
Sri Lanka
83. Seven years after the end of its 30-year civil war, Sri Lanka has embarked on a
process of transitional justice and reconciliation. Yet, just as the conflict had a
disproportionate impact on women’s physical and economic security, the post -conflict
environment has placed a heavy financial and care burden on women. Single women
head one quarter of all households. Their plight is compounded by the sociocultural
stigma attached to widowhood and to sexual violence, as well as by the limited
psychosocial support available to those traumatized by war. The culture of violence,
entrenched during the civil war era, is viewed as a driver of continuing gender-based
crimes, which afflict all nine provinces. The situation is exacerbated by weak law
enforcement and delays in the administration of justice.
84. In November 2016, the Committee against Torture observed that serious
allegations of torture of a sexual nature continue. The International Truth and Justice
Project released a report documenting 20 cases of sexual violence and torture,
including eight gang rapes and five rapes of minors, allegedly committed by members
of the police and military intelligence in 2015, and called for effective reform and
vetting of the national security apparatus. The United Nations has requested that the
authorities duly investigate the allegations. On 16 November, the Government
launched a national action plan to address sexual and gender-based violence, which
generated a specific policy to support women-headed households, including in
previously conflict-affected areas of the north and east. In January 2016, the
Government appointed a civil society task force to conduct a national consultation on
the design of an inclusive transitional justice mechanism. The task force, which
includes the voices of sexual violence survivors, has made valuable
recommendations, including on institutional reform.
Recommendation
85. I call on the Government of Sri Lanka to continue to support the meaningful
participation of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in the design and
delivery of transitional justice, and to ensure that there is full accountability, including
of security sector actors, to deter future crimes. I encourage sustained political resolve
and resources for the implementation of national plans to combat sexual and gender based violence and to support female-headed households.

V. Other situations of concern
Burundi

24/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

86. The onset of the political crisis in 2015 led to a pattern of crimes of sexual
violence committed by members of the security forces, including the police, military
and the ruling party’s youth league, the Imbonerakure. Following attacks on military
camps in December 2015, 13 cases of sexual violence occurred as part of reprisals
against communities perceived to support the opposition. In each case, security forces
entered the victim’s home, separated women and girls from their family and subjected
them to rape or gang-rape. Since then, the space for monitoring violations has
drastically diminished. Service-providers indicate that addressing sexual violence by
State forces may imperil their staff and operations. Since th e Government suspended
its cooperation with OHCHR on 11 October 2016, the United Nations has been unable
to verify subsequent reports. For example, between August and November, 19 cases
of sexual violence allegedly involving the police and the Imbonerakure were reported,
but remain unconfirmed. Likewise, hundreds of reports that children were raped
during night patrols and house searches could not be verified. In 2016, such
operations continued on an almost daily basis in areas perceived to be opposition
strongholds. In that context, sexual assault may have served as a form of reprisal or
persecution, often being accompanied by insults based on the victim’s perceived
political or ethnic affiliation.
87. Female-headed households, adolescent girls, widows, internally displaced
persons and returnees face a heightened risk of sexual violence/exploitation in a
climate of impunity and economic fragility. Underreporting owing to stigma,
insecurity and fear of retaliation is compounded where the perpetrators are part of the
State security apparatus or are politically connected. Reports from service providers
indicate that 518 incidents of sexual violence occurred in Burundi or during flight
from the country in 2016. The Government has developed plans to fight gender -based
violence and to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), and 2016 saw
the adoption of new legislation on gender-based violence and the establishment of
specialized gender-based violence chambers to fast-track cases. The Government is
also piloting specialized police units on sexual and gender-based violence in several
provinces.
Recommendation
88. I call on the authorities of Burundi to facilitate human rights monitoring,
including by resuming cooperation with OHCHR; to enable humanitarian actors and
service providers to deliver assistance to sexual violence survivors, including
internally displaced persons and returnees; and to ensure that those responsible for
such crimes are held accountable.

17-05090

25/32

S/2017/249

Nigeria
89. Despite military gains made against Boko Haram, women and girls remain
exposed to the risk of sexual violence and other crimes, including being used as
suicide bombers. Efforts led by the Government to secure the release of the gi rls
abducted from Chibok and others held in captivity continued in 2016. Hundreds
managed to escape or were rescued, with many returning pregnant or with babies,
some having contracted HIV. Their accounts corroborate information received about
forced marriage, forced pregnancy and sexual slavery by Boko Haram. Those living
in Boko Haram-controlled areas who were compelled to marry insurgents face acute
stigma and discrimination. Additional concerns have been raised when women and
children released from Boko Haram are held for prolonged periods by the national
security forces for screening and detention, often on the grounds that they were
married to fighters. Children born to abducted women and girls face ostracism and
guilt by association. While religious and traditional leaders have become increasingly
open to accepting these women and children, many displaced communities remain
deeply distrustful of returnees.
90. Women and girls displaced by conflict face a serious risk of sexual violence.
Approximately 90 per cent of those affected by conflict in north-east Nigeria do not
have access to basic services. As a result, women and girls have been forced to
exchange sex for food and other essential supplies, and early marriages of girls to
older men are on the rise, as an ostensible protection mechanism and source of income
for desperate families. During the reporting period, 43 cases of sexual violence were
allegedly perpetrated by security guards, army officers, camp officials, members of
the Civilian Joint Task Force and vigilantes. In December 2016, nine officers were
reportedly arrested and are currently standing trial. The Government has also
deployed 100 female police officers to displacement sites to make services more
accessible to women and girls. However, despite this progress, and the efforts made
by the United Nations to strengthen service provision, access to lifesaving assistance
is limited. Just 2 per cent of the survivors of gender-based violence that sought
medical care were able to access it. Additionally, it is estimated that almost half of all
survivors decline to report sexual violence because of a lack of trust in formal and
informal justice systems, a prevailing culture of impunity, fear of stigma and personal
risk.
Recommendation
91. I urge the Nigerian authorities to ensure accountability for sexual violence
crimes, improve service delivery and enhance protection measures both in
communities and in settings where women and girls seek refuge. Socioeconomic
reintegration support should be provided to women and girls returning from Boko
Haram captivity, who should be considered victims, not affiliates.

26/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

VI. Recommendations
I urge the Security Council:
(a) To ensure that efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter
terrorism reinforce efforts to prevent sexual violence in conflict, including
through the work of relevant sanctions committees, such as the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015), noting that any person or entity who transfers funds to Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) directly or indirectly in connection with sexual
violence or exploitation would be eligible for listing;
(b) To continue to include sexual violence as part of the designation
criteria for sanctions, to ensure that dedicated gender and conflict-related sexual
violence expertise informs the work of sanctions committees and monitoring
entities and to invite my Special Representative to share information with
sanctions committees, as appropriate;
(c) To continue to address the nexus between trafficking in persons and
conflict-related sexual violence, including by terrorist groups, further to
resolution 2331 (2016);
(d) To support engagement with State and non-State parties to conflict for
specific commitments and prevention plans on conflict-related sexual violence,
in line with resolutions 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013) and 2331 (2016), and to
systematically monitor their compliance;
(e) To employ all means at its disposal to influence State and non-State
parties to conflict to comply with international law, including by referring
matters to the International Criminal Court. Referrals should apply to
individuals who commit, command or condone (by failing to prevent or punish)
sexual violence;
(f) To give due consideration to the risk factors and early-warning signs
of sexual violence in its monitoring of conflict situations, especiall y in relation to
periods of rising violent extremism, political instability, elections, civil strife and
mass population movements;
(g) To use its periodic field visits to focus attention on conflict-related
sexual violence concerns, soliciting the views of affected communities and
survivors’ associations;
(h) To ensure the accelerated deployment of women’s protection advisers
in order to facilitate implementation of successive resolutions on sexual violence
in conflict, including the new monitoring requirements set out in resolution 2331
(2016), and to support the inclusion of such posts in regular budgets.
I encourage Member States and regional organizations:
(a) To revise national legal and policy frameworks to ensure that
survivors of sexual violence committed by armed and/or terrorist groups are
recognized as legitimate victims of conflict and/or terrorism, in order to benefit
from reparations and redress;
(b) To put in place legislative and institutional arrangements to
comprehensively address conflict-related sexual violence and prevent its

17-05090

27/32

S/2017/249

recurrence, including health care, psychosocial support, socioeconomic
reintegration and livelihood assistance; shelters; legal aid; victim and witness
protection laws and programmes; effective prosecution of sexual violence crimes;
safeguards to prevent individuals accused of violations from being recruited,
retained or promoted within the security forces (vetting); the exclusion of such
crimes from general amnesties and statutes of limitations; education that fosters
gender equality; and programmes to ensure that women, including those who
become pregnant as a result of rape, have the information, support and services
that they need, including measures for the safe termination of unwanted
pregnancies. In these efforts, particular attention should be paid to ethnic or
religious minorities, women in rural or remote areas, those living with
disabilities, male survivors, women and children associated with armed groups,
women and children released from situations of abduction, forced marriage,
sexual slavery and trafficking by armed groups, and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons, noting that different forms of sexual violence
may require specialized responses;
(c) To improve conviction rates for crimes of sexual violence by
integrating legal support options with medical and psychosocial care and
extending the reach of these services to remote and conflict-affected areas;
(d) To give due consideration to recognizing conflict-related sexual
violence as a form of persecution that may serve as grounds for asylum or refugee
status;
(e) To ensure that all refugee-receiving countries adopt measures to
mitigate the risk of sexual violence, to make services available to survivors and
to provide them with the option to document their cases for future accountability
processes;
(f) To give consideration to clarifying the legal status of undocumented
refugee children, including children conceived as a result of rape, and the right
of mothers to confer their nationality upon their children, in line with the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
to avoid possible statelessness;
(g) To support community mobilization campaigns to help shift the stigma
of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators, including by engaging
with religious and traditional leaders, as well as local journalists and human
rights defenders;
(h) To increase the representation of women in national police services,
and to establish specialized units within the police, given the positive correlation
between the percentage of female officers and the reporting rates for sexual
violence crimes, and the need to ensure that detained women are held under the
supervision of female guards;
(i) To ensure that ceasefire and peace agreements signed contain
provisions that, at a minimum, stipulate sexual violence as a prohibited act in the
definition of ceasefire;
(j) To ensure that gender capacity is included in ceasefire monitoring and
verification arrangements and teams, which should include both female and
male observers, and call upon mediators to include expertise on gender and
conflict-related sexual violence as part of mediation support teams;

28/32

17-05090

S/2017/249

(k) To ensure that all efforts to document and investigate sexual violence
are survivor-centred and guided by the principles of security, confidentiality,
anonymity and informed consent;
(l) To ensure that regional bodies enhance cooperation in terms of
information-sharing and documentation, the detection of and assistance to
trafficking victims, the training of security forces, extradition and legal
assistance and the exchange of good practices in combatting sexual violence
crimes;
(m) To ensure that national action plans on women, peace and security and
on preventing violent extremism are complementary, and to work with the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to include relevant information on
trafficking in persons and sexual violence in country assessments, as
appropriate, in close cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, consistent with the recognition of the links between transnational
organized crime and the financing of terrorism in resolution 2331 (2016);
(n) To train peacekeeping personnel on gender sensitivity, preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse, and addressing conflict-related sexual violence as
a mandatory component of predeployment training, as well as on ways to better
identify and respond to indicators of trafficking in persons in areas affected by
conflict, in line with resolution 2331 (2016);
(o) To ensure that national forces listed in the annex to this report or those
listed for grave violations against children are not deployed to peacekeeping
operations;
(p) To address funding shortfalls for sexual and gender-based violence
programming and sexual and reproductive health care in conflict-affected
settings, given that these are lifesaving interventions;
(q) To draw upon the expertise of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict and United Nations Action, and to ensure
sustainable and regular funding for their valuable work.

17-05090

29/32

S/2017/249

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council
The following list does not purport to be comprehensive, but rather includes
parties for whom credible information is available. It should be noted that the names
of countries appear only to indicate the locations in which parties are suspected of
committing violations.
Parties in the Central African Republic
1.

(e)

Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Ex-Séléka coalition;

(c)

Révolution et justice;

(d)

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain;

Anti-balaka forces, including associated elements of the armed forces of the
Central African Republic.

Parties in Côte d’Ivoire
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Alliance patriotique de l’ethnie Wé;

(b)

Front pour la libération du Grand Ouest;

(c)

Mouvement ivoirien de libération de l’ouest de la Côte d’Ivoire;

(d)

Union patriotique de résistance du Grand Ouest.

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

(b)

(e)

30/32

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain;

Allied Democratic Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda;
(c)

Forces pour la défense du Congo;

(d)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri/“Colonel” Adirodhu Mbadhu/
“Colonel” Kakado;
(f)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(g)

Mai Mai Cheka/Nduma Defence for Congo;

(h)

Mai Mai Kifuafua;

(i)

Mai Mai Simba Manu;

17-05090

S/2017/249

(j)

Mai Mai Simba Mangaribi;

(k)

Mai Mai Simba/Lumumba;

(l)

Nyatura;

(m) All Raia Mutomboki factions.
2.

State actors:
(a)

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo;*

(b)

Police nationale congolaise.*

Parties in Iraq
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Parties in Mali
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad;

(b)

Ansar Eddine;

(c)

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’ouest;

(d)

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb;

(e)

Groupe d’autodéfense Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés.

Parties in Somalia
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

Al-Shabaab.

State actors:
(a)

Somali National Army;*

(b)

Somali national police force* (and allied militia);

(c)

Puntland military.

Parties in the Sudan
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

Justice and Equality Movement.

State actors:
(a)

Sudanese armed forces;

(b)

Rapid Support Forces.

Parties in South Sudan
1.

Non-State actors:

* Party has committed to adopting measures to address conflict-related sexual violence.
17-05090

31/32

S/2017/249

2.

(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Justice and Equality Movement;

(c)

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition;*

State actors:
(a)

Sudan People’s Liberation Army;*

(b)

South Sudan National Police Service.*

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant;

(b)

Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham (formerly Nusrah Front);

(c)

Army of Islam;

(d)

Ahrar al-Sham;

(e)

Pro-Government forces, including the National Defence Forces militia.

State actors:
(a)

Syrian armed forces;

(b)

Intelligence services.

Other parties of concern on the agenda of the Security Council
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

32/32

Boko Haram.

17-05090
