United Nations

A/RES/57/194

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/554)]

57/194. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and its resolutions on the status of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1
most recently its resolution 55/81 of 4 December 2000,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 in particular section II.B
of the Declaration, relating to equality, dignity and tolerance,
Reiterating the need to intensify the struggle to eliminate all forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance throughout the world,
Welcoming the affirmation that universal adherence to and full implementation
of the Convention are of paramount importance for promoting equality and nondiscrimination in the world, as stated in the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 3
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is one of the most widely
accepted human rights instruments adopted under the auspices of the United
Nations,
Mindful of the importance of the contributions of the Committee to the
effective implementation of the Convention and to the efforts of the United Nations
to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well
as all other forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin,
Noting that the reports submitted by States parties under the Convention
contain, inter alia, information about the causes of, as well as measures to combat,
_______________
1

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
2

02 55112

A/RES/57/194

contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
Emphasizing the obligation of all States parties to the Convention to take
legislative, judicial and other measures in order to secure full implementation of the
provisions of the Convention,
Recalling its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992, in which it welcomed
the decision, taken on 15 January 1992 by the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 4 to amend paragraph 6 of article 8 of the Convention and to add a
new paragraph, as paragraph 7 of article 8, with a view to providing for the
financing of the Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations, and
reiterating its deep concern that the amendment to the Convention has not yet
entered into force,
Stressing the importance of enabling the Committee to function smoothly and
to have all necessary facilities for the effective performance of its functions under
the Convention,
I
Reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination on its fifty-eighth and fifty-ninth 5 and its sixtieth and sixty-first 6
sessions;
2.
Commends the Committee for its continuing efforts to contribute to the
effective implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,1 especially the examination of reports under
article 9 and action on communications under article 14 of the Convention, which
contribute to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
3.
Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligation, under article 9,
paragraph 1, of the Convention, to submit their periodic reports on measures taken
to implement the Convention in due time;
4.
Expresses its concern about the fact that a great number of reports are
overdue and continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes
an obstacle to the full implementation of the Convention;
5.
Encourages States parties to the Convention whose reports are seriously
overdue to avail themselves of the advisory services and technical assistance that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights can provide,
upon their request, for the preparation of the reports;
6.
Commends the Committee for its continuing contribution to the
prevention of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and
welcomes its relevant action thereon;

_______________
4

See CERD/SP/45, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 and corrigendum
(A/56/18 and Corr.1).
6
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/57/18).
5

2

A/RES/57/194

7.
Encourages the Committee to continue to contribute fully to the
implementation of the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
and its revised Programme of Action, 7 including by continuing to cooperate and
exchange information with United Nations bodies and mechanisms and
intergovernmental organizations, in particular with the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and with the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as with nongovernmental organizations;
8.
Encourages States parties to continue to include a gender perspective in
their reports to the Committee, and invites the Committee to take into account a
gender perspective in the implementation of its mandate;
9.
Expresses its appreciation to the Committee for its valuable participation
in and contributions to the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, including its preparatory
process;
10. Invites the Committee to consider the relevant provisions of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action3 in the discharge of its mandate;
II
Financial situation of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial
situation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;8
2.
Expresses its profound concern about the fact that a number of States
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination 1 have still not fulfilled their financial obligations, as shown in the
report of the Secretary-General, and strongly appeals to all States parties that are in
arrears to fulfil their outstanding financial obligations under article 8, paragraph 6,
of the Convention;
3.
Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to accelerate their
domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment to the Convention
concerning the financing of the Committee and to notify the Secretary-General
expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment, as decided upon at
the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 15 January 1992,4 endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111 and further reiterated at the
Sixteenth Meeting of States Parties on 16 January 1996;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate financial
arrangements and to provide the necessary support, including an adequate level of
Secretariat assistance, to ensure the functioning of the Committee and to enable it to
cope with its increasing amount of work;

_______________
7
8

Resolution 49/146, annex.
A/57/333.

3

A/RES/57/194

5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to invite those States parties to the
Convention that are in arrears to pay the amounts in arrears, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
III
Status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 9 on the status of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;1
2.
Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that have ratified the
Convention or acceded thereto, which now stands at one hundred and sixty-five;
3.
Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its provisions are
necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Third Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination and for the implementation of the commitments
undertaken under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance;3
4.
Urges all States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to
ratify it or accede to it as a matter of urgency, with a view to achieving universal
ratification by 2005;
5.
Urges States to limit the extent of any reservation they lodge to the
Convention and to formulate any reservation as precisely and as narrowly as
possible so as to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the object and
purpose of the Convention or otherwise contrary to international treaty law, to
review their reservations on a regular basis with a view to withdrawing them, and to
withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention
or that are otherwise incompatible with international treaty law;
6.
Requests the States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to
consider making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
7.
Decides to consider, at its fifty-ninth session, under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”, the reports of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its sixty-second and sixty-third and its
sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions, the report of the Secretary-General on the
financial situation of the Committee and the report of the Secretary-General on the
status of the Convention.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
9

4

A/57/334.
