S/PV.7935

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7935

th meeting
Tuesday, 9 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13036 (E)
*1713036*

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Mogherini.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great honour for me to speak once again before the
Security Council.
(spoke in English)
It is an honour to address the Security Council once
again and to do so on a very symbolic day. Today, 9 May,
is Europe Day, when the European Union celebrates
being one and united. Sixty-seven years ago on this
very day, the French statesman Robert Schumann
put forward an idea that was revolutionary for those
times — that European States could share part of their
sovereignty to prevent any future war in Europe. After
thousands of years of European wars, two World Wars,
the most devastating conflicts in human history, had
started in Europe and spread to the whole planet.
Our founding fathers and mothers imagined a
renewed European continent — a continent that, instead
of exporting war, would promote peace, democracy
and human development within its borders and in the
world. Seven years later, the union took its first steps,
and this year we celebrate 60 years of our European
Union — when Europeans simply realized that it was
by far more convenient for all of us to cooperate instead
of fighting each other, and when they chose cooperation
over confrontation, building over these 60 years the
most successful peace project in human history.
2/24

09/05/2017

It is therefore really not only a pleasure but an
honour for me to celebrate this historic day with the
United Nations and the Security Council. Let me say
that in recent months some believed that our sixtieth
anniversary would also mark the beginning of the
end for the European Union and the beginning of its
decline. Indeed, our British friends have decided to
leave us, which is very sad for all of us. But life goes
on, and the European Union goes on as well. Since the
United Kingdom referendum last year, we Europeans
have recommitted to be the strong and united power
that our citizens and our partners need and deserve. The
European Union is, and will continue to be, the reliable
cooperative partner — I would say the indispensable
partner—the world needs. First and foremost, we will
remain an indispensable partner for our neighbours and
our region.
Let me start with the Balkans. With our support
and constant cooperation with the United Nations,
our friends in the Balkans have taken impressive
steps forward, even at times in the most difficult
and terrible of circumstances: steps forward towards
peace and regional cooperation, economic growth and
the European Union. One thing is clear. The future
of our Union will not be at 27; we will have new
members joining our Union in the future, starting from
the Balkans.
(spoke in French)
Beyond our continent, we are an indispensable
partner for a more cooperative, multilateral and peaceful
world. We are an indispensable partner for the United
Nations and of all those that believe multilateralism
is key to a world order that works. In celebrating our
sixtieth anniversary, the Secretary-General stated that:
“In this time of global division, the vision provided
by the European Union of cooperation and
integration is more important than ever”.
(spoke in English)
I would therefore like to begin with our vision. It is
what we call the European way — the European way
to peace and security, the European way to growth
and sustainable development, the European way to
international relations. This European way is also
the United Nations way. And that explains why all
our actions and initiatives are always taken in full
coordination and partnership with the United Nations.
We believe in the United Nations because we believe in
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7935

the same principles and values, and all communities are
built upon the same fundamental ideals.

United Nations-led political process with all our means
and determination.

First of all, we believe that security is not only about
military might. It is about finding common ground,
cooperation over confrontation, and diplomacy. It is
about human development and economic growth. It is
about democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
When António Guterres highlights the importance of
conflict prevention and mediation, his words resonate
with the European way to security, and in particular
with the European Union Global Strategy and our
integrated approach to conflict and crisis.

As we did at the Brussels Conference, we have also
prepared the ground for the international community to
start looking into the post-war reconstruction of Syria.
It is clear for us that reconstruction will begin only
when a political transition is under way and a political
agreement is achieved in Geneva. But we have lost the
peace too many times not to have learned a lesson.
We believe that, once the war is over, we will need
collectively to invest in reconciliation, stabilization and
the reconstruction of the country. That will be powerful
leverage for peace and a dividend of peace for Syrians
and for the region at large.

When one reads the Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, or on youth, peace and
security, the rationale is the same as in our own work
to strengthen resilience inside and around Europe. As
Europeans, we are turning those concepts into practice
each and every day. When a peace deal was announced
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, the European
Union was there to help open a path from peace to full
reconciliation. We have some European experiences in
that vein. When President Juan Manuel Santos went to
Europe to receive the Nobel Peace Prize, he came to us
at the European Union in Brussels straight from Oslo
and Stockholm. Together we signed a document on a
European trust fund that today is helping Colombia
reap the economic dividends of peace. I understand that
the Council was able to witness our work for itself, it
having just returned from a field visit to Colombia.
Take another example. Just one month ago in
Brussels we convened, together with SecretaryGeneral Guterres, the European Union Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Our
primary goal was, and still is, to address the urgency
and dramatic humanitarian situation faced by Syrians,
both inside and outside of their country, and to support
host communities. In addition, in the difficult hours
after the chemical attack in Idlib province, we also
worked together with the United Nations and with most
Council members to strengthen the world’s support to
the United Nations-led negotiations in Geneva and to
a political solution. Yesterday I spoke with Staffan de
Mistura, as I often do, to coordinate the United Nations
and European Union work on Syria. We are extremely
supportive of his decision to resume intra-Syrian
political talks in Geneva as of next week. The
European Union is, and will continue to be, actively
and strongly engaged and committed in supporting the

On each of those strands of work, the international
community will have to preserve a fragile unity in
Syria. The Council knows that better than anyone
else. To that end, the European Union is determined to
continue mobilizing all its resources in support of the
work of the United Nations to put an end to this war.
That is the European way: addressing the urgency and
the long-term humanitarian the security and diplomatic
needs at the same time.
Moving from one continent to another, the same
approach shaped the Brussels conference for the Central
African Republic, which we organized together with
United Nations and which I chaired along with President
Faustin Archange Touadéra. We managed to mobilize
more than €2 billion in support of the Government’s
priorities. Now it is time to implement those pledges.
The European Union is not only the largest donor, we
are also present on the ground with our military training
mission, working in close cooperation with United
Nations forces, as we do everywhere we are present. By
the way, having mentioned the need to implement the
pledges, the European Union is always the international
player that implements all the pledges it makes.
The European Union is also increasingly active
as a security provider worldwide. Our member States
contribute almost 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget, collectively making us the
largest contributor. In addition to that, the European
Union’s 15 military and civilian operations worldwide
work in constant cooperation with the United Nations.
Let me just mention Operation Sophia, off the coast of
Libya, which the Security Council has twice endorsed
with a certain degree of unity, for which I would like to
thank members.

17-130363/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The tasks of European Union military operations
today include not only dismantling the networks of
smugglers operating off the coast of Libya; we have
also completed the training of the first group of Libyan
coast guard personnel. I myself was honoured to hand
out the diplomas to participants, in quite a moving
ceremony on the flagship of Operation Sophia in
Malta. We also delivered to them the first motorboats,
so that the security of the territorial waters can be in
their hands.
And, as mandated by the Security Council,
Operation Sophia is also enforcing the arms embargo.
Just last week, we seized a shipment of weapons
and ammunition. The Council’s endorsement of our
Operation is a great sign of the trust that this institution
places in the men and women serving under the
European flag, doing it the European way in the context
of the United Nations.
We take this responsibility very seriously. Last
year, just days after my briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7705), I presented our Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. The Strategy envisages
greater European cooperation on security and defence.
In less than a year’s time, we have taken more steps
towards a European Union of security and defence
than in the previous 60 years. More cooperation on
European defence means more efficient spending,
better capabilities and more security for our citizens
and for the world. But it also means becoming an even
more reliable partner for our neighbours and friends,
starting with the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and many regional organizations
with which we partner on security issues.
Yet, as I said at the outset, we consider our military
capabilities as only one element of our security strategy.
To prevent conflict, you also need good development
policies and strong State institutions. Peace is never
sustainable without decent infrastructure, good health
care and education, participation or democracy. This is
what we call resilience, and the United Nations remains
for us a fundamental partner in this kind of work.
That is why the European Union’s voluntary
contributions to the United Nations funds and agencies
amount to half of its total budget. This means we
proudly and smartly invest in them as much as the rest
of the world combined. We believe that it is in our best
interests to do so. Our contributions — to the World
Food Programme to prevent humanitarian crises, to
4/24

09/05/2017

UNICEF to help children in war-torn countries go to
school and to prevent radicalization, to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to assist
millions of displaced people — are all contributions to
our own common security.
So let me be very clear and speak directly to our
American friends. It is essential for us that we all keep
investing in these United Nations agencies. They are
as important to global peace and security as defence
spending, and sometimes even more important. And we
Europeans consider this support for the United Nations
system as crucial investments in our own security. Take
the terrible famine that has hit the Horn of Africa. It has
the potential to make a security situation that is fragile
even worse and turn it into an actual security situation.
This also serves as a powerful reminder that climate
change is real and is already having an impact on our
security environments. Everything is linked.
We therefore continue to expect that the United
States will find a way to remain committed to the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. I know that there is
an ongoing debate, which we greatly respect, but 195
countries have signed the deal on climate change and
there will be 195 different paths to meeting the Paris
goals and honouring the Agreement. I am sure there is
room for the United States Administration to find its
own path, as it is already part of what the world has
agreed together. The Paris Agreement shows the right
approach to the challenges of our era. The international
community managed to come together and seek
common solutions beyond the traditional divides.
Over the past few years, we have already
managed to overcome these divides. The Sustainable
Development Goals were a key achievement for us. This
month — next week, actually — the European Council
will adopt a new consensus on development that brings
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Agenda
to the core of our development policies, both at the
European and national levels. It will be a pleasure
for me to welcome Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed in Brussels that day.
I believe that the greatest divide in today’s world
is between those who believe that international politics
are a zero-sum game and those who are working to build
win-win solutions on common ground. The European
way is in constant search for win-win solutions, and
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the essence of the United Nations is to represent a
space where compromise can always prevail over
confrontation. That is why I say the European way is
the United Nations way.
This search for win-win solutions is another field
where the European way and the United Nations way
converge perfectly. We saw it last year at the United
Nations Summit for Refugees and Migrants. Instead of
focusing on what divides us, the North and the South, the
developing and developed — even if I personally hate
these two words — we looked for cooperative solutions,
for partnerships — what we call “compacts”. Since
then, the European Union has worked on partnerships
with five African countries, including Ethiopia and
Senegal, whose representatives are both sitting in the
Security Council today, able to bear witness to the
fact that this search for win-win solutions cannot be
imposed by one side on the other. Our approach is that
we can only agree together on what is good for both,
which is why we are defining different priorities for our
cooperation with each of our partners. This cooperative
approach is already producing some concrete results,
and we believe that this work can feed the discussion
on reaching a global compact for refugees and migrants
within the United Nations framework. Let me add
that our cooperation with United Nations agencies on
migration is constant and extremely positive.
I would like to mention in particular the situation
in Libya, which, as Security Council members know, is
very close to the European heart. In Libya, we see that
the conditions of migrants stranded in the country are
dramatic. For this reason, we are funding a €90 million
support package for Libya in support of the work of the
International Organization for Migration, UNHCR and
United Nations Development Programme inside Libya.
We think this is the way. Confrontational approaches
lead nowhere. Between win-win and lose-lose, the
European Union has picked sides. We always stand
on the side of dialogue and partnership. Where others
might see conflict, we look for cooperation. In times of
global disorder, when instability spreads from one side
of the world to the other, building win-win solutions is
difficult, but for us it is an absolute necessity. There is
no sustainable alternative to that.
That is certainly true in terms of counter-terrorism.
The attacks in Europe over the last year tell us that
cross-border cooperation is of the utmost importance.
We therefore support Antonio Guterres’ proposal to
establish a United Nations office on Counter-terrorism,

S/PV.7935

to be headed by an under-secretary-general. His
proposal could enhance coordination and effectiveness
in our work, to the benefit of all.
Security today is a truly global issue. Let us look
at an obvious example that the Security Council has
had to deal with several times recently and in a very
important manner — the situation in the Korean
peninsula. A military escalation with North Korea
would lead to devastating consequences. We believe
that we all have an interest in avoiding confrontation
and pushing for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to re-engage with the international community. I
have been following very closely the past few hours the
results of the elections in the Republic of Korea to see
if that will open new avenues of engagement.
This leads me to a third point before I conclude.
Another essential feature of the European way is that we
believe in a global order based on rules that are agreed
together and respected by all, as should be the case for
non-proliferation. In our chaotic era, rules are too often
perceived, globally but also in our own countries, as
a constraint for some, more than a guarantee for all.
But more power politics is the perfect recipe for further
destabilization. International rules for us are not a threat
but a protection for every nation’s autonomy. These
rules include territorial integrity and the inviolability
of borders. For this reason, we do not and will not
recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. We
will continue to work to bring the conflict in eastern
Ukraine to an end, with the full implementation of the
Minsk Agreements.
When any such violations occur, we are all less
secure. When accountability is not guaranteed, the
credibility of the entire international system is called
into question. We have repeated time and again, to move
on to another subject, that after the chemical attack in
Syria, for instance, that accountability for those crimes
must be guaranteed. We therefore fully support the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in its important and delicate work. We believe that
this is the correct place, the correct forum, where
accountability should be guaranteed.
(spoke in French)
When we speak of multilateralism, it is not a
rhetorical profession of faith. It is a matter of taking
these rules seriously, investing in multilateral
institutions and seeing in the United Nations the overall
framework within which our actions take place. It is not

17-130365/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

an ideological posture, but a calculated and pragmatic
choice at the same time. No world Power is strong
enough to put an end to the crises of our time. Each
crisis implicates too many actors and involves too many
issues. Any contribution is welcome, and no one can
contribute in a vacuum.
(spoke in English)
With regard to the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, last year we revived the Middle East Quartet
and reached an unprecedented consensus among us on
the risks for the two-State solution and on practical
recommendations. We must preserve and enlarge
that unity, for instance through cooperation between
the European Union and the League of Arab States
and between the Quartet and Arab States. I see the
representative of Egypt sitting here as one of the key
players in this respect. I was honoured to discuss these
perspectives at the summit of the League of Arab States
in Jordan last month. Of course, we need the Israelis
and the Palestinians first of all to directly negotiate with
each other, supported by the accompanying efforts of
the international community, starting with the United
States, the European Union, Russia, the United Nations
and all those that believe that peace needs the direct
involvement of the two parties but also our contribution
to help them reach a solution.
Different initiatives can make important
contributions to a peace process. In some situations,
we need to be imaginative and look for new channels
when the traditional formats seem to fail. This seems to
be the case for Venezuela, where it is vital to stop the
escalation and establish a new form of mediation that
can be agreed to by all sides. We stand ready to help in
any useful way in support of any helpful initiative that
can be put in place.
The European Union is not interested in photo
opportunities. Between a theatrical empty statement
and a silent effective mediation, we will always
choose the latter. In our view, the real impact matters
more than the headlines. In all cases, coordination
and complementarity are the key and the best way to
guarantee coordination is by working together with the
United Nations.
Peace for Syria can come only through negotiations
among the Syrian parties in Geneva. In that connection,
I would like to once again thank Staffan de Mistura for
his incredible work and leadership.
6/24

09/05/2017

When it comes to Yemen, the European Union is
sponsoring track-two and peacebuilding initiatives, but
those efforts need to feed into a United Nations process.
In Libya, a window of opportunity has just opened.
We firmly support such an opportunity and believe
that the Libyans must seize this moment. We are fully
behind all United Nations efforts to bring a political
solution to the crisis.
Whatever the format, whatever the initiative, we
believe that the United Nations must be the centre
of gravity of all peacebuilding efforts, carried out
in an effective manner. Only the United Nations can
guarantee the coherence of the process and the strength
of the outcome and implementation.
The nuclear deal with Iran shows the way forward,
in our view. It set a milestone for non-proliferation,
making everyone more secure — in the region, in
Europe and in the world. World Powers negotiated the
deal, but the agreement was immediately ratified by the
Security Council. The deal now belongs to the entire
international community, not only to us who were in
that room in Vienna. The International Atomic Energy
Agency has certified its implementation five times.
That is the European way. Enforcing and strengthening
the rules of non-proliferation, we brought to an end 12
years of confrontation through peaceful dialogue. It is
the European way and it is the way of the United Nations.
A successful deal makes the whole system more
credible because it shows that we can collectively
deliver on our citizens’ needs. The best way to preserve
and reinforce that credibility is by making the United
Nations system more effective. Therefore, we stand
behind the Secretary-General’s reform agenda on the
peace and security pillar, the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, and United Nations
management reform. The agenda has the potential to
make the whole United Nations family less fragmented,
more united and coherent.
The European Union cares about the United
Nations as a precious tool. In 60 years, we have become
a super-Power for peace, security and democracy.
We are accompanying reconciliation processes in all
corners of the world, from Afghanistan to Myanmar.
We are helping our Eastern partners to strengthen
their economies and their institutions and bolster their
resilience — and in just a few days we will announce
a visa liberalization agreement with our Ukrainian
friends. We are finding new ways to support Africa’s
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7935

growth, together with African Governments, the
African Union, the private sector and civil society.

method, the constructive spirit of agreement, and
by respect for freedom”.

In 60 years, the European Union has become not
only the most successful peace project in the world, but
also an indispensable partner to move beyond the current
disorder and to try to build a more cooperative world
order together. We will always return to this centre of
gravity, this pivot of a rules-based international system.
Because the European way is the way of the United
Nations. The European vision is the vision of the United
Nations. Whoever wants to invest in this system, will
find in the European Union a partner and a friend — a
reliable, constructive and cooperative partner.

Because of the foundations upon which it is built,
the European Union is a natural partner and ally to the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We are also joined in our common
commitment to deliver a more peaceful, equitable and
sustainable world, as envisioned in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am delighted to see High
Representative Mogherini in the Security Council
this morning. Her briefing was truly inspirational.
Her points about the win-win nature of a cooperation
approach, of a rules-based international order and of
strong multilateralism with the United Nations at its
centre is an important message.
It is particularly fitting that she is in the Council
today on Europe Day, 9 May. As she said, today we
mark 60 years since the Treaty establishing the
European Community and 67 years since the Schuman
Declaration, which set the European continent on an
unprecedented journey from the ashes of war and division
towards recovery, reconciliation and, ultimately, to the
European Union (EU) we know today. The European
project has been the single most important institutional
source of peace and stability in Europe since the end of
the Second World War. With a vision of Europe whole
and free, based on democratic values, a rules-based
security order and shared economic prosperity, it has
been the ultimate conflict-prevention mechanism.
Today should also be seen as a celebration of the
power of multilateral cooperation to deliver peace and
development. That belief was at the heart of Europe’s
founding fathers, who, in the words of the former Italian
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Alcide
De Gasperi, believed that the future would
“not be built through force, nor the desire to conquer,
but by the patient application of the democratic

We share a commitment to a world based on the
core principles of democracy, the rule of law, and the
universality and indivisibility of human rights. That
commitment to the United Nations is clearly stated in
the Treaty on European Union, which enshrines the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Effective multinationalism is at the heart of how
the European Union engages with the wider world.
Therefore, it is clear that a strong United Nations is a
cornerstone of the EU’s common foreign and security
policy, and that a strong EU can significantly contribute
to a strong United Nations.
The opening line of the Schuman Declaration called
for creative efforts proportionate to the dangers which
threaten world peace. This call to adapt in response
to a changing world is as relevant today as it was in
1950. The Secretary-General is seeking to respond to
that imperative through his renewed focus on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace and through his efforts
to reform how the United Nations works to make it
more effective in dealing with the challenges of today
and tomorrow. We fully support his efforts.
The United Nations reviews on peace and security
emphasize the need for strengthened partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In that context, the strategic partnership between the
EU and the United Nations in the fields of peacekeeping
and crisis management is important. I would like to
thank the European External Action Service and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
efforts in implementing that partnership.
The European Union seeks to actively contribute
to peace and security in Europe and beyond. It does
that as a committed partner of the United Nations, in
many ways. Let me highlight just a few. First of all,
the European Union is an advocate for international
law and for a rules-based international order with a
strong United Nations at its heart. That is why the EU

17-130367/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

has reiterated its unwavering support for Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Secondly,
through
its
enlargement
and
neighbourhood policies, the EU helps strengthen
democracy and human rights among its eastern and
southern neighbours. In the western Balkans, the
Security Council has handed over primary responsibility
for security and stability to the EU in countries that
were once subject to large United Nations operations
and that, in many cases today, are turning into security
providers in their own right.
Thirdly, the European Union has actively
contributed to peace and security beyond the region of
Europe and across all continents. It has done so, for
example, from its contribution in Colombia, to the
Aceh Monitoring Mission in Indonesia, to stabilization
in Iraq and Afghanistan, to its maritime operations off
the coast off Somalia and Libya, to its comprehensive
policy in cooperation with countries and regional actors
for security, peace and development in the Sahel, to its
support for African Union peace operations — not least
the African Union Mission in Somalia — through the
African Peace Facility.
Finally, as the world’s largest humanitarian donor,
the EU provides needs-based humanitarian aid, in line
with humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Cooperation between
the EU and the United Nations is strong, as was
evidenced by the process leading to the agreement
on the ambitious Grand Bargain. A fast and efficient
humanitarian response that reaches those who are
most vulnerable is contingent on continuing, and
deepened, coordination and cooperation between our
two organizations.
In conclusion, the European Union’s Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy gives it a
renewed framework for global action in support of
peace and development, as we just heard. We hope it
can contribute to strengthening the partnership between
our organizations even further. The European Union is
a champion of multilateralism and a shining example of
what multilateralism can achieve. While the challenges
that Europe and the international community face today
could not have been imagined by the EU’s founders, the
principles on which they built it remain relevant as we
seek to build a better future for all.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
8/24

09/05/2017

Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security Council
and to thank her warmly for her briefing.
As we do every year on 9 May, today the States
members of the European Union celebrate Europe Day
in honour of the shared project that they have brought
to life together since the signing of the Treaty of Rome
more than 60 years ago now. The decision to hold this
annual meeting of the Council on the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
on this symbolic day is anything but trivial. It reflects
the closeness of two organizations that share the
same values and whose areas of joint intervention
are constantly increasing. It is also testament to the
huge importance that the United Nations has for the
European Union in its conduct of its external policies,
as shown by Ms. Mogherini’s presence in New York
today, on this special day for all Europeans, and I thank
her for it once again.
Today the European Union is a major player
in peacekeeping and a strategic partner of the
United Nations in that area. As with other regional
organizations, its role is becoming ever more central
to the implementation of peacekeeping operations,
whether through financing, military contributions or
political support. The European Union’s numerous
missions, military and civilian, within the framework
of its common security and defence policy, help to
implement Security Council decisions in many regions
of the world. That is particularly the case in Europe
itself, where, for example, it contributes to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to strengthening
the rule of law in Kosovo; in Africa, including in
Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic and
Somalia, where it helps to strengthen African crisisresponse capabilities structurally and provides crucial
funding for African peace-support operations; and in
responding to cross-cutting threats through its efforts
to combat migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean and
maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia. I could give
many more examples.
We should keep in mind the financial contribution
that European countries make to peacekeeping
operations, covering 40 per cent of the total budget
for peacekeeping — but also on the human front, as
in Mali, for instance, where more than 1,000 European
Blue Helmets are working with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali with unprecedented means at their disposal. More
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7935

broadly, the European Union intervenes in support of
peace and security by using the full range of its tools
within a global approach designed to promote political
solutions and address the underlying causes of conflicts
and terrorism in depth. That makes it entirely consistent
with the Secretary-General’s vision for action by the
international community throughout cycles of conflict,
from prevention to peacebuilding.

the European Union’s proactive efforts are too often
downplayed or misunderstood. It continues to be by
far the biggest provider of humanitarian aid to refugees
around the world. Its operations, with EUNAVFOR
Sophia in the forefront, have saved the lives of tens
of thousands of people in distress in the waters of the
Mediterranean and have been combating the migranttrafficking networks in the Mediterranean.

The European Union is also a core partner of the
Security Council in its efforts to reach lasting solutions
to the major crises on its agenda. Some examples of that
include the Syrian issue, where the European Union
has added its voice to those emphasizing the urgency
of resuming inter-Syrian negotiations with a view to
setting up a political transition that accords with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). That
can be achieved only in an environment where there is a
sustained cessation of hostilities and free, unhindered,
consistent access to humanitarian aid.

The EU is not ignoring the importance of tackling
the underlying causes of the issue, as it has demonstrated
through the priority it has given to financing for
development in implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its major financial
support to countries of origin and transit. To cite just
one example, the European Union contributes well over
50 per cent of governmental assistance to development
globally. So while it cannot solve the migrant crisis
on its own, it contributes its full share of political,
security, financial, moral and human responsibility in
attempting to respond as effectively as possible.

Another such example is in Libya, where the
European Union is deployed alongside the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in a major effort
to enable the Presidential Council of Prime Minister
Serraj to combat the threat posed by the growing
presence there of terrorist groups. In addition, through
the European Union Sophia military operation in
the Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR),
deployed in international waters off the Libyan coast,
and based on the relevant Council resolutions, the
Union is also helping to fight migrant smuggling and
strengthen the implementation of the arms embargo
on Libya.
A third example is the crisis in Ukraine, in which
the European Union has pursued a policy of dialogue
and firm support for the work of the Normandy group,
whose efforts will continue in the months to come. The
European sanctions are intended not as punishment
but rather as encouragement to the parties involved
to implement the provisions that the Security Council
has endorsed to bring about an end to the crisis, that
is, the package of measures for implementing the
Minsk agreements.
Lastly, the European Union is a leading actor in the
response to the global migrant crisis. In the face of what
appears to be the greatest crisis of displaced persons
and refugees since the end of the Second World War, in
which we must show both solidarity and responsibility,

Finally, I would like to echo a remark of
Ms. Mogherini’s and note the deep attachment that
France, and our community of nations as a whole, has
to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and its full
implementation, which represents one of the greatest
challenges of our time and which needs all of our
engagement. I would like to conclude by emphasizing
once again a fundamental point of convergence between
the United Nations and the European Union, which is
their shared commitment to multilateralism and a world
where the law is stronger than mere might. That is one
of the elements that go to make the European Union one
of the pillars of today’s international order, far beyond
its role as a regional organization.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this meeting on
Europe Day, and of course High Representative Federica
Mogherini for her briefing and her words. As a member
of the Security Council and a founding member of the
European Union, Italy attaches great importance to
this meeting and to the cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union..
About one month ago we celebrated in Rome the
sixtieth anniversary of the Rome Treaty and signed
a new declaration that affirms the tangible value
and current relevance of the European project. As
highlighted by Ms. Mogherini, the EU stands today

17-130369/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

as a key world player and as a provider of peace and
development throughout the world.
In that vein, together with our European partners,
we are committed to making a constructive contribution
to strengthening the European voice at the United
Nations and in the Security Council. The decision to
split our term in the Council with another founding
member of the European Union, the Netherlands, was
shaped by our shared European values.
We live in a time of interconnected, evolving
challenges that require transnational comprehensive
solutions. The complexity of destabilizing factors
threatening our societies entails a multidimensional
response in which security, human rights and
development are closely intertwined. The United
Nations, as well as the EU and its member States, have
developed and incorporated a holistic approach into
their strategies — the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the sustaining peace agenda and
the European Union Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy, which was mentioned by the
High Representative.
(spoke in French)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union, under and beyond Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, is based on a
natural partnership that links the two organizations
as communities of shared values and principles. That
cooperation could be further developed today on the
basis of that shared understanding of the complexity of
current challenges.
(spoke in English)
First, the European Union and its member States
contribute to United Nations missions, supporting them
with a common security and defence policy mission and
working closely with regional organizations such as the
African Union. The European Union has noteworthy
engagement in international peace efforts, especially
in Africa, for instance in Somalia and the Central
African Republic, in Mali with EU military training
mission, and in Libya with an EU border assistance
mission. As the High Representative stated, the recent
decision to establish a military planning and conduct
capability will provide an additional tool to improve the
effectiveness of the EU as a security partner.
In strengthening those capacities we should never
forget or compromise our values. That means, first and
10/24

09/05/2017

foremost, protecting and saving lives. That is what we
are doing relentlessly every day in the Mediterranean
off the Libyan coast, thanks to Operation Sophia. In less
than two years, with 25 EU members participating in
the Operation led by Admiral Credendino, over 34,000
people have been rescued and more than 100 smugglers
arrested. Those figures are clear proof of the added
value provided by the European Union. The decision
of the High Representative to give the Operation the
name of a baby born aboard a vessel reminds us that
combating human-trafficking networks is a collective
moral duty and a shared security priority. Italy will
continue to address that plight through a comprehensive
approach aimed at tackling its root causes, dismantling
the business model of traffickers and saving lives at sea.
Secondly, the European Union is a global driver
of peace. As a union of half a billion people, among
the main economic powers in the world and the
first investor in development corporation, the EU
is a builder and keeper of the peace, security and
development continuum. That gives the European
Union unparalleled potential to contribute to the surge
in diplomacy advocated by the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres. We strongly support his push for
a shift from crisis management to crisis prevention. We
believe that this approach should drive the reform of the
United Nations peace and security pillar, including its
partnerships with regional organizations.
The European project has displayed its magnetic
force since its foundation. Along with the widening of
its borders, democracy, stability and development have
stretched all over the continent. Today it continues to
exert the same power of attraction, moving towards
enlargement to neighbouring countries. I underscore in
that regard the vital role it plays in the Western Balkans.
A credible EU enlargement policy represents the unique
path for countries in the Western Balkans to consolidate
inclusive, democratic and resilient societies. The United
Nations and the European Union should be resolute in
encouraging them to work together for a better future.
Moreover, the European Union is endowed with
a set of diverse and effective tools to facilitate the
political solution of crises — a goal that is at the top
of the agenda of the Union and its members, starting
with Syria, Libya and the Middle East as a whole.
In coordination with other international regional
actors, the Union is proactively engaged in diplomatic
efforts to find a peaceful settlement to protracted and
unresolved conflicts in Europe. Ending the crisis in
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ukraine remains a top priority for the European Union,
which is providing its utmost support to the Security
Council’s call for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
Last but not least, I turn to development. The
European Union is the world’s leading donor, as was
recalled here, and provides more than 50 per cent
of global development aid. Bridging humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation while
promoting human rights, the rule of law and good
governance, the European Union is a major partner
of the United Nations and its agencies in the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Our common endeavour to eradicate extreme poverty,
tackle the effects of climate change, strengthen fragile
institutions, protect human rights and build confidence
and dialogue among communities is the primary
antidote to the spread of conflict.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, in all of the areas I mentioned,
we think that corporation and coordination between
the United Nations and the European Union could be
further strengthened in order to take full advantage of
their respective potential, in keeping with the principles
of complementarity and subsidiarity.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): It is good to see the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
back in the Security Council. I wish to thank her for the
range and depth of her comprehensive statement.
As the representative of Sweden mentioned, it is
fitting that we meet today on what is both Europe Day
and the Time of Remembrance and Reconciliation for
Those Who Lost Their Lives during the Second World
War. The Europe Union (EU), just like the United
Nations itself, emerged as a direct consequence of that
terrible conflict. Born of the same scourge of war, both
organizations have shared the same values since their
inception, cooperating closely to advance international
peace and security, democracy, the rule of law and
human rights.
Those values are just as relevant today in a world
that faces a different sort of challenge than those that the
founders of the United Nations and the European Union
envisaged. Terrorism, violent extremism, organized
crime, uncontrolled migration, climate change and
globalization have created even more protracted and

S/PV.7935

complex conflicts and humanitarian crises. In the
face of these challenges, the United Nations and the
European Union need each other more than ever. Today
we need to develop smarter approaches to ensure that
efforts across both organizations are complementary
and collaborative in order to resolve conflicts, promote
peace and build long-term development.
From Russian aggression in Ukraine and the
annexation of Crimea to instability in Libya, the Horn
of Africa and the migration crises, Europe is sadly all
too familiar with the threats to security in its region and
across the globe. In those cases, the EU has demonstrated
its ability to support the United Nations as a global
security provider. We see that in our peacekeeping
partnerships in Somalia, in Mali and the Central African
Republic, where EU, United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions are doing a vital job in
maintaining peace and providing security and training.
As others said, Operation Sophia continues saving lives
in the waters of the Mediterranean, bringing traffickers
to justice, countering illegal migration and interdicting
weapons that can fuel violent extremism. As the High
Representative said, Security Council support for that
has been absolutely vital. In Ukraine, the European
Union is using targeted sanctions to help that country
in the face of Russian aggression.
The European Union also helps the United Nations
to resolve conflict through its mediation capacity as an
honest broker and a bridge-builder. We see that in Syria
and the Horn of Africa, where the European Union
is supporting the United Nations to foster political
dialogue with key actors so as to provide urgently needed
humanitarian assistance. Such activism can also be seen
with regard to Iran, where the EU, through the Office
of the of the High Representative, continues its key role
as coordinator of the joint commission contributing to
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. As the High Representative said, the EU
approach links security, development and human rights
just as many of us seek to do in the Council.
The United Kingdom is proud to play its part in
that regard. Tomorrow’s London Somalia Conference,
hosted by the United Kingdom’s Prime Minister, the
Secretary-General and the President of Somalia, will be
an important moment to accelerate progress on security
sector reform and to support Somalia’s movement
towards a political settlement. We are delighted that
the High Representative will also be present at that
conference. Furthermore, the European Union and the

17-1303611/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations are working together to deliver inclusive
development in protracted crises by implementing
new approaches that bring together peacebuilding,
development and humanitarian finance and expertise.
In response to the Syria crisis, the EU and the United
Nations are working together with refugee-hosting
countries so as to address more effectively the needs of
Syrian refugees and host populations.
But United Nations-EU cooperation goes well
beyond conflict resolution. As the Secretary-General
said in this Chamber, the United Nations needs to
reform so as to better contain and prevent modern-day
threats and build peace after conflicts end. We need
a United Nations that can prevent crises as well as
end them. The United Kingdom shares the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment and the commitment that the
High Representative just reiterated on behalf of the
EU to reforming the United Nations so that there is a
further strengthening of the nexus between peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights. We
must all stand with the Secretary-General to implement
and deliver reform. That will be crucial for the United
Nations and for collaboration with the European Union
as we seek to tackle future threats to international peace
and security together and strengthen the effectiveness
of the multilateral system.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Let me
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. You
wear it well, and we look forward to your leadership.
I also thank the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy for her
comprehensive briefing.

09/05/2017

of the Al-Assad regime. The humanitarian assistance
provided by the European Union and its member States
in that and other crises across the globe has been vital
to relieving suffering. That support has complemented
the United States humanitarian assistance to Syria,
which has amounted to more than $6.5 billion since
the start of the crisis. In the longer-term, the European
Union’s commitment to support serious reconstruction
once a political settlement is reached will be invaluable
not only to the Syrian people, but to the region and the
world. But to get to that point, imposing sanctions on
individuals and entities connected to Syria’s chemical
weapons programme is necessary. The United States
has sought to expand United Nations sanctions on
known suppliers and facilitators of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme. We appreciate the European
Union’s cooperation in levying Syria-related sanctions,
but we need to do more. We call on the European Union
and the United Nations to apply more rigorous sanctions
to deny Al-Assad and his regime the means to commit
further war crimes.
Ukraine is another area in which we have worked
defectively together. The European Union has played
a critical role in holding Russia accountable for its
actions in Ukraine. The United States and the European
Union should remain united in their resolve to keep
sanctions in place until Moscow fully honours its
Minsk commitments.

One of the great honours and pleasures of being the
United States Permanent Representative to the United
Nations is working with nations and organizations that
share our commitment to freedom, prosperity and human
dignity. We deeply appreciate the European Union
and its member States’ leadership and cooperation in
promoting peace, security and human rights in Europe
and around the world.

One of our most fruitful areas of cooperation
has been in our effort to bring greater focus on the
relationship between human rights and international
peace and security. We commend and share the
European Union’s emphasis on accountability and its
efforts to fight impunity for human rights abuses and
violations. Together we are fighting not only to hold
violators accountable, but also to ensure that victims
receive the proper treatment, care and justice. I am
hopeful that we will begin to see greater support from
European Union member States at the Human Rights
Council as we work to prevent the ongoing anti-Israel
bias in that forum.

Today, as we take stock of our global priorities,
I am struck by how often the United States and the
European Union partner to amplify each of each
other’s important efforts. In Syria, the European
Union is a close, reliable partner as we work together
to end the conflict there and address the human
rights and international humanitarian law violations

We remain deeply concerned about the migrant
situation in Libya and the central Mediterranean region.
We recognize the challenges that the European Union
and its member States, especially Italy, face with the
continuous flow of refugees. We commend them for
their sustained efforts to counter migrant smuggling
and human trafficking.

12/24

17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Other bright spots in our partnership are in conflict
prevention, security assistance, counter-terrorism and
peacebuilding. In Africa, we commend the European
Union’s missions on the ground. We also greatly
appreciate its partnership with the United Nations and
the United States in the nine United Nations missions
in Africa, especially in Mali, Somalia and the Central
African region. The European Union’s financial
contribution to the African Union forces in Somalia in
particular has been central to the significant security
and political progress there.
Elsewhere in the world, we look forward to further
support from European partners. In Asia, the European
Union has played a key role in supporting United
Nations efforts to establish the necessary incentives for
North Korea to address urgent non-proliferation and
humanitarian crises and human rights violations. The
only path to a secure and prosperous future for North
Korea is to comply fully with all of its obligations under
international law. North Korea must abandon its reckless
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons. We call on the European Union and
all countries to exert maximal pressure on North Korea
to change course. We urge European Union member
States to rigorously implement Security Council
resolutions, impose tough, autonomous measures that
go beyond the resolutions, and downgrade diplomatic
and economic ties with North Korea. Stronger action on
North Korea from the European Union and its member
States will assist in securing peace in the region.
With regard to Iran as well, we look forward to
deepening cooperation with the European Union to
counter Iran’s destabilizing activities and to hold
the Iranian Government accountable for its actions.
Resolution 2231 (2015) must be fully implemented,
including provisions regarding the transfer of weapons
and the launching of ballistic missiles. The European
Union can, and should, do more to underscore to Iran
that its destabilizing actions in the region, including
support for extremists and terrorists groups, must cease.
In conclusion, the United States shares deep bonds
of history and principle with the European Union and its
member countries. We reiterate our firm commitment
to working closely with the High Representative in
support of United Nations priorities. We look forward
to continuing our valuable partnership and support for
our shared values.

S/PV.7935

Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to welcome
High Representative Federica Mogherini to the
Security Council and thank her for her insightful
briefing. Furthermore, we deeply appreciated her visit
to Hiroshima, Japan, in April 2016 and her call for
lasting peace throughout the world.
First, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Japan, I would like to recognize that the European
Union (EU) plays an indispensable and contemporary
role in enabling the Security Council to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security. The EU has consistently demonstrated
leadership and commitment in charting road maps for
the resolution of conflicts, post-conflict reconstruction
and humanitarian assistance around the world, while
also garnering vital international attention and support.
Japan and the EU are global strategic partners that
share the common values of democracy, freedom, human
rights and the rule of law. We have worked together
tirelessly for the peace and security of the international
community as a whole. As one example, the EU and the
United Nations recently hosted a conference in Brussels
to marshal international humanitarian support for Syria
and the region. Japan is pleased to have joined in those
efforts by announcing new humanitarian assistance of
approximately $260 million, which was decided after
the beginning of 2017. The EU also plays a key role in the
Middle East peace process as a member of the Quartet,
including on the relaunch of negotiations to achieve
lasting peace. Japan is committed to facilitating direct
talks and implementing confidence-building measures.
Japan and the EU are also working closely
together in Africa, especially on measures to enhance
security and counter-terrorism. Joint projects are
under way in countries such as the Niger, Mali,
Mauritania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia to provide equipment, communications
technology, improved facilities and human resources
training. In the Niger, Japan recently announced
approximately $2 million in assistance to provide
wireless communication devices and vehicles to the
Government, while the EU is providing training for law
enforcement officers. Japan Maritime Defence Force
and EU Naval Force are also cooperating closely to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of
Aden, including through joint exercises.
Japan strongly supports the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. The Strategy demonstrates

17-1303613/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the EU’s commitment to promoting a rules-based
international order, including on global maritime
security, centred on multilateralism and the United
Nations. The development of that Global Strategy comes
at an important time, given the ongoing challenges
faced by the continent, from refugee flows to terrorism.
Japan looks forward to enhancing its cooperation with
the EU throughout the world, including in the Asia
Pacific region. In particular, Japan strongly hopes that
the EU global strategy on building maritime capacities
and regional security architecture in South-East Asia
will be implemented.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that Japan
supports a strong, unified Europe. We hope that Europe
will overcome its various challenges and continue to
take robust and concrete steps towards integration and
international activism.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I also thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for participating in today’s meeting and for her
very important and clear-cut position statement.
I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s full support
for the further development of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Such cooperation is
essential for delivering on the Council’s mandate to
maintain international peace and security. The role
of the European Union (EU) in such cooperation is a
special one. The European Union is a major political
and economic player in the international arena and a
contributor to the resolution of a number of conflicts
and crises, far beyond its geographic neighbourhood,
with Colombia as just one recent example. The EU is an
active partner of the United Nations in peacekeeping,
humanitarian assistance, non-proliferation, combating
terrorism and many other issues.
The European Union Global Strategy for Foreign
and Security Policy, presented last year, reflects
the main areas and priorities of EU-United Nations
cooperation. Ukraine fully shares the overall vision
of the Strategy, in particular responsibility, unity and
an integrated approach to conflicts and crises. The
strong engagement of the EU in conflict resolution
processes and its participation in international political
dialogue would definitely enhance the voice of partners
14/24

09/05/2017

struggling for peace, democratic values and their
sovereign choice. We believe that a rules-based global
order with multilateralism as its key principle and the
United Nations at its core is a vital element in ensuring
sustainable peace in the world.
Ukraine also supports the initiatives mentioned in
the Strategy on United Nations peacebuilding efforts,
the implementation of the commitments on sustainable
development and climate change, support of the
Human Rights Council and others. We also support the
Strategy’s call upon members of the Security Council
not to vote against credible draft resolutions on timely
and decisive action to prevent or end mass atrocities. In
the light of events in Syria and Russian shameful vetoes
on relevant resolutions, that call is as relevant as ever.
The High Representative outlined a number of
challenges and threats that affect the world and where
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU is
effectively maintained. We praise the EU contribution
to conflict resolution in the Middle East and Africa, as
well as its work to combat terrorism, violent extremism,
climate change and so on. I would like to emphasize in
particular the existing conflicts in Europe and the role
of the EU in their management and resolution.
During our presidency in February, Ukraine
organized an open debate (see S/PV.7886) on that issue,
and we are grateful to the European Union for its active
participation and valuable input to the discussion.
During that meeting, the majority of Council members
expressed a common vision of the important role of the
EU as an arrangement under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, in addressing current and emerging
security challenges in Europe. In my view, that role is
vital for the following reasons, inter alia.
First, the contribution of the EU is essential in
building the resilience of countries in the Eastern and
Southern neighbourhoods by encouraging them in
a reform process that brings long-term benefits and
fosters stability in the region. The reviewed EuroMediterranean partnership and updated EU Global
Security Strategy set up good frameworks for building
upon our cooperation on security matters.
Secondly, the EU is directly or indirectly involved in
conflict resolution in Europe, including around Ukraine,
the Western Balkans, Moldova, Georgia and so on. It
defends the European security order, which is firmly
based on the principles of sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of States, the inviolability
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of borders, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
free choice of countries in deciding their own future.
Such EU efforts prove their effectiveness in the former
Yugoslavia, where despite all of the suffering, numerous
casualties and terrible atrocities, all conflicts are now
by and large resolved. In the post-Soviet region to the
contrary, none of the conflicts — I repeat, none — has
been settled. Moreover, new conflicts erupt and new
threats to regional peace appear. Why is that?
The answer is rather simple. In the case of the
former Yugoslavia, success was reached due to the
resolute stance of the international community and its
coordinated efforts, including the United Nations and the
EU. Furthermore, although not without delay, spoilers
and instigators of the conflicts were removed from
decision-making. In the territory of the former Soviet
Union, the situation is different, if not opposite. Since
the early 1990s, the Russian Federation has embraced the
concept of an instability belt. It has effectively created
controlled instability in many countries along Russia’s
border to keep them in Moscow’s orbit, and, like in the
case of Ukraine, to halt any integration with the EU.
We are greatly thankful for the strong position of the
European Union on the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
which the High Representative has just confirmed. I am
also thankful to other colleagues around the table who
spoke in support of my country.
We believe that the existing situation is not a
deadlock; protracted and active conflicts in Europe
can be effectively resolved and potential tensions can
be prevented from erupting. We also believe that the
European Union, together with the United Nations,
should not shy away from taking an even more proactive
approach in conflict management and resolution
in Europe.

S/PV.7935

In that connection, I would like to affirm that the
aim of international cooperation, as established in
Article 1.3 of the Charter of the United Nations, is to
solve international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character and to do so
through multilateralism. On this point, we agree with
the statement in the foreward of the European Union
Global Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy that we
must work together, but we must be more than merely
inclusive in our efforts. We must do so under the principle
of sovereign equality, which responds to the common
good of our people. In that sense, it is imperative to
work to strengthen multilateralism in strict compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Regional and subregional organizations are critical
to ensuring stability and security in their roles as
natural mediators with appropriate inputs to address
specific matters, thereby creating conditions conducive
to lasting solutions on the basis of the mutual benefit
of States and the principles of international law, in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and General Assembly resolution 65/276, regarding
cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations.
In that respect, Bolivia maintains relations with the
European Union, framed in institutionalized dialogue
with the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, to agree policies and actions in the international
context that will allow us to move towards mutually
beneficial goals, facing such challenges as the global
food crisis, climate change and terrorism, among
others. We therefore hope that cooperation between the
organizations will continue in that direction, for the
common good.

In conclusion, EU-United Nations cooperation has
proved to be invaluable on numerous occasions, from
the fight against terrorism to the peaceful resolution
of conflicts in different parts of the world. Ukraine
looks forward to that continued partnership, which
will further effectively contribute to the promotion of
international peace and security.

We express our solidarity with the families and
Governments of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that have affected the European Union. We regret the
increase in such attacks and commend the efforts of
the European Union to overcome that scourge. We
condemn terrorism and encourage the Organization to
pursue its efforts to enhance cooperation and exchange
of information, in respect for human rights.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.

With respect to conflicts or disputes between
States, Bolivia stresses the importance for all Member
States to observe, respect, apply and comply with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that understanding, it is necessary
encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes through

17-1303615/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

dialogue, mediation, negotiation or judicial mechanisms
established by the Charter, such as the International
Criminal Court.
Bolivia believes that the European Union is an
essential global actor at the political and economic levels
that contributes to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
and we commend it for its work throughout the planet.
Also in that regard, we consider that the diplomatic
preventive measures and mechanisms of regional
organizations should be coordinated and oriented
towards the identification of potential crises and the
exchange of impartial information. In that regard, we
favour cooperation with that regional organization,
based on the principles of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States, the non-use of force or the
threat of use of force, and the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of States.
Bolivia recognizes the work of the European Union
on various issues with which the Security Council is
seized, such as the Iranian nuclear issue, on which
the European Union has played a very important role,
and the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
through the establishment of two States within the pre1967 frontiers and with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the State of Palestine.
We also appreciate the work of the European Union
in Africa, where security is a factor of great importance,
in financing the African Union Mission in Somalia and
contributing to the development and training of the
Somali National Army through its military training
mission in Somalia and its Naval Force Operation
Atalanta, which is fighting piracy. We further
commend the work of the European Union in Mali,
through the training of that country’s armed forces,
and in the Central African Republic, in cooperation
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
The world is suffering the worst crisis of inequality
in its history. Eight individuals own half the planet’s
wealth. The world is also experiencing its worst
humanitarian crisis since 1945. Some 128 million
people require humanitarian assistance in 33 countries.
Moreover, we are going through a severe financial crisis,
because we have not resolved such structural causes as
the phenomenon of external debt. We are in a serious
energy crisis — 2.9 billion people use wood or stoves
for heat or cooking. As Ms. Mogherini affirmed, we are
in serious climate, food and international institutional
16/24

09/05/2017

crises, the latter due to the fact that the Organization
has been unable to reform itself for decades. But
the worst of all are the wars being waged across the
world, prompted in many cases by interventionism,
regime change policies and the flouting of the norms of
international law.
All these crises prove that there is no such thing
as a first world or a third world. There is only one
world, one house for the human family, one home with
differentiated responsibilities among its members.
We believe that the European Union can and must
play a critical role in resolving all these crises, on
the basis of international law and of strict respect for
multilateralism, without double standards, resorting
first and foremost to policy and diplomacy in all cases.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this briefing on United
Nations cooperation with the European Union (EU).
China listened attentively to the briefing given by
Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
As the largest organization of regional integration
in the world, the EU has achieved significant results in
economic and political integration and made important
contributions to the promotion of a multipolar world.
As an important cooperation partner of the United
Nations and the Security Council, the EU has actively
participated in efforts to resolve regional hotspot issues,
such as the Iranian nuclear issue and the situations in
the Middle East and Africa. It has played an important
role in maintaining regional stability in some regions,
which China welcomes.
The countries of the world are interconnected and
interdependent. Humankind has a shared destiny. The
United Nations is the most universal and authoritative
intergovernmental international organization. The EU
has a wealth of experience in conflict prevention and
peacekeeping and is an important force for peace in the
world. The United Nations and the EU should strengthen
cooperation and make even more positive contributions
to world peace, stability and development.
First,
they
should
vigorously
promote
multilateralism. The international situation is
undergoing profound, multiple and complex changes.
Anti-globalization and conservative thinking are on the
rise. Parties should jointly safeguard the international
order and the collective security mechanism, with the
United Nations at its centre. They should strengthen the
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations central role and status in international
affairs. The United Nations and the EU should jointly
champion a concept of global governance featuring
consultations, collaboration and benefit-sharing so as
to jointly promote international peace, regional stability
and global development.
Secondly, they should cultivate a harmonious and
stable international security environment. In view of
the complex and grave international security challenges
they face, the United Nations and the EU should
strengthen their cooperation, establish a concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, and jointly push parties to abandon zero-sum
thinking so as to achieve win-win results for both sides,
multiple sides and everyone. Parties should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, respect the sovereign equality of countries and
the development paths chosen independently by them,
resolve disputes peacefully through such diplomatic
means as mediation, good offices and dialogue,
and jointly promote global security governance in a
coordinated manner.
Thirdly, it is important to vigorously promote
sustainable international economic and social
development. Countries face the common task of
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Developing countries are faced with
unique difficulties and challenges. With its economic
development advantages, the European Union should,
in view of the developing needs of developing countries,
provide more funding and technical support in key
fields so as to help those countries achieve the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals at an early date.
China attaches great importance to its
relationship with the EU and has all along supported
the integration process of Europe. We welcome a
united, stable and prosperous Europe. China stands
ready — through the One Belt, One Road initiative,
the China-EU Cooperation Mechanism and other
platforms — to deepen the China-EU comprehensive
strategic partnership for mutual benefit and win-win
cooperation and, along with Europe, jointly push
for new results in the four partnerships — for peace,
growth, reform and civilization — so as to jointly make
a new and even greater contribution to the promotion of
world peace, stability and prosperity.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We join others in welcoming
Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini for today’s

S/PV.7935

annual briefing on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the European Union
(EU). We thank the High Representative for her remarks
on the EU’s foreign policy priorities and its perspectives
on some of the most pressing issues of peace and
security to both the United Nations and the European
Union. It is indeed symbolic that we are discussing
the United Nations-EU partnership on Europe Day,
and I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate our
European friends on the sixtieth anniversary of the EU.
We are also holding this meeting at a time when the
world is facing unprecedented challenges and threats
to peace, security and prosperity. Europe is certainly
not immune to those challenges. It is in fact going
through difficult times, as the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy has acknowledged. We
understand that there are no easy solutions to some of
those challenges and, in a much more interconnected
and interdependent world, Europe cannot find solutions
to these difficult and complex challenges alone. That is
why reaffirming the multilateral approach, investing in
a stronger United Nations and enhancing cooperation
and partnership with other regional organizations is a
sensible and logical thing to do, as outlined in the EU
Global Strategy.
It is indeed music to our ears to hear the High
Representative stress that the EU vision is the United
Nations vision. This is a time when that kind of
commitment can serve as an example to all. A peaceful
and harmonious Europe would be an important pillar
for global peace at a time when there is more confusion
than clarity at the global level. The European Union
remains one of the most indispensable multilateral
organizations, with a crucial role to play at a time of
great uncertainty and a great deficit in trust, including
in institutions that have endured for a long time.
The United Nations-EU partnership is one of the
most important global regional partnerships for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security, which we need to foster now with even more
and deeper commitment.
The significance of this partnership has indeed
been reinforced in the light of the new challenges that
we referred to earlier. In that regard, we appreciate the
growing cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union, which encompasses a wide range
of issues across the peace, security and development
agendas. That includes, inter alia, preventive diplomacy
and mediation, peacekeeping, the fight against

17-1303617/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

terrorism and violent extremism, combating human
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes,
the global response to humanitarian crises, tackling
the issue of large movements of refugees and migrants,
addressing the impact of climate change and promoting
sustainable development.
For us in Africa, Europe is not only a neighbouring
continent but also an important partner — a vital
partner — for addressing the many peace, security
and development challenges we face. We in the Horn
of Africa are extremely mindful of this fact. We are
particularly grateful for what the EU has done in
Somalia for so long, but quietly and with great effect.
We therefore hope that Europe will continue to remain
true to the spirit of the strategic partnership that has
been forged with Africa in tackling issues of mutual
concern as well as in ensuring collective peace, security
and prosperity.
That is why we welcome the EU’s renewed
commitment to investing in African peace and
development as an investment in its own security and
prosperity. Indeed, EU support for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security on our continent,
inter alia, through its African Peace Facility, which is
providing substantial amounts of funding to African
Union-led peace support operations, has been quite
significant. Its intention to make an initial contribution
to the African Union Peace Fund once its governance
structures are put in place, with a view to encouraging
international support for the African Union’s requests
for assistance for its peace support operations from
United Nations assessed contributions, is also very
much welcomed.
Finally, in the light of the upcoming EU-Africa
Summit, due to be held in Côte d’Ivoire later this year,
we hope the strategic partnership between Africa and
Europe will be further strengthened. We take note
of the EU’s revitalized framework for joint action in
that regard.
In conclusion, we cannot overemphasize the
significance of forging even stronger multilateral
cooperation in partnership between the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other relevant regional and international partners for
sustainable peace, security and development in Africa.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
18/24

09/05/2017

European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
for her comprehensive briefing on the European Union’s
future priorities. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Mogherini and her delegation — and all European
delegations in the Security Council — on the occasion
of Europe Day. I also congratulate the delegation of the
Russian Federation on the occasion of Victory Day.
Egypt recognizes the important role played by
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Their role in
preventing, managing and settling conflicts is essential
and growing. Egypt also calls for promoting and
enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and such regional mechanisms in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our world today is witness to great unprecedented
challenges, including terrorism, radicalization,
irregular migration, illegal trafficking in humans and
drugs, piracy and transborder organized crime. Such
challenges go beyond the capacity of any one party to
resolve them alone. A concerted effort to address them is
therefore needed at the regional and international levels.
Given that the European Union has significant
political and economic weight at the international level,
it is one of the most influential international actors
capable of contributing effectively to finding solutions
to many of the challenges the world is facing today,
in particular in the Middle East and Africa. Egypt
recognizes the important role of the European Union in
that regard, given the history, geography and challenges
that link Europe to the Middle East and Africa.
The EU’s recent adoption of its new Global Strategy
on Foreign and Security Policy is noteworthy. Egypt
trusts that the implementation of the Strategy will
take place in full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the general principles of international
law, particularly the principle of sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and
in coordination with active regional actors, including
taking their concerns into consideration to achieve
common goals and purposes and avoid the mistakes of
the past.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
EU is one of the major strategic partnerships between
regional organizations. Such partnerships include the
active engagement in a number of conflicts and crises
that go beyond the immediate EU neighbourhood.
Hence, the importance of the full integration between
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

EU efforts and those of the United Nations in matters
related to international peace and security.
One of those main arenas is peacekeeping
operations — for example, in Africa. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic plays a central
role in supporting efforts by national authorities
to establish State authority and restore security
throughout the country. The European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
makes a significant contribution in that respect, as it
provides training to the Central African Republic army
military units as a part of security sector reform. In that
connection, I would like to highlight the importance of
forging coordination with the AU and other regional
parties that are capable of building up the capacities
of the Central African Republic army to accelerate
that process, in response to the calls by the national
authorities to do so.
We also look forward to optimizing the role of the
European Union Military Training Mission in Mali
and the European Union Capacity Building Mission in
Mali, in coordination with the United Nations and other
international and regional partners.
In conclusion, Egypt highly values Operation
Sophia and underlines its important role in addressing
illegal migration, given the loss of thousands of lives in
the Mediterranean as a result. Egypt stresses the need
to examine the possibility of expanding the mandate of
the Operation to address the phenomenon of the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, weapons and funds to conflict
zones, particularly Libya.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your
role as President of the Security Council, following
a very successful Council field trip to Colombia. We
look forward to a productive presidency this month. I
also want to thank our American colleagues for a very
effective presidency last month.
Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
European Union High Representative, Ms. Mogherini,
for her substantial briefing. The European Union (EU)
is the major player in the maintenance of peace and
security and the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations, not only to the regular budget but also
to official development assistance and peacekeeping
missions. The many areas in which the United Nations
and the EU cooperate include conflict prevention,

S/PV.7935

counter-terrorism, maritime security, organized
crime — including the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings — and irregular migration.
The two organizations work together to promote human
rights, gender equality, access to energy, cybersecurity,
space security and mitigation of climate-change impact.
Their collaboration must increase as we jointly seek to
address the complex threats and transnational crises.
The EU also collaborates with key regional
stakeholders, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the African Union (AU),
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the League
of Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, as well as other strategic partners, including
Kazakhstan and Central Asia.
The regional tensions intensifying in the Middle
East, Africa and other parts of the world will require
greater interlinkages between the EU and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as international and
regional financial institutions. In addition to providing
soldiers and police for United Nations peacekeeping
missions, the EU cooperates effectively with global
and regional organizations by fielding its own missions
and operations within the framework of the Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy — in Africa,
for example.
The United Nations and the EU work successfully
in peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Sahel, Mali and Somalia. That is
significant in the light of present-day geopolitical
tensions and protracted conflicts in the Great Lakes
region, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa.
Additionally, through its African Peace Facility, the
EU has provided funds since 2004 to the African Union
for peace missions and the development of an African
Security Architecture. We believe that strength should
be further developed.
We support the joint communication to the European
Parliament, the European Council and the Council on
migration on the central Mediterranean route, adopted
on 25 January 2017, which identified priorities to be
addressed through the mobilization of €200 million,
under the North Africa window of the EU Emergency
Trust Fund for Africa in 2017. The priority focus of
the Fund is on migration-related projects in Libya
and North Africa, implemented with the cooperation
of the International Organization for Migration, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for

17-1303619/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNICEF.
We welcome the EU-organized Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held on
4 and 5 April in Brussels. As a contribution to the joint
efforts of the international community in addressing the
urgent humanitarian and resilience needs inside Syria
and supporting the efforts of neighbouring countries in
hosting the refugees, that could be considered as a best
practice to mobilize support for other humanitarian
crises as well.
As part of the EU’s commitment to the principles of
multilateralism and in the light of the 2016 EU Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy, we encourage
the EU’s engagement with regional and subregional
organizations in Eurasia, which could serve as an
additional instrument to respond more effectively to
emerging threats to peace and security in our continent.
Kazakhstan represents the Central Asian region,
a region which is represented in the Security Council
for the first time. We actively work together bilaterally
and multilaterally in the EU Central Asia format. We
strongly believe that joint efforts and the contribution
of the United Nations and the European Union in
making Central Asia a zone of peace, cooperation and
security are thoroughly important to the maintenance
of global stability. In that regard, the EU strategy
for a new partnership for Central Asia is a platform
for cooperation in Central Asia, given the unique
geostrategic position of the region, linking the East and
West together.
As mentioned in the EU Global Strategy, peace and
stability in Asia are a prerequisite for EU prosperity. In
that regard, we consider the situation in Afghanistan
vital to the security and stability of Central Asia. We
have a genuine interest in the political settlement,
socioeconomic development and recovery of that
country, while emphasizing the importance of the
security-development nexus through a holistic regional
approach. It is our desire to create a template model
in our part of the world of successful collaboration
and connectivity, in line with the preventive agenda
of Secretary-General Guterres and applicable for
other regions.
Another important part of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the EU is the counterterrorism agenda. It is crucial to strengthen the EU’s
interaction with countries of Eurasia, the Western
20/24

09/05/2017

Balkans, West Africa, the Sahara-Sahel region, the
Great Lakes region, the Horn of Africa, North Africa,
the Middle East and Asia — together with global
and regional intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations, including the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. We believe that in the years
to come the EU will continue its efforts to foster global
peace, security and development.
Before concluding, I would like to congratulate
our European colleagues on the sixtieth anniversary
of Europe Day. Today also marks the seventy-second
anniversary of victory in the Second World War, and
I would like to pay tribute to the war’s victims and to
all who fought for our lives and freedom. I would like
to congratulate war veterans on this important day and
to express the hope that we will never see another such
tragedy in the future.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her detailed briefing.
I would first like to congratulate everyone on
today’s seventy-second anniversary of the victory over
fascism, an extraordinary event that changed the world
for the better and laid the foundations for the United
Nations. It made a genuine unification of Europe
possible, not one based on the delusions of some about
their superiority to others, but founded on equality and
mutual respect. We fully share those values, which
should constitute the pillars of today’s multipolar world.
Russia has consistently advocated for the
development and improvement of United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional mechanisms,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and cooperation with the European
Union (EU) is no exception. It, too, should be established
on the basis of the Charter and in the framework of
General Assembly resolution 65/276. We have seen
the contribution that the European Union has made to
solving many international problems and its emergence
as a truly global player in the world arena. Russian-EU
cooperation on many current issues on the international
agenda has not stopped, despite the fact that relations
between us have not been at their best in recent years.
That is particularly noticeable in areas where Russia
and the EU’s interests objectively coincide, on issues
such as combating terrorism and drug trafficking,
dialogues on migration and readmission, problems of
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

disarmament and non-proliferation and situations in the
Middle East, the Balkans, Africa and Asia, including
Central Asia.
Some good examples of Russia’s cooperation with
the EU have been our joint efforts to settle the Iranian
nuclear-programme issue, as well as our collaboration
on internal security, on which we have regularly held
constructive and useful talks on counter-terrorism.
We are pleased with the ongoing positive experience
of Russian-EU cooperation in providing security
support, including in the EU operations and missions
in Chad and the Central African Republic, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and in the fight against piracy off the
coast of Somalia. Unfortunately, the absence of a legal
framework makes increasing our cooperation on crisis
management difficult.
Regrettably, however, current realities and
discussions in the Security Council have shown that
our European partners, rather than pursuing patient
and careful teamwork, have often chosen destructive,
unilateral approaches that can only leave us seriously
concerned. We are disturbed by the European Union’s
continuing use of unilateral sanctions that bypass the
Security Council. In our view, such restrictive measures
are illegitimate and counterproductive, especially since
in most cases their expanded use over the past two
decades has increased people’s suffering without in
any way helping to settle the crises they are designed
to resolve. Such practices undermine the legitimacy
of the United Nations and damage the authority of the
EU itself.
Another example of illegal activity is the
participation of the EU in the so-called coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant; it has
been conducting military operations in Syria without
a mandate from the Security Council or an invitation
from the Syrian Government. This undermines the
international order based on international law, and
not on no-one-knows-whose rules. It diminishes the
prospects for a global anti-terrorism front coordinated
by the United Nations and makes the fight against
terrorism less effective overall. We have been closely
following the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, including the continued exodus of refugees
from conflict-affected countries, and have regretfully
concluded that this sad situation is the result of
external interference in the internal affairs of States
and aggressive policies in those regions, accompanied
by violations of the Charter and Security Council

S/PV.7935

resolutions. The European Union’s military Operation
Sophia in the Southern Central Mediterranean has still
not been able to handle its basic task of destroying
the business model of the networks that are illegally
transporting and smuggling people in the region.
In the light of the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2017/95/Rev.1) on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and what it says about the EU entities’ efforts there,
it would be appropriate if, where EU efforts — and
those of regional organizations in crisis situations more
generally — interact with United Nations political
entities, they were complementary to the work of
the United Nations and aimed at implementing the
internationally agreed-on parameters of the settlement
in question. It is unacceptable for them to subordinate
the resolution of the conflict to their own agendas
and priorities.
With regard to resolving the conflict in southeastern Ukraine, there is no alternative to the
established settlement framework of the Minsk package
of measures. The efforts must focus on fulfilling the
political provisions of the agreement, which include
granting special status to the Donbas region and
amnesty to its citizens, separating the parties and
conducting humanitarian demining. None of that is
possible without conducting a direct dialogue with
Donetsk and Luhansk. Only Kyiv can start action on
these political aspects, and it has been stubbornly
refusing to do so. For the time being, Brussels has
continued to display an antagonistic attitude on the issue
through its anti-Russian sanctions, which does nothing
but create a sense of impunity and irresponsibility in
the Ukrainian authorities.
Here is another example. At this time, when the
world is once again celebrating the end of the Second
World War, I would like to recall here the EU’s refusal
to support draft resolutions submitted to the General
Assembly by Russia on combating the glorification of
Nazism (resolution 71/179). We should not ignore the
acute problem of neo-Nazism in countries that Brussels
protects, including the Baltic States and Ukraine, let
alone play with that sort of fire for the sake of fleeting
political goals. Europe should have learned that lesson
by now.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that for
our part we are committed to full cooperation with
the European Union in working for common strategic

17-1303621/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

goals. However, that should take place exclusively
on a equal footing taking full account of each other’s
interests and concerns.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Uruguayan delegation for organizing
today’s meeting — on a day that is a celebration as
much for the United Nations as it is for the European
Union — on cooperation between the two organizations,
this time from the point of view of the European Union.
I would also like to welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to Secretary-General Guterres for his
leadership and efforts to strengthen the effectiveness
of the United Nations and provide its good offices
with the aim of improving the management of conflict
situations and crises around the world. Right now,
there are many conflicts and crises around the world
that require close collaboration between the United
Nations and its various partners, particularly the
subregional organizations that, as we all know, play a
vital role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In that regard, the European Union, firmly
anchored in its values, understanding and know-how,
which Ms. Mogherini so elegantly describes as “the
European way”, and given the human, institutional,
technological and financial means at its disposal, has
dedicated itself to remaining a major partner — indeed,
a strategic one — of the United Nations and many
other regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union. That is important both for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the prevention of conflicts.
Allow me to recall some important documents that
continue to serve as strategic multisectoral frameworks
for relations between the United Nations and the
European Union in the areas of crisis management and
peacekeeping. Those documents include the 2003 and
2007 Joint Declarations on United Nations-European
Union Cooperation in Crisis Management, and the
plan of action to strengthen support provided by the
European Union Security and Defence Policy to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which was adopted
in 2012 by the Political and Security Committee of the
European Union. That document, it should be recalled,
identifies the ways and means of cooperation between
the European Union and the United Nations, as well as
priority measures jointly applied in past years by the
22/24

09/05/2017

two organizations, as pertains in particular to increased
contributions of uniformed personnel by European
Union member States, planning and coordination,
cooperation in general policy and guidelines, as well as
lessons learned from experience and training.
As underscored in the 1 April 2015 report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/229), communication and
coordination activities conducted at the strategic level
between the European Union and the United Nations in
peacekeeping and crisis management take on various
forms. Bridges between the two organizations include
the formal biannual meeting of the Security Council
with representatives from the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union. That meeting
provides an opportunity to review peacekeeping
operations and other matters related to peace and
security. Furthermore, there are high-level meetings
dealing with the review of strategic issues, in particular
periodic briefings by the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the
Security Council. There are also presentations from high
United Nations officials to the Political and Security
Committee in Brussels. Moreover, let us not forget
the biannual meeting of the United Nations-European
Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management,
which is co-chaired by the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral of the European External Action Service.
We could present an exhaustive list of European
actions for international peace and security. However,
simply by way of example, I would note the contribution
of the European Union to African peace and security
efforts, including in the Central African Republic,
Somalia, Mali and, more broadly speaking, the fight
against illegal trafficking of all types, the fight against
terrorism and the management of the migrant crises.
Simultaneously, with contributions to peace and
security, we would underscore the numerous actions
of the European Union in the area of prevention that
seek to address the root causes of conflict. The United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is a striking
example, as is the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative, which is part of the same line of effort.
The European Union provides significant
contributions to the work of the United Nations. It
cooperates with all bodies, agencies and programmes
of the Organization and is involved in almost all
United Nations activities, from development policy
and rebuilding peace to humanitarian assistance and
17-13036

09/05/2017

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

protection of the environment, human rights and even
culture. The European Union is involved in activities
in all the regions of the world. The 28 European
Union members are the primary donors for the United
Nations system, in terms of the regular budget of the
Organization, peacekeeping operations, as well as
funds and programmes.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that as
seen from Dakar, the European Way applies universally
to the United Nations, regionally to the African Union,
subregionally to the Economic Community of West
African States, and nationally to my country. Ethiopia,
which was mentioned by Ms. Mogherini earlier, is
a member of the Security Council and engages in
effective cooperation to manage the migrant crisis and
other transboundary issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.
I thank Ms. Mogherini for her detailed and
informative statement. Allow me to congratulate her,
and through her all States members of the European
Union, on the sixtieth anniversary of the signing of the
Rome Treaty, a date that coincides with the seventysecond anniversary of Victory in Europe Day.
Uruguay attaches the utmost importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The challenges of the twenty-first
century are too numerous and complex to be addressed
only within the United Nations. It Is essential to
revitalize Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
in order to make the outstanding work more effective,
and to progressively guarantee international peace
and security.
We acknowledge the important work that the
European Union does in the field of international
peace and security. The ongoing support that the
European Union offers to various countries through the
deployment of a variety of instruments — from good
practices, mediation, support for the development of
national institutions and capacities, as well as training,
funding and equipping peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council, among others — provides
the multilateral system with a committed and effective
actor in the search for solutions that ensure sustainable
peace. In that regard, the European Security and
Defence Policy is a fundamental and complementary

S/PV.7935

part that allows the multilateral system machinery to
work properly.
The European Union and the United Nations work
jointly in several peacekeeping contexts. The European
Union provides training and support for security-sector
reform in, for example, the Central African Republic,
Mali and Somalia. Furthermore, the European Union
performs relevant work in the Balkans. I would highlight
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
under the auspices of the United Nations, as well as
its contribution to the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, and the 2015 Minsk agreements. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina the presence of the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force represents a guarantee
for the political and social stability of the country.
Uruguay is strongly committed to the promotion
and protection of human rights. In that connection,
it is understood that there can be no sustainable
development, peace or security without respect for
human rights. That is why human rights follow-up
and monitoring is essential to early warning and the
ability to take preventive measures in time. For that
reason I cannot fail to mention the women and peace
and security agenda, to which the European Union,
like Uruguay, attaches the utmost importance. Women
play an essential role in achieving peaceful societies,
whether in prevention or in the solution of conflicts.
Among the most vulnerable groups are refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants.
Uruguay belongs to a region in which the
phenomenon of migration has been a fundamental
element of its past and present. It has welcomed
European immigrants throughout its history and, more
recently, during the various wars that have impacted
that continent. Without any doubt, the phenomenon
of migration is a very complex issue because it
encompasses aspects of security, development and
human rights. It is essential to develop comprehensive
plans so as to help protect those in vulnerable situations.
Uruguay therefore does not subscribe to the approach
that criminalizes migration. On the contrary, it believes
that it is necessary to attack the underlying causes
that facilitate taking advantage of people in need in
extremely precarious situations by criminal groups.
Lastly, Uruguay notes the policies and new
regulatory frameworks of the European Union in the
area of ​​prevention and combating terrorism. Terrorism
is undoubtedly one of the primary threats facing peace

17-1303623/24

S/PV.7935

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and international security. In addition to destroying
human lives, it jeopardizes the rule of law, democracy,
peaceful coexistence between civilizations, and
economic and social development. We are aware that
the list of areas in which the European Union has a
substantial role has not been exhausted in our statement.
It is a matter of acknowledging that the extraordinary
process of European integration is a model that has

24/24

09/05/2017

contributed to peace among its members and, we trust,
will continue to contribute to international peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

17-13036
