S/PRST/2005/46

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 October 2005
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5275th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 October 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note of the special report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2005/603) dated 26 September 2005, on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It
expresses its concern over the presence of foreign armed groups, which
continue to pose a serious threat to stability in the eastern part of the country.
“The Security Council deplores in this regard the failure of the Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda (FDLR) to proceed with the
disarmament and repatriation of their combatants, and exhorts them to do so
without further delay and in accordance with the declaration that they signed
in Rome on 31 March 2005.
“The Security Council recognizes the attached decision, taken on
16 September 2005 by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Rwanda, and Burundi, acting within the framework of the Tripartite Plus One
Commission, to set the deadline of 30 September 2005 for FDLR to disarm or
otherwise to face measures intended to compel them to do so. FDLR can no
longer remain as an armed group in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council demands that FDLR seize this opportunity to
proceed voluntarily with their disarmament and return to Rwanda without any
delay or preconditions.
“The Security Council commends the political and military pressure
placed on FDLR by the Congolese Government and MONUC.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by the Government of
Rwanda, with the support of the international community, to peacefully
repatriate FDLR members returning to Rwanda, in accordance with the
applicable norms of international law and with respect for the rights and
freedoms of the human person. The Council encourages the Government of
Rwanda to continue to give the widest publicity to its commitments.

05-53547 (E) 041005

*0553547*

S/PRST/2005/46

“The Security Council demands the full cooperation of FDLR with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in Arusha, particularly with regard
to the arrest and transfer of indictees who remain at large.
“Moreover, the Security Council notes with concern the incursion of
members of the Lord’s Resistance Army into the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and welcomes the intention of the Congolese Armed Forces to disarm
this group in cooperation with MONUC and in accordance with its mandate as
set out in resolution 1565.
“Further, the Security Council calls upon all armed groups in the Great
Lakes region of Africa to act without delay to lay down their arms and join the
processes of political transition under way in the region.
“The Security Council calls upon the States of the region to deepen their
cooperation with a view to putting an end to the activities of illegal armed
groups. It recalls its adherence to respect for the sovereignty of all States and
underlines that any recourse to the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of a State is contrary to the Purposes and Principles set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.”

2

S/PRST/2005/46

Tripartite Plus Joint Commission Ministerial
Waldorf Astoria Hotel
New York, New York
16 September 2005

Summary of decisions
Members of the Tripartite Commission commended Burundi’s successful
political transition, officially welcomed Burundi as a full participant and adopted
the new name Tripartite Plus Joint Commission.
The Tripartite Plus members
– reiterated their commitment to prevent negative elements from using their
respective territories to destabilize neighbouring countries.
– agreed to continue military and political pressure on the FDLR to ensure that it
fulfils its commitment to disarm and repatriate.
– agreed to continue military and diplomatic pressure on all other militia to
ensure their disarmament and repatriation or reintegration.
– agreed to retain 30 September 2005, as the deadline for voluntary disarmament
and repatriation or reintegration and that failure to do so would trigger
imposition of sanctions.
– agreed that the Tripartite Joint Commission has contributed to the reduction of
tension in the Great Lakes region and that additional confidence-building
measures are necessary to bring stability to the area, including:
• DRC authorization of a Ugandan office in Beni to encourage, in conjunction
with MONUC and the DRC, the disarmament and repatriation or
reintegration of ADF, NALU and PRA.
• Consideration of how to extradite Mutebusi, Nkunda and other leaders of
armed groups.
• Articulation of the mechanisms the U.S. and EU should employ against all
militia operating in eastern DRC by members of the Tripartite.
– agreed to have the EU, in conjunction with the GOR, draft an information
package for distribution to the FDLR that outlines measures to encourage their
disarmament and repatriation or reintegration.
– welcomed the African Union’s announcement of plans for an October
reconnaissance mission that will lead to recommendations on how to proceed
with the establishment of an AU force in eastern DRC.
– welcomed the continued effort of the international community to augment and
build the capacity of the FARDC in order to bring stability to eastern DRC.
– agreed that MONUC’s response in eastern DRC had improved, but that
additional capacity was necessary to enforce its mandate.

3

S/PRST/2005/46

– agreed that the facilitator will draft a timeline of actions by the Tripartite
members and Contact Group through 31 December 2005, that are aimed at
ensuring stability in the Great Lakes region, to include:
• Develop sanctions that will be imposed on militia after 30 September 2005
should voluntary disarmament not occur.
• Install Tripartite Fusion Cell (TPC) in Kisangani and Tripartite Plus member
capitals.
• Develop and distribute an incentive package to encourage FDLR and other
militia to return to their country of origin.
• Undertake an AU reconnaissance mission in the DRC.

4
