S/PV.8390

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8390th meeting

Monday, 5 November 2018, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 October 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/917)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36101 (E)
*1836101*

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 October 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/971)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/971, which contains the text of a letter
dated 29 October 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to brief the
Council again on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), on the elimination of the chemical weapons
programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in regular contact with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on this
matter. I spoke to the OPCW Director-General this past
Thursday, 1 November, and look forward to seeing him
in two weeks, when I travel to The Hague to deliver
a message on behalf of the Secretary-General at the
opening of the Review Conference of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
There have been some new developments related to
this file in the past month; in other areas there has been
little change. Efforts to clarify the outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab
Republic remain as I previously informed. Following
the analysis by the OPCW of the information provided
to it by Syria on 10 July, the Director-General wrote
2/17

05/11/2018

a letter to the Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister, dated
28 September, which reiterated the need to resolve
the outstanding issues and invited Syria to continue
working to clarify the remaining gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies. That message was underlined at
working-level meetings that took place between the
OPCW and the Syrian National Authority.
In that context, I welcome the Director-General’s
news that the inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities are now under way. The conduct of the
inspections is in accordance with the decision of the
OPCW Executive Council taken at its eighty-third
session, which required the OPCW to carry out two
yearly inspections of those sites.
With regard to the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
(FFM) in the Syrian Arab Republic and its work in
relation to the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma, the Director-General informed me that the
FFM is close to drawing its conclusions and will be
issuing the report in due course. Like the Council, I look
forward to receiving the final report on that incident.
The FFM is also investigating five additional
reported incidents brought to the attention of the
Director-General by the National Authority of the
Syrian Arab Republic: two incidents in Kharbit
Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and 4 August 2017; one
incident in Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; one
incident in Yarmouk, Damascus, on 22 October 2017;
and one in Souran on 8 November 2017. So far there
is no indication of when a report on those incidents is
likely to be issued.
At its fourth special session, in June, the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
decided, among other things, that the OPCW Secretariat
“shall put in place arrangements to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic ... in those instances in
which the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in Syria
determines or has determined that use or likely use
occurred, and cases for which the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has not
issued a report”.
The OPCW Director-General has now provided two
progress reports in that regard to the OPCW’s Executive
Council and to the Secretary-General. He continues to
make progress in implementing his mandate.
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Although five years have now passed since the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), there is still work
to be done before it can be considered to have been
fully implemented. Moreover, as long as the use of
chemical weapons is ongoing or the threat of their use
lingers, we must retain our focus on the issue and not
allow ourselves to become inured to it. We will need
unity in the Security Council if we are to collectively
re-establish the norm against chemical weapons. The
vitality and credibility of the broader disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture depend on it. The use of
these weapons must always be seen as a violation of a
deeply held taboo. It is therefore imperative to identify
those responsible and hold them accountable.
In a related matter, and before concluding, I want
to note that allegations of a possible planned use of
chemical weapons in Idlib continue to surface. The
Secretary-General has made clear his concern about
the continued use of chemical weapons, as well as the
risks of a humanitarian catastrophe in the event of a
full-scale military operation in Idlib province. He has
called on all parties to exercise restraint. I want to once
again underscore the vital importance of upholding
humanitarian principles and the Chemical Weapons
Convention in Syria.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The United States is pleased that the agreement
to establish a demilitarized zone in and around Idlib
continues to hold. We again note that any military
offensive in Idlib would be a reckless escalation that
would bring further instability.
The United States is standing with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to support his effort to make
progress towards a durable political solution as the
best chance of forestalling additional episodes in
which the Al-Assad regime might again consider
using chemical weapons. The Al-Assad regime’s use
of chemical weapons, independently confirmed by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, is a clear demonstration

S/PV. 8390

of why the United Nations-led political process must
move, make progress and succeed without further
delay. The regime used deadly chemical weapons on
its own people. There must be accountability for that,
and there must be a political transition, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), that ensures justice and
prevents anyone, particularly the Al-Assad regime,
from using chemical weapons again.
There must be an end to the provocations and
disinformation from the Al-Assad regime and Russia,
including their continued attempts to falsely accuse
humanitarian first responders and heroes — the White
Helmets — of planning chemical-weapon attacks
in Idlib or elsewhere. This is especially ridiculous
considering that independent mechanisms created by
this very Council have found the Syrian regime to be
the party responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
The United States once again expresses its strong
support for the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in its work of investigating
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
strongly support the implementation of the OPCW’s
attribution arrangements for cases where the Factfinding Mission has determined that use or likely
use has occurred. Attribution for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is one of the steps necessary for
accountability and preventing future use. The United
States continues to hope that the Council will unite
around the notion, which was thought to have been well
established and accepted for 100 years, that chemical
weapons have no place in our world. All of us, and
particularly the Syrian people, deserve to live without
fear of those horrific weapons.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
For a long time now, some Western States have made
Syria’s so-called chemical dossier, which the Security
Council considers every month, into a tool for putting
pressure on the authorities in Damascus — a tool that
destroys the foundations of international cooperation
in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
Syria’s chemical-weapon stockpiles were removed
and eliminated under the supervision of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The
former military-chemical programme’s facilities have

18-361013/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

05/11/2018

been destroyed. Inspections of the scientific research
centre have revealed no undeclared activities, and after
the missile strikes on the installations by the United
States and its allies any inspection activities would
be pointless.

because it contradicts the letter and spirit of the CWC
and would require substantial amendments to the text
of the Convention that would require the consent of all
member States. Besides that, it is a blatant infringement
on the Security Council’s exclusive prerogatives.

The subject of Syria’s initial declaration under the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) has become
particularly ritualized. For all these years, the Syrian
Government has conscientiously cooperated with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat. It has provided all
the information it possesses, but the number of socalled unresolved issues is only increasing. Damascus
has reached a point where it has no more data. Any
possibility of shedding light on a host of issues has
gone, but they have been artificially kept on the agenda.

The people behind that initiative are now attempting
to extract budget funds for implementing the attribution
resolution and tailoring the OPCW’s programme of work
for the coming year accordingly. That is being done with
violations of the rules of procedure and severe pressure
being put on the parties to the CWC. The OPCW, which
began as an effective mechanism for international
control in the area of chemical disarmament, is losing
its authority and becoming an instrument for putting
political pressure on undesirable countries.

The investigations conducted by the former OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
have gone down in history as blatantly unprofessional
and outrageously politicized. They were artificially
directed at one goal, tarnishing the international
reputation of the Syrian authorities. Our attempts
to bring the JIM’s work into alignment with CWC
standards were firmly blocked. The logical outcome of
those manipulations was the closure of the Mechanism.
I should add that we have yet to hear a reasonable
explanation from the Secretariat about how effectively
the principles of the confidentiality and inviolability
of the former JIM’s archives are being ensured, as
established in the scope of its authority. We have had
information that there have been unacceptable leaks of
sensitive data, which must stop immediately.

Against that backdrop, we continue to receive
alarming information that terrorist groups in Syria
are pursuing their preparations for large-scale
provocations through the use of toxic substances,
in cooperation with the White Helmets. Our Syrian
colleagues regularly bring indications of this to the
Council’s attention and the Russian military also
has information on it. For example, we know that on
27 October, militias from the Turkistan Islamic Party
in Syria transferred 20 decalitre containers of chlorine
from Maarrat Al-Nu’man. Local residents reported to
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic that White Helmet
activists were looking for people willing to take part
in filming staged video footage in exchange for food.
We have received similar information from Aleppo
province, where the White Helmets brought canisters
of toxic substances and professional video-recording
equipment to the towns of Azaz, Marea and Al-Rai.
Those provocations are clearly designed to pin a label
on the violator of the non-proliferation regime in
Syria, create a reason for renewed acts of aggression
against Damascus and hold Russia up to shame as an
alleged enabler of the “heinous crimes of the regime”.
Our military experts are monitoring the situation. We
have radiation, chemical and biological reconnaissance
vehicles deployed at posts in the immediate vicinity of
the demilitarized zone in Idlib province that will help
us analyse the situation.

So far we have not been able to change the
parameters of the operations of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, which prefers to
work remotely and base its research on dubious sources
that are known to be hostile to the Syrian authorities.
Attempts to reform the Mission in accordance with
the provisions of the CWC have been met with stiff
resistance from those whom this state of affairs suits.
Meanwhile, Damascus’s opponents continue to
design new structures, needless to say according to
their own rules, as a result of which the OPCW has
lately been literally bursting at the seams. In June,
a decision by an absolute minority vote of the States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was
pushed through assigning to the organization in The
Hague the job of determining those responsible for the
use of chemical weapons. The decision is illegitimate,
4/17

The negative side of the politicization of the topic
of Syria’s former chemical warfare programme is the
lack of an adequate response to the genuine threat of
chemical terrorism in Syria and the Middle East. The
initiatives that Russia has launched in that regard are
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

being deliberately obstructed. However, we hope that life
will compel an end to such unconstructive approaches.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for convening this
meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General Izumi
Nakamitsu for her very informative briefing. Today I
will discuss three points — the situation on the ground,
the importance of remaining mobilized in the face of
the re-emergence of chemical weapons and the problem
of Syrian chemical weapons in particular.
On the ground, our priority is maintaining a
long-term ceasefire in Idlib. The Istanbul summit on
27 October resulted in a clear commitment by the four
participants to support the sustainable implementation
of the ceasefire in Idlib. The idea is removing for the
long term the threat of a major offensive that would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences. The summit’s road map is therefore
clear and we will continue to support the ongoing
efforts to stabilize the situation and enable Turkey to
separate terrorists from other groups. We must also do
everything we can to ensure the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, as
well as to ensure comprehensive, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout Syria by the most
direct routes and in the most effective way.
The Istanbul communiqué also outlines our
collective demand that any use of chemical weapons be
banned. To cite its very clear message, the summit’s
participants
(spoke in English)
“[r]eaffirmed their strongest opposition to the use
of chemical weapons by any party in Syria and
called for strict compliance by all parties with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
(spoke in French)
While the regime has continued its deceitful propaganda
campaign of blaming others for the chemical attacks, I
should emphasize the importance of maintaining our
extreme vigilance with regard to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Any resort to such weapons will not
go unanswered.
As President Macron hosts a ceremony in France
a few days from now marking the 100th anniversary

S/PV. 8390

of the armistice of 11 November 1918, we must be able
to assume our collective responsibility to history by
ensuring that the barbaric use of chemical weapons that
occurred during the First World War, so deeply etched
in our collective memory, is never repeated. In view
of the re-emergence of chemical weapons in Syria and
elsewhere, a united and mobilized Security Council
is therefore an absolute necessity. The decision of the
States parties to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), adopted in June in
accordance with the rules of the Organization, has
enabled the international community to strengthen
its capabilities, providing it with improved tools for
deterring the use of chemical weapons and in particular
aimed at designating its perpetrators more effectively.
It is now necessary to translate that decision into the
Organization’s means, especially with regard to the
upcoming deadlines this month in The Hague.
We should make it clear that failing to invest in
strengthening the existing institutions would jeopardize
the non-proliferation regime, which is at the heart of
our collective security, and at a time when that regime,
with its highly developed chemical-weapon component,
is being put to the test. That is a scenario that we cannot
allow to happen. In particular, we call on everyone to
support all investigative mechanisms established in
The Hague, Geneva and New York in the difficult task
that lies ahead. That is the goal of the initiatives that
we have put forward, from the partnership in the fight
against impunity for the use of chemical weapons to the
establishment of a European Union sanctions regime.
For that reason, we also support strengthening the
OPCW’s verification and inspection capabilities.
My third point is that strengthening those
verification measures is all the more necessary in view
of the continuing uncertain state of Syrian stockpiles.
The continued use of chemical weapons in Syria
confirms the existence of chlorine and sarin stockpiles,
and yet there there has been little progress for months
on Syria’s initial declaration of its stocks in 2013, which
is still full of inconsistencies. That à la carte approach
by the Syrian regime is not acceptable and demands
our collective vigilance. It is essential that the regime’s
supporters get it to cooperate fully.
In conclusion, with regard to the broader Syrian
conflict, the threat of the use of chemical weapons
and the country’s instability will not end as long as
the regime refuses to engage with Staffan de Mistura’s
political process, whose framework was established in

18-361015/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

resolution 2254 (2015). The Istanbul communiqué also
establishes a clear goal with regard to that, a meeting
of a constitutional committee by the end of the year.
Together with the members of the small group on
Syria, France will spare no effort in that regard. The
United Nations has established a third list, which it has
reviewed in dialogue with all stakeholders on several
occasions. All conditions have been met so that the
United Nations can convene a constitutional committee
and finally implement the entirety of resolution 2254
(2015), which serves as our common guiding light now
more than ever, in particular with regard to the holding
of free and fair elections under the supervision of the
United Nations in a safe and neutral environment. That
is the only way to reach a lasting solution to the conflict.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing today and
for submitting the sixty-first monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to the security Council pursuant to resolution
2118 (2013).
As we begin the month of November, allow me
to start by reminding the Security Council that this
month last year the Council had the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism at its disposal,
which was able to identify in a professional, objective
and independent manner those who used chemical
weapons in Syria. For some time, the Syrian chemical
dossier counted as one of the Security Council’s most
prominent successes. Through its unity, the Council
was able to underline the international community’s
determination and resolve to ensure the non-recurrence
of chemical-weapon crimes and ensure accountability.
One year after the end of the Mechanism’s mandate, we
find ourselves unable to agree on a new mechanism and
compelled to resort to means outside the purview of the
Security Council so as to administer justice and ensure
accountability relating to chemical-weapons crimes.
The State of Kuwait therefore supported the French
initiative to ensure accountability for those who used
chemical weapons and supported numerous countries
to hold a special session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the OPCW on 26 and 27 June in The Hague.
The Conference sought to identify parties responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria through the
OPCW. That was a very important step supported by
the State of Kuwait. We look forward to seeing the
6/17

05/11/2018

OPCW adopt the necessary measures to shoulder that
responsibility. At the same time, we stress that the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations to counter all
threats to international peace and security, including
crimes involving chemical weapons.
Once again, we restate our readiness to work with all
members of the Security Council to reach an agreement
on establishing a new mechanism to shoulder our
common responsibilities. We call again for the need for
Council’s members to speak as one voice on this issue,
which involves is the crime of using those prohibited
weapons. We reiterate that the lack of a mechanism to
hold accountable those who used chemical weapons
in Syria will allow them to enjoy impunity and fail to
ensure that they will be held accountable in the future.
On the other hand, we look forward to the final findings
of the investigation of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma on 7 April. We renew our support
for the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to uncover the truth.
We share the Secretary-General’s disappointment
over about continued inconsistencies in the
Syrian Government’s declaration concerning its
chemical-weapons programme. Once again, we call
on the Syrian authorities to fully cooperate with the
OPCW and provide it with the required information
to end the discrepancies regarding the details of its
chemical programmes.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm and principled
position condemning the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, anytime and by any party. We underscore
the need to hold accountable the perpetrators of those
crimes, whether individuals, entities, non-State groups
or Governments. We once again emphasize that there
is no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The only
solution is a political one in accordance with the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this meeting.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her comprehensive
briefing on the issue of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, my country
commends Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts with regard
to the Syrian issue.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the Syrian authorities’
cooperation with the relevant bodies of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
which led to the destruction of 27 chemical-weapon
production facilities declared by Damascus. In that
regard, my country commends the Syrian Arab
Republic for its efforts and encourages it to cooperate
further with a view to addressing the concerns raised
by the OPCW in the report to the Secretary-General
(S/2018/971, annex). Côte d’Ivoire also notes with
satisfaction the visit made by the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in September to
collect additional information and conduct interviews
concerning the 2017 incidents, including in Kharbit
Masasnah; Qalib Al-Thawr, in Al-Salamiyah; Yarmouk,
in Damascus, and Al-Balil, in Souran. My delegation
would like to see the analysis of the data collected by
the Fact-finding Mission help identify those who used
chemical weapons in the areas just mentioned with a
view to bringing them before the competent courts.
My country welcomed the 17 September signing
by the Russian Federation and Turkey of the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in Idlib governorate.
That agreement helped to prevent the much-feared
armed confrontation among the warring parties, thereby
avoiding the risk of the use of chemical weapons and of a
humanitarian catastrophe. Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges
all parties to play a decisive role in the implementation
of the provisions of that agreement, particularly those
relating to the withdrawal of heavy weapons and
combatants from the demilitarized zone.
The steadfast position of Côte d’Ivoire is that the use
of chemical weapons, both in times of war and peace,
constitutes a grave human rights violation regardless
of who uses them. The Council therefore has the
imperative duty to respond collectively and firmly to
those reprehensible acts, together as one. It is therefore
regrettable that the institutional vacuum resulting from
the failure to renew the mandate of the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in November
2017 is responsible for the inability to determine the
facts concerning the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and to bring the perpetrators before the competent
international tribunals. My country therefore welcomed
the mandate conferred upon the OPCW at the fourth
special session of the Conference of the States Parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, held from

S/PV. 8390

26 to 27 June 2018 in The Hague, thereby enabling
it to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators of
chemical-weapon attacks.
Côte d’Ivoire stresses once again that the use
of chemical weapons, whatever the circumstances,
remains unacceptable both in terms of international law
and the values that make up our collective conscience.
In conclusion, my country calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to prioritize finding a political
settlement to the current crisis through inclusive
dialogue and in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of this
meeting and express our thanks to Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
and her team for her informative briefing. We reaffirm
the support of the Government of Equatorial Guinea
for the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), whose personnel operate
in very sensitive and risky conditions.
We reiterate that the complete destruction of the
27 chemical-weapons production facilities declared by
Syria is an important development that reflects the will
and commitment on the part of national officials of the
Syrian Arab Republic and of international parties, above
all the Russian Federation, to take resolute steps towards
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). It also
aims to achieve the objectives of the original declaration
on the Syrian Government’s chemical-weapons
programme. In that regard, we continue to commend
the close cooperation between the OPCW and
Damascus in order to clarify any discrepancies or
inconsistencies that might have been observed in the
original declaration and in the information exchanged
in compliance with the obligations provided for in the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes note that
the Fact-finding Mission has not yet reached conclusions
with respect to the events of 7 April in Douma.
However, we endorse the idea that further investigation
into the indicent should be carried out with rigour and
professionalism, as well as the other five incidents
reported to the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
With respect to the safety of OPCW personnel at
investigation and inspection sites, our Government
believes access to the sites of alleged incidents
requires that the security of the mission be ensured on

18-361017/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

a permanent basis in accordance with the provisions
of the Conference of the States Parties held on 26 and
27 June. In that regard, we reiterate the need for the
Technical Secretariat to implement the new measures
aimed at mitigating high-security risks proposed by
the United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
That would lead to better planning on the upcoming
inspections planned at the Barzah and Jamraya facilities
of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre.
We must remember that we are talking about
the most effective, cheapest and easiest type of
weapon available — certainly more so than nuclear
weapons — and we must therefore prevent warring
parties from using this weapon again in Idlib or any part
of Syria at all costs. The demilitarization agreement on
Idlib, which has brought about relative stability to the
area, should make it impossible for chemical attacks to
re-emerge.
Let us not be deceived. Opposing positions in the
Security Council show that the end of chemical weapons
in Syria effectively depends on a political agreement.
In that context, the Security Council and the OPCW are
the main channels for addressing this thorny problem.
We recognize the important role they have been playing
and we hope that the parties concerned will adopt a
constructive approach to find a solution through direct
and unhindered dialogue, which can make it possible
to prevent and put a definitive end to any further use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any party that intends to
use them.
In that regard, we continue to emphasize the need
for the establishment of a mechanism for attribution of
responsibility, which would be essential in reaffirming
the prohibition of the use of those weapons and to
deter their use. We also welcome the decision of the
Conference of the States Parties urging the Technical
Secretariat to take steps in identifying those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is a step
in the right direction, as we firmly believe that it is
the common responsibility of the entire international
community to uphold the prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons and prevent those abominable
attacks from being repeated and by ensuring that no
one can be exonerated from responsibility in the event
of those situations.
I conclude by reiterating the official position of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea: we oppose the
8/17

05/11/2018

production, trade, distribution, storage and use of
chemical weapons by anyone and anywhere.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I take the floor during this month, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also thank
Bolivia for its presidency of the Council last month.
I would like to thank the High Representative for
her briefing. I think that it is clear that not enough
progress has been made. At one level that is not a
surprise, given the track record of the Syrian authorities.
But at another level it just beggars belief: chemical
weapons are universally prohibited weapons under
international law. Everybody on the Council, except
one member, stresses that and stresses the supreme
importance of upholding that prohibition. I think that
the interventions by Kuwait and France laid out very
well the historical place that chemical weapons hold in
global non-proliferation regimes.
What part of “these are prohibited weapons” do
Syria and Russia not understand? I think it is almost
absurd that we should have to rehearse each month
quite how terrible those weapons are. It really ought
to be globally recognized and upheld that we work
to strengthen the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention and to make sure those weapons are never
used. That ought to be a universal good that everybody
in the United Nations ought to be able to subscribe to.
Future generations will judge us very harshly — but
will judge two countries particularly harshly — for
breaking that prohibition. As many speakers have said,
the OPCW is doing good work. It is mandated to do
that work. And the Conference of States Parties have
decided to strengthen the work that it does.
There was an alternative — to have a Security
Council mechanism — but that came to a grinding halt
with a Russian veto. Therefore, we must all support the
OPCW Director-General and his work to implement
the decision adopted at the special conference of the
States Parties held in June. For our part, the United
Kingdom looks forward to arrangements being swiftly
put in place so that the OPCW can begin its work on
attribution of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria.
We call on all States that will be meeting in The
Hague later this month to respect the decision, which
was taken by an overwhelming majority in June. We look
to all international partners to engage constructively in
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

discussions on the future work of the organization in
Syria and elsewhere. On the funding point, it is in all
our countries’ interests for the OPCW to receive the
funding it needs to continue to uphold the global norms
against chemical weapons.
On other issues, I just want to endorse what others
have said about the importance of the political settlement
and of establishing the constitutional committee in line
with the Istanbul summit declaration, which we very
much welcomed at the time. And of course, on Idlib,
we want that agreement to hold. It is the key to so much
about the future of the people in Syria.
I want to conclude by addressing the allegations
about the White Helmets. We keep hearing those
allegations. Again, it beggars belief that we should have
to take the floor to defend some of the bravest volunteers
working in Syria. The Syrian civil defence have
confirmed that none of their volunteers were involved,
let alone killed, in the alleged incident referred to by
the Syrian authorities in their recent correspondence,
which is contrary to those authorities’ fabrications.
Repeated allegations that the United Kingdom and
its allies are preparing a chemical-weapons attack are
malicious, absurd and they are simply an attempt to
distract and deflect attention from the real situation on
the ground in Syria, But I want to end by echoing what
the representative of France said, that we will respond
appropriately if there is a chemical-weapons attack.
And that attack will not come from us.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her important briefing.
We note with deep concern the growing number
of allegations of the use of chemical weapons against
the civilian population in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Peru condemns those atrocious acts wherever they
occur and considers them to be in open defiance of
the non-proliferation regime and the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are also
concerned about the continued discrepancies, errors
and omissions in the Syrian declaration. The recent
information provided by the Government of Syria to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) was once again insufficient. We reiterate that
the Syrian authorities are legally and morally obligated
to cooperate fully in order to clarify the remaining
discrepancies and that the Council is responsible for
safeguarding the non-proliferation regime.

S/PV. 8390

Moreover, we wish to reaffirm our confidence in
the work being carried out by the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission, whose professionalism and technical rigour
have made it possible to determine that chemical
attacks have occurred in Syria. We look forward to the
findings of its final report on the events in Douma and
its account of several additional incidents that have been
reported regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons
in Syria. We would also like to highlight the progress
made by the OPCW in terms of logistical planning for
the effective implementation of the decision adopted
on 27 June at the special session of the Conference of
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
consider it of the utmost importance that investigations
enable the OPCW to identify the perpetrators of those
barbaric acts. We stress that identifying those resposible
and conducting fair trials that lead to punishing
those responsible will enable justice to be rendered
to the victims, while also effectively discourage the
repetition of those atrocious crimes and safeguard the
non-proliferation regime. That also means restoring
the rule of law, which is required to build sustainable
peace, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): As this is the first time
this month that I take the floor in the Chamber, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its efforts
and work during its presidency in October. I would like
to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing and for
submitting to the Council the latest report (S/2018/971,
annex) of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on chemical weapons in
Syria. Since the Polish position on chemical weapons
is well-known, I would like to make my remarks brief.
The sixty-first report of the OPCW does not
provide information that would allow us to state that the
declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic can
be considered accurate and complete in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the decision
of the OPCW Executive Council. We call on Syria to
cooperate fully with the OPCW in order to clarify all
existing gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies.
We continuously express our support for the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Fact-finding Mission in their dedication
and professional efforts to maintain and strengthen the
effectiveness and integrity of the Chemical Weapons

18-361019/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

Convention. We are concerned by the reports of the
Fact-finding Mission on the use of chemical agents
as weapons in Saraqib, Ltamenah and Douma. Poland
strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons
everywhere, including in Syria. We are of the view that
the perpetrators of those crimes must be brought to
justice. In conclusion, I support all efforts to enhance
the integrity and efficiency of the OPCW. At the same
time, I would also like to echo other speakers and
emphasize the need for the resumption of the political
process in Syria.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for the information she
provided today.
We once again highlight the destruction of the 27
chemical-weapons production facilities declared by
the Syrian Arab Republic and encourage it to continue
to submit reports regarding such facilities. We also
encourage the Syrian Government to continue to
cooperate in order to clarify outstanding issues for
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We stress
that dialogue and transparency are the best paths to
overcome any doubt or discrepancy that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat encounters. We reiterate our
support for the work being carried out by the Technical
Secretariat. We encourage Syria and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to continue to work concertedly.
We also consider it essential that the Technical
Secretariat conduct on-site inspections in order to
gather reliable information from those places where
chemical elements or agents are alleged to have been
used. In that regard, we highlight the upcoming
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre. We will
examine the results closely.
Bolivia categorically rejects the use of chemical
weapons; it is an unjustifiable and criminal act regardless
of where or by whom it is committed, as it is a serious
crime against international law and life itself. Anyone
who uses that type of weapon must be accountable to
justice. To that end, we insist that the Security Council
remain united in order to establish an impartial and
credible mechanism to conduct an investigation that is
conclusive, transparent and depoliticized to bring those
responsible to justice. In that regard, we regret that
10/17

05/11/2018

other multilateral bodies such as the OPCW — whose
technical work carried out to date we recognize and
support — have been resorted to and given powers.
However, we believe that the identification of those
responsible should be undertaken by a mechanism
that has the backing of the Council. With regard to the
technical work of the OPCW, we will closely examine
the results of any of the analyses and investigations
that the Fact-finding Mission carries out on the alleged
incidents in Douma and those reported in 2017.
Finally, we reiterate that the only way out of the
conflict is through a high-level political dialogue that,
within the framework of international law and, in
particular, respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria, allows for the
formation of a constitutional committee, in accordance
with the Sochi declaration, resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva process under the auspices of the United
Nations. We also highlight the latest agreement between
Russia and Turkey, which has enabled a reduction of
violence, mainly in the province of Idlib, as well as the
meeting among Russia, Turkey, France and Germany.
Those platforms for dialogue are essential if we want to
reach a peaceful solution to the conflict.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her informative briefing and
the professional work of her able team.
Despite the willingness of and some actions between
the key parties aimed at eliminating all remaining
ambiguities, we are still not able to see tangible
progress on outstanding issues. My delegation believes
that the Council should focus more on the following
three factors. First is assistance and support to enhance
cooperation and collaboration between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the Syrian Government. It would help to move forward
effectively on the resolution of all disputes concerning
the initial declaration by the latter. The second factor
concerns facilitating the effective investigation of all
reported chemical weapons incidents in Syria. Every
month, we hear only that the investigations with regard
to Douma and other incidents are continuing. We do
not see how the procedures are being carried out or
what the problems and obstacles being faced are and
how they are being addressed and solved. The third
element is the existence of impunity and the absence
of preventive measures, which are further stumbling
blocks that prevent us from effectively countering the
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

continued threats of the use of chemical weapons. My
country is firmly convinced that the Council must be
united in tirelessly seeking a comprehensive solution
to the issues of attribution and prosecution without
transferring such prerogatives to other structures.
With regard to the decision of the fourth special
session of the Conference of the States Parties,
Kazakhstan advocates that the possible new functions
of the OPCW, as well as the possibilities of expanding
its mandate, should be considered and implemented
with the participation and support of all States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
To conclude, we hope that the Security Council
will retain its leading role and special prerogative in
resolving all such issues without transferring them to
other structures. To do so would be to subject the issues
to further risks of politicization and polarization.
Finally, Kazakhstan calls for the much-needed
constructive and patient consultations and the tireless
search for mutually acceptable solutions for the benefit
of the people of Syria.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Since this is the
first meeting for me personally this month, let me also
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team on
your presidency and to thank Bolivia for its very active
presidency last month.
During the conflict in Syria, we have witnessed the
repeated use of chemical weapons as well as numerous
other systematic and flagrant violations of international
law by the parties to the conflict. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded that the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant were responsible for using chemical
weapons. We condemn that in the strongest terms. It is a
serious violation of international law and it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. Such use in
armed conflict amounts to a war crime.
The proliferation and use of chemical weapons must
end and those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable. We have repeatedly stated in the Security
Council that impunity is not an option. As representatives
know, to that end, we have worked tirelessly, including
with the other elected members, to find an agreement
on a mechanism for accountability. That is also why we
joined the French-led International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons and why

S/PV. 8390

we supported the decision of the Conference of States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention at its
special session to put in place arrangements to identify
the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. While a mechanism established by the Council
would have been and remains preferable, the issue is
too important to be allowed to be blocked indefinitely.
However, the decision of the Conference of States
Parties does not relieve the Council of its responsibility.
We now look forward to updates to the Council on the
implementation of that decision as part of the monthly
reporting under resolution 2118 (2013).
Let me make the following comments with regard
to the most recent report on the elimination of chemical
weapons in Syria by the Director-General of the OPCW
(S/2018/971, annex).
First, we note that the Declaration Assessment
Team of the OPCW is analysing the response by the
Syrian authorities to the questions regarding the
outstanding issues related to its chemical weapons
declaration. We emphasize that all open issues must
be closed as soon as possible. All remaining chemical
weapons must be declared and destroyed, in line with
resolution 2118 (2013). We urge the Syrian authorities
to cooperate fully and actively with the OPCW so that
the accuracy and completeness of its declaration can
ultimately be verified.
Secondly, we reiterate our full support for the
OPCW and our complete confidence in the independent,
impartial and professional work of its Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. We look forward
to the upcoming reports regarding a number of pending
investigations, including the final report on the alleged
attack in Douma.
Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about
allegations that chemical weapons may be used again.
In that regard, we fully support and endorse the remarks
made by the Secretary-General in his letter transmitting
the monthly report where it states “that any further
possible use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic would be wholly unacceptable” (S/2018/971).
All parties must be reminded of the clear and absolute
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons under
any circumstances.
As co-penholder on humanitarian matters in Syria,
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight
and welcome the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to Rukban, which took place this weekend. We want to

18-3610111/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

recognize the tremendous efforts by the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to make that happen,
as well as the facilitation by Russia and the United
States. It is critically needed relief for the approximately
50,000 people who are stranded in the camp and who
have not received aid since January. However, we need
more positive examples like this as we continue to push
for safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access
to all people in need throughout Syria.
In the same vein, let me also take this opportunity
to comment on the most recent developments on the
political track. The recent meetings in relevant formats
show that there is an international momentum that
now needs to be seized solution, aiming to have the
constitutional committee in place before the end of
the year. At this critical time the Council needs to take
a clear stand, show that we fully support the United
Nations-led political process and make sure that there
is some real progress in time for the Special Envoy’s
briefing later this month.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing.
We appreciate the continued efforts by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Government
on its chemical weapons programme. However, we
understand from the report of the Director-General of
OPCW that the Secretariat remains unable to resolve all
the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies.
In that regard, we note that the Director-General
has sent a letter to the Syrian Government emphasizing
the importance of resolving the outstanding issues on
an expedited basis.
We would like to once again stress the importance
of meaningful and results-oriented communications
and continued consultations between the OPCW and
the Syrian Government with the clear objective of
addressing all remaining outstanding issues once and
for all. Meanwhile, we note the Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) has continued its
investigation with regard to the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma in April. All parties should
cooperate with the FFM in its ongoing investigation.
We look forward to the issuance of its final report on
that incident.
12/17

05/11/2018

We also note that the FFM has continued to collect
and analyse information related to five incidents of the
alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. Our position
remains consistent and clear, namely, that any use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any actor under any
circumstance is totally unacceptable.
As the Secretary-General stressed in his letter
dated 29 October, “it is imperative that no impunity
for those acts be permitted by the international
community” (S/2018/971) In that regard, we remain
convinced that restoring the unity of the Council is the
most sensible way forward to make tangible progress
towards ensuring accountability.
Finally, we would like to underscore the importance
of resuming political dialogue in order to sustainably
address the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I
Ms. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.

thank

I will focus on three points: first, our support
for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW); secondly, accountability; and
thirdly, political developments.
First, I will address our support for the OPCW and
the establishment of the attribution mechanism. We
thank the Secretary-General for the sixty-first OPCW
report (S/2018/971, annex), and we support the objective
and professional work of OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic.
It remains unacceptable that, almost five years
after Syria joined the Chemical Weapons Convention,
its declaration can still not be verified as accurate and
complete. The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates
the importance of the outcome of the fourth special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention on 27 June. An
overwhelming majority of member States reconfirmed
and strengthened the standard against the use of
chemical weapons by deciding on the establishment
of an attribution mechanism. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands therefore praises the Director-General of
the OPCW for his commitment to implementing that
decision expeditiously.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses great
concern about the obstructive attitude of the Russian
Federation during the recent budget discussions in the
OPCW. By frustrating the discussions on the OPCW
budget for 2019, the Russian Federation is trying to
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

delay the legitimate establishment of the attribution
mechanism. It also puts the overall functioning of the
OPCW at risk. We call on the Russian Federation to
engage constructively and to demonstrate support for
the solemn purpose of the OPCW — and that purpose
is to eradicate chemical weapons worldwide under a
United Nations mandate.
Secondly, I turn to the need for accountability.
Syrians deserve justice. Impunity for chemical weapons
use cannot be allowed. Accountability for chemical
weapons used in Syria is neither optional nor negotiable.
The use of chemical weapons is never permitted by
anyone under any circumstance. Therefore, upholding
the international non-proliferation regime is crucial.
That norm has been endangered by the Syrian regime.
We look forward to the final report on the attack in
Douma on 7 April to be published before the end of
the year.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the memorandum of understanding on cooperation
between the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. The possibility for the
OPCW to share information with the Mechanism can
make an important contribution to combating impunity
in Syria. It is therefore an important first step towards
accountability. We remain convinced that a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is by far the best option. It is the best way
to achieve accountability for the most serious crimes
that have taken place in Syria. As long as the Council
is prevented from referring the situation in Syria to the
ICC, we will continue our efforts for accountability
elsewhere — in the OPCW, the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism, the commission of inquiry
and the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons.
We emphasize that the archiving for the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Joint
Investigative Mechanism’s is done on the basis of
the applicable United Nations rules and procedures,
as Ms. Nakamitsu shared with us during a previous
meeting on chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.8174).
A letter from the Office for Disarmament Affairs or
the Secretary-General has no added value, and for

S/PV. 8390

that reason we cannot support the Russian request for
a letter.
Thirdly, I will speak on political developments.
We welcome the reduced level of violence in Idlib after
the Turkish-Russian memorandum of understanding.
We are concerned, however, by the recent statement of
the Syrian representative here in the Council that “[we
will] fully recover Idlib when we deem it necessary”
(S/PV.8383, p. 15). An escalation of violence in Idlib by
the regime would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe. It
would reconfirm that the regime in no way prioritizes
protecting the Syrian people. Citizens in Idlib deserve
protection. A military confrontation will undermine
lasting stability and peace.
We call on Turkey and Russia to involve the United
Nations in the implementation of the humanitarian
side of the memorandum of understanding. We must
not allow ourselves to miss the window of opportunity
offered by the situation in Idlib for the actual convening
of the constitutional committee. It should be used as
the starting point of a broader, sustainable political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). The
Kingdom of the Netherlands pleads for the convening
of the constitutional committee as soon as possible,
before the end of the year and before the departure
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. We call on all
parties, particularly the Syrian regime, to cooperate
constructively with the United Nations to prevent
further delays in the political process.
In conclusion, with reference to the statement
delivered earlier by our Russian colleague on the White
Helmets, we reconfirm our point of view that the White
Helmets are brave humanitarian workers. They have
been attacked on the ground by the Syrian regime while
engaging in purely humanitarian efforts, and those
attacks are unacceptable.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
At the outset, I would like to thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
have taken note of the report of the Organization on
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (S/2018/971,
annex), transmitted recently to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General. The OPCW has continued to
engage with Syria on unresolved issues concerning the
initial declaration of chemical weapons.

18-3610113/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

China supports enhanced coordination between
the two sides for a proper settlement of the issues at
hand. We have taken note that the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is investigating
five cases of alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria,
and hope to see conclusions from the investigation at an
early date. Meanwhile, all parties hope that the Mission
will produce the final investigation report on the use
of chemical weapons in the Douma area. We hope that
the mission Will carry out its work in strict compliance
with its mandate.
China’s position on chemical weapons is consistent
and clear. We are firmly against the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstances and for any purpose. The use
of chemical weapons is not to be tolerated whenever
or wherever it occurs. All alleged chemical weapons
incidents must undergo comprehensive, objective and
impartial investigations so as to draw conclusions,
based on well-established evidence, that can withstand
the test of facts and history and to bring to justice the
perpetrators and parties responsible.
With regard to the adoption of the position on
accountability for the use of chemical weapons at the
fourth special session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention in June,
China’s position remains unchanged. We hope that the
parties will work to bridge their differences through
dialogue and consultations, and together cope with the
threat posed by the use of chemical weapons.
Finally, I want to underscore that the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria is closely related to the
political settlement of the Syrian question. At present,
the parties to the Syrian question are engaged in
intensive diplomatic efforts to advance the Syrian
political process. We call on all parties concerned to
take a constructive approach, maintain unity on the
issue of chemical weapons in Syria, resolve problems
through dialogue and consultations and work together to
prevent the recurrence of the use of chemical weapons.
In that process, the parties should strictly abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and fully respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. We hope that the parties will work
together constructively for an early comprehensive, just
and proper settlement of the Syrian question.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
14/17

05/11/2018

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I wish to congratulate to you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the proceedings of the
Security Council this month. I hope that the Council
will be able to benefit from the Chinese wisdom during
your presidency.
I should like to begin by providing information
to raise awareness among members of the Security
Council. There is a Syrian terrorist named Jihad Diab.
He is also known by the name of Abu Wa’el Diab.
That terrorist travelled to Afghanistan in 2000 to fight
alongside Al-Qaida. Pakistani security forces arrested
him in 2001, along with other international terrorists.
Pakistani security forces handed them over to United
States intelligence services, which transferred them to
the Guantánamo Bay detention camp.
It turns out that the American authorities have
released a number of Guantánamo prisoners during
the terrorist crisis that has been plaguing my country.
Miraculously, those prisoners were able to leave
Guantánamo and travel to my country. They obtained
passports, visas and money. They travelled tens of
thousands of kilometres without being stopped by
anyone, managing to go from Guantánamo all the way
to Syria. Among those individuals was Jihad Diab,
who is currently residing in Turkey. He is visiting his
mother, who is sick, in one of the hospitals there. He
can move freely between Syria and Turkey to fight
alongside the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist entity that has
been inscribed on the Council’s lists. That is the first
part of what I wanted to share with the Council today.
The second part deals with the details, and I trust
that it will be of interest to the Council. The American
Government reached an agreement with the Uruguayan
Government in 2014. Pursuant to that agreement, a
large number of terrorists from Guantánamo prison
were transferred to Uruguay for so-called humanitarian
reasons. That number included three Syrians, one
Palestinian and one Tunisian. Jihad Diab was one of
them. For humanitarian reasons, therefore, he was able
to go from Guantánamo to Syria through Uruguay. The
United States has stated that it reached an agreement
with the Government of Uruguay, pursuant to which
the Government of Uruguay committed to keeping that
terrorist on its soil. However, that terrorist left Uruguay
and went to Syria. Now residing in Turkey, he is
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

recruiting terrorists and sending them to Syria — either
to Idlib or elsewhere in the country. We will relay
that information to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015). We expect that the Committee
will deliver a practical response this time by inscribing
the name of that terrorist on the sanctions list — of
course, if there is anyone who genuinely wants to tackle
the heinous scourge of terrorism that has been plaguing
my country.
I will tell the Council of another incident, which
happened in 2014. We informed the Council about
it in an official letter that was issued as document
S/2014/195. I concerns another Syrian terrorist, named
Haytham Qassab. That man transferred chemical
material from Turkey to the so-called Ahrar al-Sham,
which is the Al-Nusra Front, now located in Idlib.
On 31 May, Turkish authorities released that terrorist
after having caught him in the act and in possession of
chemical material on Turkish soil. He was released to
be able to play his terrorist role in Syria. That terrorist,
Haytham Qassab, went to a Turkish supplier named
Khalid Osman Malika, head of the Thurwa Import
and Export Company in Turkey, which operates in
the Polhajili area of Turkey. We can even describe the
colour of the building’s façade and give the building’s
address. Haytham Qassab requested material from
that Turkish supplier, including white phosphorus,
red phosphorus, potassium fluoride, methanol and
resorcinol. He said that he needed those materials to
produce white smoke in certain areas and then claim
that it was the Syrian authorities that had bombarded
those areas. The objective therefore was to use those
materials as chemical weapons. That is the information
I wished to provide concerning the terrorism from
which my country has been suffering — terrorism
supported by certain States.
Day after day, the practices of certain Western
States on the Council demonstrate that they have come
to enjoy exploiting the principles of international law,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rules governing the proceedings of the Organization.
Those States have also manipulated United Nations
platforms to advance their political agendas, with the
aim of interfering in the affairs of other Member States,
as well as to cover up for the crimes that they themselves
perpetrated against the Syrian people, and also to cover
up the crimes perpetrated by the armed terrorist groups
to which they have provided myriad forms of support

S/PV. 8390

over the past seven years. That includes facilitating the
acquisition by those terrorist groups of toxic chemical
materials that they then used against the Syrian army
and Syrian civilians alike.
Day after day, light is shed on unprecedented
atrocities perpetrated against the Syrian people due to
the heinous policies carried out by the Governments of
those States. The most recent example is the discovery
of mass graves in Raqqa several days ago. That was a
consequence of the air strikes by the so-called global
coalition against that city. The tragic discovery of those
mass graves in Raqqa revealed 4,000 bodies, most of
whom were women, children and the elderly. We had
removed only 2 per cent of the rubble in Raqqa and
already discovered 4,000 bodies to date in mass graves.
That tragic discovery corroborates the veracity of the
information we provided repeatedly with respect to the
brutality of the crimes perpetrated by the coalition.
The coalition completely destroyed the Syrian city of
Raqqa — after having transferred Da’esh terrorists
to the governorate of Deir ez-Zour — to prevent the
national army from controlling the shared borders with
Iraq, and to ensure that they could deliver on their plans
to undermine the sovereignty and unity of the Syrian
Arab Republic in conjunction with the militias under
their wing.
Once again, my country calls upon the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities to safeguard
international peace and security, to act immediately
to put an end to the crimes perpetrated by the global
coalition against the Syrian people, to prevent the
reoccurrence of those crimes and to hold the perpetrators
of those crimes against my people accountable. My
country calls upon the Security Council to conduct an
international investigation into the crimes and mass
killings that were uncovered in the city of Raqqa. We
call upon the Council once again to put an end to the
aggressive and illegal presence of American forces and
other foreign forces on Syrian soil.
I would like to tell those who have a short memory
that Syria’s commitment to eradicating weapons of
mass destruction does not date back to 2013 alone,
rather 2013 was the year we joined the Chemical
Weapons Convention. On the contrary, our commitment
to eradicating weapons of mass destruction is a longstanding one. I would like to remind all present in the
Council that my country presented, on 27 December
2003 to be exact, when we were a member of the
Security Council, an initiative to make the Middle East

18-3610115/17

S/PV.8390

The situation in the Middle East

a zone free of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction.
Nonetheless, at that time the United States delegation
threatened to veto it if we put that proposal to the vote
in Security Council. Therefore, our commitment is
long-standing and dates back to 2003. In that regard,
my country reiterates the call for Member States to
make the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons
and all weapons of mass destruction. We also calls
upon the Council to urge Israel to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclearweapon State and to submit all of its nuclear activities
and facilities to the monitoring of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
My country has honoured its commitments
pursuant to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013). Syria has always endeavoured
to cooperate in a positive, transparent and flexible way
to uphold its commitments, even as we face tremendous
challenges and difficult, complicated and provocative
security conditions resulting from the hostile actions of
some regional and international stakeholders.
The Syrian Government made an unprecedented
achievement in the Organization’s history by irreversibly
eliminating its chemical-weapons programme in record
time and on United States vessels. Yet instead of
commending what the Syrian Government has done,
we observe that those States that are manipulating
international law, those that are masters of the art of
deception, are calling on the Security Council to hold
theatrical meetings on an almost daily basis, with the
sole aim of advancing provocative and unfounded
allegations against the Syrian Government. I would
underscore for those States once again that there is a
huge, rampaging elephant in the Chamber. The elephant
is the States that called for today’s meeting are the same
States that facilitated terrorist groups’ acquisition of
toxic chemical materials. The elephant is that those
armed terrorist groups used that material against Syria.
The elephant is the statements of senior officials of
those States, accompanied by the statements we have
all heard today, that the only way to save the armed
terrorist groups is through the use of chemical weapons.
Hence there are States in this Chamber that want to see
chemical weapons used, and States that are prompting
terrorist groups to use those weapons to once again
hold such theatrical meetings and make unfounded
accusations against the Syrian Government and say that
the Syrian Government used those heinous weapons.
16/17

05/11/2018

I now take this opportunity to note that these
heinous weapons are European and American weapons.
American weapons in Viet Nam and European weapons
in the hands of France and Germany, as was mentioned
by my colleague the representative of France, who
mentioned that at the beginning of his statement this
morning. Therefore, the use of chemical weapons is
indeed a Western use.
One day I visited Hanoi on a Vietnamese aircraft.
I travelled from Saigon to Hanoi. From the window of
my aeroplane I saw thousands of giant craters in the
ground between Saigon and Hanoi. When I asked,
“What are those craters there?” I was told that they
were craters left by the dropping of American chemical
bombs, which incinerated all signs of life over a
1,000 kilometres between Saigon and Hanoi. I repeat,
thousands of craters.
The elephant is that those statements are direct
incitement for armed terrorist groups to use toxic
chemical weapons against civilians in Idlib and for
them to fabricate evidence and seek false witnesses to
manipulate the crime scene. These States, with their
media and political influence, stand ready to accuse
the Syrian Government and intervene to save terrorist
groups, and that is exactly what happened in Khan
Al-Assal and Khan Shaykhoun.
The elephant is the scenes orchestrated by the White
Helmets, which are the deceptive British branch of the
Al-Nusra Front, about the alleged use of toxic chemical
weapons in a number of Syrian areas. The elephant is
that the fact-finding mission has continuously violated
its mandate and failed to uphold professional standards.
It has adopted a selective approach in its investigations.
It has not been transparent or maintained the chain of
custody of its samples. It did not comply with the fair
geographical composition of its teams. That, I would
say to Ms. Nakamitsu, is the truth.
The elephant is the use by the global coalition
of white phosphorus, an internationally banned
chemical agent that has bee unsed repeatedly against
Syrian civilians.
The elephant is that these States are turning a
blind eye to more than 160 letters that my Government
addressed to the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as
well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, concerning
18-36101

05/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the possession and use by armed terrorist groups of
chemical and toxic materials.
The elephant is that the Security Council has not
taken any measure to address those States that sponsor
and finance the armed terrorist groups, those States that
have facilitated the possession of toxic and chemical
weapons for those groups.
In our most recent letter, we informed the Security
Council about a tremendous explosion on Thursday,
18 October, in a part of a factory with a large amount
of fertilizer, explosive material and barrels of liquid
chlorine, a factory that belongs to an armed terrorist
group in Idlib, specifically in the city of Termanin,
which is 15 kilometres from the Turkish border. That
factory is supervised by foreign Turks, British and
Chechen experts. The explosion took the lives of nine
of the so-called experts and two of the so-called White
Helmets. We remind the Council that some Al-Nusra
Front agents have previously transferred cargo from
that factory to an unknown destination, in conjunction
with the terrorist White Helmets.
With regard to the settlement of the so-called
unresolved issues that have to do with Syria’s first
declaration, my country is of the view that a great
deal of effort and time was spent on certain aspects
of the declaration, which continues to be described as
unresolved issues and yet they were widely considered
and studied. My country believes that it is important to
reconsider the composition of the current Declaration
Assessment Team. It is important to introduce changes
to the Team and incorporate scientific and technical
expertise, rather than intelligence elements. It is
important to let go of one-sided interpretations and
to stop turning a blind eye to the interpretations of
Syrian experts.
My Government calls the Council’s attention to
the fact that the nature of the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team has changed. It was an assistance
team and it has become an investigation team. That runs

S/PV. 8390

counter to the provisions of the agreement. Therefore,
all the issues that were discussed remain unjustifiably
pending, even though Syria has collaborated with
the Declaration Assessment Team in general and has
provided the it with all the information at its disposal.
Syria has also responded effectively and without delay
to the questions and inquiries submitted to it.
In conclusion, my country’s Government has
underscored time and time again before the Council
and the OCPW Executive Council that it condemns any
use of any type of chemical weapon or other weapon
of mass destruction, as that constitutes a crime against
humanity and a wrongful, immoral and unjustifiable
act, no matter the circumstances, whereabouts or cause.
From this Chamber, we reaffirm that the Syrian
army has never used any chemical weapons. We no
longer possess those weapons, as Ms. Sigrid Kaag
reported few years ago. We remind the Council that
the Syrian chemical-weapon arsenal was completely
destroyed in the Mediterranean aboard the American
vessel MV Cape Ray. That was attested to by Ms. Kaag
as well in her report submitted to the Council in
June 2014.
This case, therefore, was closed four years ago,
but there are some who do not want it closed. They
want to continue to defame the Syrian Government
every month during these theatrical meetings; indeed,
these meetings are purely theatrical. A lot of effort and
money here and at The Hague are spent while this file
is essentially empty.
The Syrian Government confirms that it will
continue to uphold all the commitments it undertook
upon acceding to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
as well as its commitment to fight terrorism, which
will not be stopped by any form of political or media
blackmailing, or even by the despicable exploitation of
the blood of our innocent people in Syria.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

18-3610117/17
