A /74/PV.36

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

36th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 27 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gafoor
(Singapore), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/74/446)
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and
upon their nomination by the Economic and Social
Council, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
The Assembly has before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral, circulated in document A/74/446, which
contains the nominations by the Economic and Social
Council to fill the vacancies in the Committee that will
occur on 31 December 2019 upon the expiration of the
terms of office of Bangladesh, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Haiti, the Republic of Korea and Senegal. Those States
are eligible for immediate re-election.
I should like to remind members that after 1 January
2020, the following States will remain members of the
Committee: Angola, Argentina, Belarus, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, Cuba, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Pakistan,

Paraguay, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. Those 25 States will therefore not be eligible
in this election.
I should now like to inform Members that the
following six States have been nominated by the
Economic and Social Council: the Comoros, Liberia
and Mauritania for the three seats for the African States;
China and the Republic of Korea for two of the three
seats for the Asia-Pacific States; and Uruguay for the
one seat for the Latin American and Caribbean States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However, I
should like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The number of States
nominated from among the African States, the AsiaPacific States and the Latin American and Caribbean
States is equal to or lower than the number of seats to
be filled in each of those groups.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-38631 (E)

*1938631*

A/74/PV.36

May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to declare those States nominated by the Economic and
Social Council, namely, China, the Comoros, Liberia,
Mauritania, the Republic of Korea and Uruguay,
elected members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2020?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate the States that
have just been elected members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination. Members are reminded
that two vacancies remain for a term beginning on the
date of election by the General Assembly, to be filled
by one member from among the Latin American and
Caribbean States for a term expiring on 31 December
2020 and one member from among the Western
European and other States for a term expiring on
31 December 2021.
I should like to inform members that the Economic
and Social Council postponed the nomination of one
member from among the Asia-Pacific States for a
three-year term beginning on 1 January 2020 and
expiring on 31 December 2022.
The General Assembly will be in a position to act
on those vacancies upon nomination by the Economic
and Social Council.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 114.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/74/123)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/74/123, since the terms of office of the representatives
of Austria, China, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Morocco
and the United States of America will expire on
31 December 2019, it will be necessary for the President
of the General Assembly to appoint seven members to
fill the resulting vacancies. These members will serve
for a period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2020.
Consequently, after consultations with the Chairs
of the Groups of the African States, the Asia-Pacific
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and
the Western European and other States, the President of
the General Assembly has appointed Algeria, Austria,
2/25

27/11/2019

China, the Comoros, Jamaica, Japan and the United
States of America for a period of three years, beginning
on 1 January 2020.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
these appointments?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/74/84)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/74/84, the General Assembly is required, during the
current session, to appoint members to fill the vacancies
on the Joint Inspection Unit that will arise from the
expiration of the terms of office on 31 December 2020
of Ms. Aicha Afifi (Morocco), Mr. Petru Dumitriu
(Romania), Mr. Jeremiah Kramer (Canada) and
Mr. Gönke Roscher (Germany).
As also indicated in document A/74/84, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, the President of the General
Assembly shall consult with Member States to draw up
a list of countries, in this case four countries, that would
be requested to propose candidates for appointment to
the Joint Inspection Unit.
As further indicated in the document, the General
Assembly, by its resolution 61/238, of 22 December
2006, decided that beginning on 1 January 2008, the
President of the General Assembly, when drawing up
the list of countries that would be requested to propose
candidates, in accordance with article 3, paragraph 1,
of the statute of the Unit, will invite Member States to
submit the names of the countries and their respective
candidates simultaneously, on the understanding that
the candidates submitted are the candidates that the
respective Member States intended to propose, to the
extent possible, for appointment by the Assembly, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute.
Having held the necessary consultations with
the regional groups, I should like to communicate
to the Assembly the following information received
from the Chairs of the regional groups: for the one
19-38631

27/11/2019

vacancy from among the African States, Eritrea is the
endorsed candidate; for the one vacancy from among
the Eastern European States, the Republic of Moldova
is the endorsed candidate; and for the two vacancies
from among the Western European and other States,
Germany and Spain are the endorsed candidates.
I would like to remind members that in accordance
with Assembly resolution 59/267, of 23 December
2004, the proposed candidates should have experience
in at least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
Therefore, in accordance with article 3, paragraph 1,
of the statute of the Unit and resolution 61/238, Eritrea,
Germany, the Republic of Moldova and Spain will be
requested to submit the names of candidates and the
curricula vitae highlighting the candidates’ relevant
qualifications for the tasks ahead.
After holding the appropriate consultations
described in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with
the President of the Economic and Social Council and
with the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair
of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board
for Coordination, the President will submit the names
of the candidates to be proposed by Eritrea, Germany,
the Republic of Moldova and Spain to the Assembly for
appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 115.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/74/525/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mohamed Mahmoud Ould El
Ghaouth of Mauritania as a member of the Committee
on Contributions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2020.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mohamed Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth

A/74/PV.36

of Mauritania as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2020?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
(j) Appointment of members and alternate
members of the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/74/545)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Tomoya Yamaguchi of Japan as a
member of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
for a term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and ending on 31 December 2020.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint Tomoya Yamaguchi of Japan as a
member of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
for a term of office beginning on 27 November 2019
and ending on 31 December 2020?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/74/348)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.13)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/74/L.13.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): It is again my pleasure
to introduce this year’s draft resolution entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan” (A/74/L.13) to the General
Assembly. As members of the Assembly know, this text
was first adopted in 1980 and has been reintroduced
every year since then. The annual resolutions have
been mirroring the dynamics of the conflict and the

19-386313/25

A/74/PV.36

international community’s continuing endeavour to help
restore peace and stability and end the long suffering of
the Afghan people. Since 2002, Germany has served
as the facilitator of the draft resolution. During these
years, we have been able to adapt the resolution to
changing circumstances and to revise it to increase its
effectiveness. That task has never been easy, but has
always resulted in a demonstration of international
consensus on Afghanistan.
This year has been no exception, even though the
goal posts have continuously shifted. Afghanistan
held presidential elections in late September and there
were promising attempts to initiate a peace process.
While those efforts suffered a setback, there are now
ongoing attempts to reinvigorate the political process.
The presidential elections in September were a crucial
moment for the country’s democratic transition — yet,
even preliminary results are still not in and there is no
clear date for their announcement. That has made it
hard to put anything definitive into the draft resolution
on those two issues.
Last year was the first on record in which a vote
was called on the draft resolution (see A/73/PV.46).
That showed that there were a few delegations that
did not see eye to eye when it came to the often-cited
situation on the ground, but in the end the result was
resoundingly supportive.
Unfortunately, this year is no different. Consensus,
at least in the negotiations, has remained elusive, but
not for lack of trying. My expert held almost a dozen
meetings in various formats, among them four in
the plenary format with almost 60 delegations at the
table for up to seven hours at a time. Those extensive
consultations prepared us well for presenting the
Assembly with a draft that reflects all the positions
communicated to us to the maximum extent possible.
As the German representative did last year, I
would like to remind everyone that this draft resolution
remains first and foremost an important expression of
support for Afghanistan and its people by the entire
membership of the United Nations. I would like to
thank all the delegations that have demonstrated great
flexibility to maintain this unified show of support.
Turning to the substance of the draft resolution,
our pre-eminent concern remains the fragile security
situation in Afghanistan. In the past six months alone,
we have seen a number of high-profile attacks. Just last
Monday, an American United Nations aid worker was
4/25

27/11/2019

killed in Kabul, and I want to convey my condolences
to the victim’s family and loved ones. Furthermore, the
number of civilians killed in Afghanistan is at an alltime high. The situation simply cannot go on like that.
The country desperately needs peace.
We also pay tribute to the patriotism and sacrifices
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
Together with our international partners, Germany will
continue to support them through NATO’s Resolute
Support Mission in their efforts to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan. But that support is viable
only if matched by and linked to continued support
for civilian development and stabilization, as well as
diplomatic efforts aimed at a political solution. An
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
involving all parts of Afghan society, including the
Taliban, is the only path towards a sustainable resolution
of the conflict. Despite the recent setback, we need to
continue on that path.
On behalf of the international community, this
draft resolution reiterates the call on the parties to the
conflict, in particular the Taliban, to recognize their
responsibility to pursue peace and to enter into direct
talks without preconditions. Just this past July, when
Germany and Qatar jointly organized the intra-Afghan
dialogue in Doha, we saw that it was possible to have
direct and in-depth interactions with all parties involved.
Most remarkably, 20 per cent of the participants were
women — and they were key to making that meeting
a success. We need to build on that and increase and
strengthen the role of women in the peace process.
The support of Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
other countries of the region for the peace process is
crucial to its success. Peace and stability in Afghanistan
would benefit everyone and would lay the groundwork
for much-needed regional cooperation and connectivity.
Afghanistan has come a long way. However,
numerous challenges remain. Women’s empowerment,
good governance and the fight against corruption
continue to be of crucial importance. We encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to continue its efforts in
that regard and to implement the announced political and
economic reforms. We also encourage all sides involved
to speed up the process that will lead to democratic
transition in Afghanistan, thereby reassuring the voters
that they made the right decision when they risked their
lives in casting their ballots in September’s election.
19-38631

27/11/2019

Germany remains deeply committed to supporting
Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan and our international partners. Germany
also remains deeply committed to acting as a facilitator
on this important draft resolution, which merits the
support of all of our countries.
Lastly, Germany aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting as we adopt this
year’s draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/74/L.13).
Allow me to express my gratitude to the German
Mission as a long-time facilitator of this very important
draft resolution for Afghanistan. I thank in particular
Ambassador Christoph Heusgen and his team, and
especially Mr. Friedrich Schroeder, for their leadership
and able facilitation. Germany is one of the longstanding supporters of the Afghan people and a genuine
partner and ally in the efforts to ensure peace, security
and prosperity in Afghanistan. I would also like to
extend my appreciation to the representatives of all
Member States who participated in the discussion,
showed flexibility and supported the draft resolution
through active contribution — especially those States
that are sponsoring it today.
As we adopt this annual draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan, let me speak about some major
political, security and socioeconomic developments that
have occurred since the adoption of last year’s resolution
73/88. Those include the holding of the presidential
and parliamentary elections and the pursuit of peace
and reconciliation efforts in the implementation of the
reform agenda to achieve self-reliance.
With regard to the elections, against the backdrop
of serious security threats, the parliamentary elections
were held on 20 October 2018, when 4.6 million Afghans
voted. About 60 per cent of the new members of the
new Parliament, which was inaugurated on 26 April
2019, are under the age of 40 and about 25 to 28 per
cent are women. That was yet another important step in
strengthening and sustaining democracy in Afghanistan.
Through their votes, the people of Afghanistan proved
once again that no threat can ever affect their strong
will for consensus and that the essence of democracy is
the cornerstone of the new Afghanistan.

A/74/PV.36

Following the parliamentary elections on
28 September, we held our fourth presidential elections.
Despite the threat of violence, attacks and, in some
cases, even having their fingers cut off by the Taliban,
people still came out to vote. For Afghans, that was not
simply a vote to elect a future President, but rather a
vote for democracy and a vote for the Republic. People
voted to defend the Constitution and the sovereignty
of the State, as well as for the prosperity and stability
of Afghanistan. The vote gave the power to 2 million
Afghans to say no to terrorism and yes to peace.
The Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces participated in both elections with the utmost
professionalism and bravery as they protected the
constitutional right of every Afghan to vote. About
70,00 of our courageous soldiers safeguarded our
people during that historical moment, and due to
their effective measures and competence most attacks
were averted. For the majority of us here in the Hall,
elections and voting are assumed rights and those who
exercise them are simply performing their civic duty.
For Afghans, it is beyond a civic duty — it is our civic
power, which we can exercise equally to define the
destiny of the new Afghanistan.
I would now like to pause to congratulate our
friends and allies, particularly the NATO member
countries that have stood by us over the past 18 years as
we pursued our journey to rebuild the new Afghanistan.
All of them have invested their blood and treasure in the
pursuit of democracy and stability in Afghanistan, and
there should now be no doubt about our commitment to
those values and principles.
Peace is an important priority for the people in
Government of Afghanistan. It was in February 2018
that President Ghani first called for unconditional
peace talks with the Taliban. In June, following that
unconditional offer of peace talks, we had a three-day
ceasefire, which helped us to understand our society’s
capacity to absorb the 20,000 Taliban members who
came to our big cities during the celebration of the
three-day Eid holiday. That helped us to understand
that achieving peace and ending conflict is possible.
As we know, the success of every peace deal lies
in its sustainability and duration, and it can happen
only if the public is involved, engaged and consulted.
The Government needed to carry out nationwide
consultations in order to identify the framework for
negotiations and, to that end, took the important step of

19-386315/25

A/74/PV.36

27/11/2019

organizing the consultative peace loya jirga. In April,
3,200 representatives from all parts of the country
participated in the jirga to highlight their mandate
for peace. The five-day consultative peace jirga,
in which 30 per cent of the delegates were women,
adopted a national road map and a mandate for peace.
That road map was decisive in its parameters, which
called for, among others, an immediate ceasefire,
sustainable peace, direct talks with the Government,
and the preservation of human rights, particularly
women’s rights. The constitutional rights of women
are an important feature of the new Afghanistan. As
the Secretary-General has said, the preservation and
protection of women’s rights is not only the good
thing to do, but the right thing to do for an effective,
meaningful and lasting peace.

and go against all moral values. Those acts need to be
stopped immediately by the Taliban.

The Government of Afghanistan welcomes all
regional and international peace efforts that align
with an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
and help to facilitate direct talks with the Taliban. In
line with international norms, we firmly believe in
the principles of respecting sovereignty and State-toState relations and hold those values as central to the
success of our peace efforts. We would like to thank
our friends and allies, including the United States,
the European Union, Germany, Norway, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, the State of Qatar, the United Arab
Emirates, Indonesia and Uzbekistan, among others,
which have supported our work to achieve a dignified
and sustainable peace.

Nevertheless, the Afghan Government has
undertaken to implement and realize the reform agenda
according to the commitments made in the Geneva
Mutual Accountability Framework and the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework. As we
work towards fully implementing this agenda, we are
making tremendous progress in our regional economic
cooperation agenda. The Afghan Government
welcomes all initiatives that bolster our regional
economic connectivity and help Afghanistan connect
to the region and beyond.

With regard to the security situation, the Taliban
and other transnational terrorist groups have relentlessly
and violently continued creating terror and fear. Our
national security and defence forces have proved their
ability to successfully defend our country in the most
courageous way, reversing many attacks and protecting
our people. In fact, the Afghan soldiers fighting today
are eliminating the threat posed to all of us globally.
As we have said before, terrorism does not recognize
boundaries or borders and it threatens the lives of
everyone, everywhere.
As a result of the growing strength of our security
forces, the Taliban and terrorist groups have resorted
to cowardly and deadly attacks on civilian targets and
have caused this year’s record-high numbers of civilian
casualties, a third of which have been women and
children. Targeting civilians and public institutions,
including hospitals and clinics, and using individuals
as human shields are violations of international law
6/25

Among the persistent challenges that continue to
threaten the peace and security of Afghanistan are
terrorism and the presence of regional and transnational
terrorist groups, including the Taliban, as well as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida
affiliates. Recently, the Government of Afghanistan
carried out an intensive and successful operation in
Nangarhar to eliminate ISIL strongholds. The past 18
years of conflict imposed by terrorist groups and the
Taliban have not resulted only in the loss of innocent
lives and instability in my country, but have also deeply
impacted our joint efforts for achieving social and
economic development.

Terrorism is not the only threat that the people
of Afghanistan face. The effects of climate change,
leading to severe humanitarian crises, are another
critical challenge we are facing. Afghanistan is a
predominantly agricultural economy; the prolonged
drought had destructive effects on the life and wellbeing of our society, driving many families to leave their
homes and provinces in search of better alternatives.
That led to a highly critical humanitarian situation that
requires an immediate response. However, I do need to
highlight the leadership role that the United Nations has
taken in coordinating with the international community
to facilitate the necessary response as soon as possible.
The threats of illicit drug cultivation, production
and trafficking pose another security challenge to
Afghanistan. The Afghan people were the primary
victims of this menace and continue to pay the highest
price. There is also a direct link between narcotics and
sources of funding for the Taliban. In that regard, the
Government of Afghanistan has been a committed
partner and ally in fighting to eradicate and dismantle
this threat. However, this is not a single-country issue.
19-38631

27/11/2019

We need a regionally comprehensive, collaborative
effort and strategy to counter the narcotics trade and
market. We need an inclusive approach involving all
regional and international stakeholders to combat the
root causes of the problem, including the trafficking of
precursors, financial safe havens and demand reduction.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the President of the General Assembly and his
Government for their sustained support in assisting the
Afghan Government and people in our efforts to restore
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We should look to
the future of Afghanistan from our perspective, which
is more forward-looking and optimistic. For some, 18
years may seem a long time to rebuild the country from
its state of ruin and complete destruction. But for me,
who still remembers the dark days of the Taliban and
the absence of hope when the regime locked all of us in
complete isolation and contact from the outside world,
today is the brightest and most fortunate future I could
ever have dreamed of.
Thanks to the tremendous support we have
received, we have come a long way and we have made
great progress. Today, the support of the Assembly and
the draft resolution represent another important step
in sending a strong message of solidarity to Afghans,
as well as those that still aim to turn Afghanistan
into a safe haven for terrorist groups. The voices of
Member States in in this Hall will matter to people in
Afghanistan, letting them know that they are not alone
and that, in both our fight against terrorism and our
quest for peace, we all stand together.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): The Australian
Government congratulates the people of Afghanistan
on their courage and determination in participating in
presidential elections on 28 September. We commend
the Afghan people for exercising their democratic right
in difficult circumstances. We await the results of
the election and encourage all stakeholders to respect
due process during the period of tallying votes and
reviewing complaints.
The Australian Government acknowledges the
commitment of the Afghan Government and the
bravery of the Afghan security forces in promoting
security, combating terrorism and working to create
the conditions necessary for a peaceful end to the
longstanding conflict in Afghanistan. Afghans are
ready for peace and security, which are preconditions
for Afghanistan’s development. There is no military

A/74/PV.36

solution to the conflict. Dialogue and negotiation are
the only path to a permanent settlement. We welcome
the important steps that the Government of Afghanistan
and the United States have taken towards ending
the conflict, including recent confidence-building
measures. We encourage our partners to support these
steps towards a peace that can set the stage for postpeace economic development.
We condemn the Taliban’s ongoing use of violence.
We are disappointed that the Taliban continues to
resist direct talks with the Afghan Government. We
do not believe that a sustainable political settlement
is viable without such talks and call on the Taliban to
reduce violence immediately and begin discussions
without preconditions.
While we welcome efforts made towards peace, we
must not forget the millions of Afghans who continue
to struggle in the face of a protracted humanitarian
crisis. The links between conflict, humanitarian need
and ongoing development are complex. International
partners need to coordinate closely and draw on our
collective experience to support Afghanistan through
a successful transition to peace. There are many
challenges, including corruption, that diminish the
extent to which the Afghan people are able to benefit
from peace and development.
Australia calls on international partners to
recognize Afghan women’s achievements, their gains
and their particular struggles in the ongoing conflict.
Afghan women have the right to a strong voice in the
ongoing dialogue on peace and development. Indeed,
a peace process cannot be successful without their
full involvement. We call on international partners
to mobilize diplomatic and development resources to
support Afghan women.
We appreciate the valuable contribution of all
United Nations agencies, diplomatic partners and their
staff in supporting Afghanistan to meet its people’s
needs. Australia calls on the international community
to cooperate in continued efforts to support the people
of Afghanistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its 28 member States. Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania and Bosnia

19-386317/25

A/74/PV.36

27/11/2019

and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

environment conducive to reaching a balanced peace
agreement that respects the constitutional order and
fundamental values of Afghanistan.

I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for her statement and I also thank all
delegations that participated in the consultations on the
draft resolution (A/74/L.13), particularly the German
team, for facilitating the negotiations. We look forward
to its swift adoption by consensus once again.

Secondly, the EU believes that the start of these
intra-Afghan negotiations should be accompanied by
a ceasefire. Until then, between now and the start of
the intra-Afghan talks, there should be a significant
reduction in violence, as a concrete step towards peace
that will also halt unnecessary suffering and facilitate
the forthcoming peace process. Afghan citizens are
longing for peace. It is important that all sides seize this
historic opportunity, for too many opportunities have
been missed over the past 18 years.

Before I start my statement, let me underline the
EU’s condemnation of the cowardly terrorist attack
against a United Nations-marked vehicle that killed an
American citizen and wounded two others, who were
all working to help and protect the Afghan people.
The EU is very aware of the crucial role played
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and United Nations agencies
in supporting the Afghan people by encouraging peace
and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting human
rights and implementing the commitments from the
November 2018 ministerial conference on Afghanistan.
In a spirit of cooperation, we strive to maintain the
closest possible relationship with UNAMA on the
ground and in international forums for the ultimate
benefit of Afghanistan and its citizens.
The suspension of bilateral talks between the
United States and the Taliban in September led to the
suspension of the peace process and the postponement
of the next phase, the intra-Afghan negotiations between
the Government and the Taliban, which were due to start
later that month. The current pause, however, is being
used to prepare the launch of a genuine peace process
that could and should be accompanied by a ceasefire.
On 9 November Federica Mogherini, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs, and
the Foreign Ministers of the European Union member
States discussed Afghanistan and recalled the following
principles framing the EU’s engagement in Afghanistan
in the current phase.
First, direct intra-Afghan talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban remain
the only way to reach lasting peace in the country.
The conflict needs a political settlement. The EU
supports a resumption of talks between the United
States and the Taliban as a step towards the launch
of a genuine intra-Afghan peace process, with direct
negotiations between the Government and the Taliban.
The intra-Afghan negotiations must take place in an
8/25

Thirdly, while the international community can
play a supportive role, it must always respect the
principle of an Afghan-owned and -led peace process,
respecting the independence, integrity and sovereignty
of the Afghan State.
Fourthly and finally, as the European Union has
repeatedly stated, the peace process must consolidate
rather than erode the achievements of the past 18 years,
including improvements related to the rights of women,
children and minorities. Particular attention should be
given to the full involvement of women in line with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the protection
of their constitutional rights, and the preservation of
Afghanistan’s rights and democratic advances. The EU
is ready to support an inclusive political process.
As High Representative Mogherini stated at
the Geneva ministerial conference a year ago, the
European Union stands ready to contribute politically
and financially at every stage of the process to
the future of Afghanistan, post-conflict reforms,
and the implementation of a peace settlement that
embodies those principles. The EU Special Envoy for
Afghanistan is working hard, together with the special
envoys and representatives of the EU member States,
and in close cooperation with the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan, to make this peace
settlement a reality.
When it comes to elections, the EU strongly
believes that the pursuit of peace must not come at
the expense of Afghanistan’s fundamental values
and democratic development. Elections and peace
go hand in hand. The presidential elections that took
place on 28 September demonstrated once again
the determination of Afghan citizens to support the
democratic development of their country, even if casting
19-38631

27/11/2019

their votes means risking their lives. The legitimacy
of the election results will be linked to the ability of
the Afghan electoral management bodies to fulfil their
mandate impartially, efficiently and transparently and
with full respect for the Constitution and electoral laws
and procedures, including the correct management of
complaints and appeals proceedings. We trust that the
preliminary and final election results will be released
without much further delay. The European Union
expects all candidates to exercise restraint and take
a constructive attitude to the Independent Electoral
Commission. The European Union supported both the
2018 parliamentary and the 2019 presidential elections
with a total contribution of €30 million through the
United Nations-implemented Electoral Support Project
and grants to civil society. We deployed a small election
expert team on both occasions.
On development, the European Union stands ready
to continue its long-term commitment to Afghanistan
after the signing of a peace agreement. The EU
welcomes all opportunities to provide substantial
financial, political, diplomatic and development
support as required at all stages of the peace process,
including after the successful conclusion of a peace
agreement. As the process continues towards a political
settlement, coordination between development,
security and political actors is crucial. The European
Union is continuing its close cooperation with key
international partners. In that regard, we reiterate our
support to the efforts of the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission to provide training, advice and assistance for
Afghanistan’s security forces and institutions.
The European Union and its member States
will continue to be strong development partners for
Afghanistan. We are currently beginning preparations
for our next programming cycle for Afghanistan, for
the period from 2021 to 2027. It is our belief that all
donors should already seriously reflect on the many
peace dividends that will be available to all Afghans
if the parties to the conflict eventually reach an
agreement on lasting peace. That will require shared
analysis and a vision for development, a sustained and
demonstrable commitment to poverty reduction, a
renewed commitment at the highest level to tackling
corruption, and a conducive and enabling environment
for all development actors.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the high level of civilian casualties and the
increasing numbers of displaced people in Afghanistan,

A/74/PV.36

and emphasizes the importance of protecting the
civilian population, especially women and children.
The European Union supports the economic
empowerment of Afghan women. In addition, the
European Commission has reinforced humanitarian
support with €40 million in aid to the most vulnerable
families in Afghanistan, as well as for Afghan refugees
in neighbouring Pakistan and Iran.
In conclusion, this is a crucial moment for
Afghanistan’s future. The European Union firmly
believes that any final peace agreement to end the
Afghan conflict will be viable and accepted by the
various layers of Afghanistan’s population only if it
supports and maintains the values and achievements of
the past two decades — in other words, if the process
and ensuing agreement project Afghanistan into the
future and build on its evolution in the twenty-first
century. The democratization of Afghanistan should
continue, along with improved protection of the rights
of all Afghans and efforts to safeguard the country’s
democratic institutions. For peace to endure in
Afghanistan, it will need the full support of all States
involved. The EU has played its part and remains ready
to carry on working to support Afghanistan.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening this
important meeting on the situation in Afghanistan.
We would also like to thank Germany for its efforts in
facilitating the consultations on this year’s draft of the
annual resolution on Afghanistan (A/74/L.13), which
reflects the continuing international efforts to help
restore peace and stability in the country and put an
end to the protracted suffering of the Afghan people.
We are also honoured to be among the more than 60
sponsors of the draft resolution.
Almost three years have passed since Juma
Alkaabi, our Ambassador to Afghanistan, together
with five Emirati humanitarian aid officials, was
killed in a terrorist explosion in Kandahar in January
2017 while working on humanitarian, education and
development projects in Afghanistan that included the
signing of an agreement with a university in Kabul
to provide scholarships funded by the United Arab
Emirates. Notwithstanding that tragedy, the United
Arab Emirates has continued its efforts to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan by participating
in the work of NATO there and hosting intra-Afghan
reconciliation talks in Abu Dhabi in December 2018.

19-386319/25

A/74/PV.36

My country supports every effort of the international
community to provide consolidated and coordinated
support to the inclusive peace process in Afghanistan,
in the belief that diplomatic solutions are the only path
towards long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We would like also to express our deep concern
about the continuing terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
which claimed more than 8,200 lives during the first
nine months of 2019, while July was the bloodiest month
of all. In that context, I reiterate that the United Arab
Emirates maintains a very strict position regarding all
forms of extremism and terrorism. We renounce any
kind of violence, which causes instability and is against
our humanitarian and religious principles.
We are committed to helping Afghan people realize
their vision of peace, stability and prosperity in all
areas. We have provided Afghanistan with development
and humanitarian assistance amounting to more than
$215 million since 2014. Given the importance of
increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
processes, in early 2019, in collaboration with UNWomen, the United Arab Emirates launched a military
and peacekeeping training programme for Arab women
with the participation of 134 trainees from the Arab
region. The second stage of this training programme
will be launched in January 2020, and it will be
expanded to include trainees from Afghanistan and
other countries of Asia and Africa. The United Arab
Emirates is pleased to have joined the Group of Friends
of Women in Afghanistan, through which we are
seeking to strengthen partnerships with civil society
and the private sector to bolster efforts to address the
challenges facing women in Afghanistan.
In every international and regional forum, in
keeping with our policy of ensuring respect for the
human rights of nationals of States experiencing wars
or disasters, the United Arab Emirates continues to
urge States that are hosting Afghan nationals on their
territories to refrain from using them in other regional
conflicts or issues that they have nothing to do with, in
violation of international law, and to respect refugees’
rights and provide them with minimally decent
standards of living.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
uphold its humanitarian obligations towards the Afghan
people and continue to provide humanitarian support
and development assistance through both bilateral and
multilateral cooperation. We call on the international
10/25

27/11/2019

community to come together to defeat the violence and
extremism that threaten the security and stability of the
region and the world.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): The Maldives welcomes
the progress that Afghanistan is making in peace
and development. The people of Afghanistan have
shown extraordinary resilience and determination in
reforming their nation despite a volatile environment.
The people of the Maldives support and share with
the people of Afghanistan the vision of a peaceful and
prosperous nation.
Afghanistan has made considerable progress in
improving its investment environment. It has risen
from 183rd to 167th place in the World Bank’s business
rankings, which signals increased self-reliance. The
economic growth and integration in the region are
contributing to that economic progress and to the
welfare of the people of Afghanistan. That regional
integration would benefit from regional partnerships,
including with members of the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation. The Maldives supports and
encourages Afghanistan in strengthening its regional
economic engagement.
The Government of Afghanistan has also shown
great leadership and courage in promoting democratic
values in the country. In the recent elections, the
Afghan people showed that they have chosen the path of
peace and of tolerance over extremism and cooperation
over confrontation. We understand that in the country’s
journey towards an Afghan-led and -owned peace
process, more steps must be taken to consolidate and
further its democratic gains. We look forward to seeing
constructive engagement in all aspects of the electoral
process by all stakeholders, including candidates,
political parties and civil-society organizations.
Afghanistan is making remarkable progress in
promoting human rights values, especially for women
and young girls. The establishment of a technical
committee to review the 2009 law on eliminating
violence against women is an encouraging step, as
is the increasing participation of women in peace
negotiations, peacebuilding and conflict prevention
for sustaining peace in the country. As Afghanistan
approaches the halfway point in its transformation
decade, the Maldives would like to acknowledge
the Government’s achievements in key elements of
this agenda, including finalizing 10 national priority
19-38631

27/11/2019

programmes, implementing far-reaching fiscal reforms
and promoting women’s participation in public life.
The Maldives condemns and is deeply concerned
about the Taliban’s continued attacks, and we express
our heartfelt sympathy to the people and the Government
of Afghanistan for their losses. This year’s significant
rise in the numbers of civilian casualties of terrorist
attacks, and the high and rising cost of the conflict in
civilian lives generally, is a stark reminder that ending
the conflict through peace negotiations must remain
the top priority guiding all efforts in Afghanistan. We
call on the United Nations and its Member States to
support Afghanistan in rebuilding the country. To that
end, we call on all parties to respect their obligations
under international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We also call on all anti-government
elements to cease their attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
A stable, safe, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan
would not only benefit its people but would be in the
interests of the whole region, its economic partners and
the global community. The Maldives therefore calls
once again on the United Nations and its Member States
to support Afghanistan on its journey to achieving
peace, development and self-reliance.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We are pleased that
the negotiations led by Germany on draft resolution
A/74/L.13, on the situation in Afghanistan, were
successfully completed. We thank all the delegations
that made genuine efforts to that end. We are pleased
to be among its sponsors and look forward to its
adoption by consensus. As in previous years, the
draft resolution underscores the progress achieved in
Afghanistan and also constitutes a solid manifestation
of the international community’s unanimous support
to the people and the Government of Afghanistan in
addressing the challenges facing the country.
On 28 September, presidential elections took place
in Afghanistan for the fourth time since 2001. We
commend all the effort put into the election process amid
the many technical challenges and security threats. We
are pleased that despite some incidents, the elections
were held in a relatively secure atmosphere. Although
the results have yet to be officially announced, the
entire process once again demonstrated the Afghan
people’s commitment to democracy. Following the
conclusion of the electoral process, efforts for the peace
process will have to be redoubled. We are glad that

A/74/PV.36

the drive to achieve peace has gained momentum in
recent months. That is a welcome development in itself.
Turkey supports all initiatives that could help to end the
violence. However, they should be closely coordinated
and complementary. We hope that the necessary lessons
will be drawn from previous talks. We should be careful
not to grant the Taliban premature legitimacy.
At this critical juncture of political, security
and economic transformation in Afghanistan, the
importance of regional cooperation and commitment
becomes all the more relevant for steering the region
into a zone of peace, stability and prosperity. The region
has frequently demonstrated its readiness to resolve its
own problems and transform common problems into
areas of mutual benefit, and we welcome all bilateral
and multilateral dialogue and cooperation efforts
to that end. We consider the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan a significant platform
for strengthening our cooperation for political dialogue
and consultation. Launched in Istanbul back in 2011, the
Process remains instrumental for addressing current
challenges in a spirit of responsibility, solidarity and
ownership. Throughout the year, meetings of senior
officials and other gatherings have enabled us to
exchange views and concerns on regional matters in a
transparent manner. Our experience in the Process has
shown that focusing on our common interests helps this
unique forum for cooperation to reach its full potential.
We therefore believe that the Process could be better
used in that regard. One immediate objective could be
to utilize it as a platform for facilitating peace efforts
as well as post-peace initiatives. The forthcoming
ministerial conference to be held on 9 December in
Istanbul will certainly be an important opportunity for
substantial discussion of these matters.
The Afghan people, and especially Afghan women,
cannot sacrifice the achievements they have made
at great cost over the past 18 years. Of the 8 million
students enrolled in Afghan schools, 2.5 million are
girls. Ensuring women’s participation in election
and peace negotiations and their overall engagement
in governance and Government will help preserve
the gains we have made to date. All our efforts to
empower girls and women should not be wasted. The
Afghan people deserve a better future. It is our joint
responsibility to help them reach that goal, and Turkey
will spare no effort to that end.

19-3863111/25

A/74/PV.36

Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Italy welcomes the opportunity
to participate in the annual General Assembly debate on
Afghanistan. At the outset, we would like to reiterate
our full support for the draft resolution to be adopted
(A/74/L.13).
We also align ourselves with the statement by the
observer of the European Union.
Italy remains committed to the enduring partnership
between the international community and Afghanistan.
Together, we will persevere in our common efforts to
create an environment that enables the Afghan people
to look towards a future of peace, economic prosperity
and self-reliance. That partnership is essential precisely
because Afghanistan continues to face daunting
challenges, first and foremost in the security arena.
The cycle of violence has continued to exact a terrible
toll on civilians, and especially on the most vulnerable
segments of the Afghan population, such as women and
children. As a framework nation of the Resolute Support
Mission, Italy continues to train, advise and assist the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, and we
honour their bravery and sacrifices on the battlefield.
The best path to lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan today continues to be a negotiated solution
through an Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation
process. Intra-Afghan negotiations must begin as soon
as possible and should ensure the full buy-in of all layers
of Afghan society. Italy strongly supports the ongoing
engagement of international stakeholders in promoting
the revitalization of the peace process. We hope that
the window of opportunity for peace that has been
pursued so resolutely and tenaciously in recent months
will remain open. We must also maintain a strategic
approach, recognizing that sustainable peace is a longterm project. The process should be as inclusive as
possible, with a primary and meaningful role for Afghan
women at the negotiating table, which will be essential
if we are to ensure that their constitutional rights and
hard-won civil and social gains are fully safeguarded.
We welcomed the holding of the Afghan-led
presidential elections in September, in spite of the
insurgency’s attempts to disrupt the process, which
we condemn. The credibility and transparency of the
electoral process must also be maintained during the
final tabulation of the votes. We hope the definitive
results will be announced as soon as possible.
Italy welcomes the partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community for
12/25

27/11/2019

advancing wide-ranging, meaningful reforms. We look
forward to the next international pledging conference
in 2020, which will be an opportunity to take stock of
the progress that has been made and to reaffirm our
mutual commitment to fostering a future of peace,
prosperity and sustainable development. In this context,
it remains imperative to strengthen measures to fight
corruption, which will build people’s confidence in the
country’s institutions and have a positive impact on
private-sector development, a key element for a more
open and productive society.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Italy’s full
support to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the key role it plays in the framework
of the partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The situation in Afghanistan
remains a source of grave concern for the international
community. Persistent conflict, instability and turmoil,
and a fragile economy, continue to exacerbate the
suffering of the Afghan people.
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Pakistan, I would like to begin by condemning in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack on the United Nations
vehicle in Kabul on 24 November, which resulted in the
sad death of one United Nations official and injuries to
two others. We join the Secretary-General in calling for
the perpetrators of this heinous crime to be brought to
justice as soon as possible.
Pakistan enjoys a close and symbiotic relationship
with the people of Afghanistan, anchored in geography,
history, shared ethnicity and a common faith. Peace in
Afghanistan will enable both nations to serve as a bridge
for trade and commerce between Central Asia, South
Asia and beyond. The success of the efforts to achieve
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan is therefore vital
for us. Apart from Afghanistan itself, no country has
suffered more than Pakistan from the four decades of
war and foreign interventions in Afghanistan. We have
lost more than 80,000 civilians and soldiers in the war
on terror. No other country has therefore more to gain
from peace in Afghanistan.
Our Prime Minister, Imran Khan, has been opposed
to foreign intervention in Afghanistan from the outset.
Pakistan has consistently maintained that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in that country.
Peace can be restored only through a negotiated
political settlement involving the full spectrum of the
19-38631

27/11/2019

Afghan political class. Pakistan therefore welcomes the
international consensus around the need for a political
settlement achieved through an inclusive, intra-Afghan
process. In that context, Pakistan supports elections
in Afghanistan in accordance with the aspirations
of its people. Pakistan has done whatever it could
in the past year to contribute to the objective of a
political settlement. The Prime Minister reaffirmed
Pakistan’s support for peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan in his very first address to the nation
after his election, and responded to United States
President Donald Trump’s request last year to assist in
the commencement of talks between the United States
and the Taliban. Our contribution to the launch of direct
United States-Taliban talks in Doha, after an initial
round in the United Arab Emirates, is well known.
Pakistan released the Taliban leader Mullah Abdul
Ghani Baradar at the request of the United States.
Throughout the several rounds of United StatesTaliban talks, we have liaised closely with the dialogue
process and have fully supported those efforts with our
endorsement at the highest levels. After the process
broke down, in October Pakistan hosted a delegation
of the Taliban Political Commission that travelled from
Doha, and we facilitated contacts enabling the stalled
negotiations to resume. Most recently, Pakistan played
a crucial role in obtaining the release of a United
States and an Australian national from captivity.
We appreciated President Trump’s call to the Prime
Minister to thank him for facilitating that release.
Those efforts have led to a resumption of direct talks
between the United States and the Taliban in Doha, and
we hope they will soon lead to an agreement between
them, which in turn should enable an intra-Afghan
dialogue that brings all Afghan parties to the table.
Such a dialogue can secure a political settlement and
sustainable peace if all the parties display flexibility
and mutual accommodation, and should also ensure
that no terrorist groups operate out of Afghanistan. The
support of the major powers and States of the region
will be essential to the intra-Afghan process and to the
achievement of sustained peace and security in and
around Afghanistan. The joint efforts by the United
States, China, Russia and Pakistan have made a positive
contribution to the ongoing dialogue and will continue
to be relevant in the next stage of the intra-Afghan
dialogue. At the regional level, China, Afghanistan and
Pakistan hosted a third round of the trilateral Foreign
Ministers dialogue in Islamabad in August.

A/74/PV.36

Pakistan has consistently worked to improve
and enhance its relations with Afghanistan. During
President Ghani’s visit to Pakistan in June, the two
countries agreed to adopt a forward-looking approach
and to move away from the difficulties of the past. We
continue to work closely with Afghanistan to expand
our trade and economic relations and cooperation
for regional connectivity under the umbrella of the
Afghan-Pakistan action plan for peace and solidarity.
The opening of the Torkham crossing to commercial
traffic on a 24/7 basis and the opening of our airspace
have added another tangible dimension to closer
cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Pakistan has provided significant development
assistance to Afghanistan in the education, health,
reconstruction and infrastructure sectors. The Jinnah
Hospital in Kabul, a gift from Pakistan to the people of
Afghanistan, was recently handed over to the Afghan
authorities. Another 100-bed hospital in Lowgar
Province is nearing completion.
Peace in Afghanistan will open the door to
economic cooperation and investment, including
projects such as the Belt and Road Initiative and the
China-Pakistan economic corridor. We are working
with Afghanistan and other regional partners on several
other regional economic and energy projects, such as the
Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India pipeline,
the CASA-1000 Central Asia-South Asia power project
and others.
Pakistan has hosted millions of Afghan refugees
for four decades. It is the largest prolonged refugee
presence anywhere in the world. My Government has
extended the tripartite agreement and the validity of
the stay of Afghan refugees in Pakistan until 30 June
2020. We remain committed to their safe, dignified,
voluntary and early repatriation.
Securing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and
preventing terrorist attacks from across the border
are essential, and that can be achieved only through
constant vigilance, effective management and real-time
communication. Terrorists should not be allowed to
provoke clashes between Pakistan and Afghanistan
border security forces. We need regular contact between
the two countries’ armed forces and intelligence
agencies in order to prevent violent incidents along
the border. To that end, the armed forces of Pakistan
and Afghanistan have agreed to post liaison officers at
each other’s army headquarters and to establish ground
coordination centres.

19-3863113/25

A/74/PV.36

The success of those initiatives requires reciprocity,
trust and good will. We hope the Afghan Government
will work constructively with us to address the
challenges that endanger our collective security and
stability. Eighty years ago, in the aftermath of Britain’s
wars in Afghanistan, Allama Iqbal, Pakistan’s national
poet, said,
“The continent of Asia is like a body made of clay
and water, and Afghanistan lies like a heart in that
body. In case of peace in Afghanistan, there will
be tranquillity in the whole of Asia. But if there is
chaos in Afghanistan, there will be disorder in the
whole of Asia.”
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Peace
and stability in Afghanistan relate to the vital interests
of the Afghan people and are crucial to regional
security, stability, development and prosperity. The
current situation in Afghanistan is at a critical stage,
with the election results yet to be announced. The
peace and reconciliation process has seen growing
uncertainties, the security situation is disconcerting
and the humanitarian situation remains grim. The
international community should provide continuous
support and assistance to Afghanistan.
China supports advancing an inclusive political
process in line with the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
principle. Recently, the international community and
countries of the region have been actively promoting
direct talks between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban, which has lent positive impetus to the Afghan
peace and reconciliation process. We call upon the
United States and the Taliban to continue negotiations
and call upon all Afghan parties, including the Taliban,
to prioritize the interests of their country and their
people, seize the historic opportunity presented and
begin intra-Afghan talks with a view to reaching a
future political framework that is acceptable to all.
Having consistently supported the Afghan
reconciliation process, China will continue to use such
mechanisms as the Afghanistan Contact Group of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the ChinaAfghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Foreign Ministers’
Dialogue, the China-Russia-United States trilateral
consultation on the Afghan issue and other channels to
promote peace talks and help the Afghan people achieve
an inclusive reconciliation. China supports the relevant
Afghan authorities in properly handling post-electoral
activities so as to achieve a stable transition of power.
14/25

27/11/2019

While the results of the presidential elections are
pending, China appreciates the work and efforts the
Afghan Government has undertaken with respect to the
elections. In order to safeguard the political stability
and social tranquillity of the country, China trusts that
the Afghan election authorities will release the results
of the election as soon as possible. China also hopes
that the country’s national security forces will make
a predeployment in anticipation of possible security
issues following the announcement of the results.
We call upon all upon all Afghan political parties to
strengthen unity and resolve electoral differences
through dialogue. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan needs to provide assistance to
Afghanistan in this regard.
China supports Afghanistan in enhancing its
security capabilities. The security situation in the
country remains fragile, with air strikes and search
operations resulting in a considerable increase in
civilian deaths. Terrorist groups — mainly funded
through drugs — are still active. We condemn the
recent attack on the United Nations vehicle in Kabul.
China calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops
from Afghanistan in an orderly and responsible
manner. We call upon the United States and the Taliban
to deliver on their commitments to troop withdrawal
and counter-terrorism.
The international community should provide
training, funding and technical support to Afghanistan’s
national security forces for capacity-building efforts.
Doing so will assist the country in its fight against
terrorism, transnational crime, drug trafficking and
other threats. China is working through bilateral
channels to assist Afghanistan in bolstering its counterterrorism capabilities. We are helping to support the
country’s counter-terrorism efforts through the SCO
and the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination
Mechanism in Counter-Terrorism comprising the armed
forces of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and Tajikistan.
China supports Afghanistan in advancing
its socioeconomic development and substantially
improving people’s lives. Given the recent economic
stagnation of the country, its desire to boost people’s
livelihoods is strong and urgent. The international
community should continue to closely follow the
situation in the country and offer its strong support
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan so
as to improve the humanitarian situation and foster
19-38631

27/11/2019

growth. It is important to help Afghanistan engage in
regional economic cooperation and connectivity by
using its own strengths, thereby enabling the country to
eradicate poverty, overcome challenges brought about
by natural disasters and achieve stability and prosperity
at an early date.
China is working with the Afghanistan to
actively promote cooperation within the framework
of the Belt and Road Initiative through the continued
implementation of their memorandum of understanding.
We are aiming to promote Afghanistan’s regional
trade, infrastructure, construction, connectivity and
socioeconomic development. We hope that all countries,
in the spirit of wide consultations, joint contributions
and shared benefits, will strengthen and scale up
regional economic cooperation, forge connectivity and
partnerships and promote regional peace and stability
through development. By helping Afghanistan integrate
into regional development dynamics, we will together
build a community of shared future for humankind.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Since the General Assembly’s meeting on Afghanistan
in December 2018 (see A/73/PV.46), significant changes
have taken place in the country — some promising and
some with menacing consequences.

A/74/PV.36

Government and its neighbouring countries, has little
chance of success, if it does not result in complete
failure. Moreover, any peace effort must be based on
preserving and promoting the previous achievements
of the Government and the people of Afghanistan,
particularly the Constitution and the Islamic Republic
system, as well as other institutions derived therefrom.
At the same time, in the case of an agreement to
amend the Constitution, the process must be conducted
in line with the procedure foreseen therein and under
the supervision of the legitimate Government of
Afghanistan. Ultimately, any amendment must take
into account the underlying causes of the conflict,
particularly the presence of foreign forces. Our genuine
effort behind the annual General Assembly draft
resolution on the situation in Afghanistan (A/74/L.13)
must not be construed as any acknowledgment of
or support for the continued presence or activities of
foreign forces in the country, and we reiterate our strong
call for a time-bound and responsible withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Afghanistan, regardless of their
mandate and instruction.

The holding of presidential elections in Afghanistan
was indeed a success and constituted a positive first
step in the right direction as elections can further
promote the rule of law and the democratic foundations
of the country. Now every effort must be made to
settle the existing differences in the lead-up to the
announcement of the election results so as to enable
the new Administration to commence its work. This is
crucial for peace, stability and prosperity in the country.

Prior to and during the withdrawal of foreign forces,
every effort should be made to support and strengthen
Afghanistan’s military and security forces as a high
priority. This is particularly essential for combating
terrorist groups such as Da’esh, whose introduction
to Afghanistan has led to increased bloodshed and
dangerous sectarian tendencies. Although counterterrorism efforts remain the responsibility of the
Afghan Government and the foreign forces present in
the country, Iran stands ready to support those efforts,
particularly given its unique and extensive experience
in helping the Governments and peoples of Iraq and
Syria in defeating Da’esh.

Following decades of insecurity and instability
in their country, the people of Afghanistan are now
calling for a genuine and durable peace, which, indeed,
can be neither imported nor imposed. In order to be
durable, peace in Afghanistan must be founded on
the true aspirations and actual needs of Afghans and
achieved through an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned process involving all Afghan factions, including
the Taliban. No other country has the right to decide
Afghanistan’s future; that right belongs exclusively to
the Afghans themselves. Accordingly, the Government
of Afghanistan must play a central role in any peace
effort. Any exclusionary, unilateral or non-transparent
peace talks, particularly in the absence of Afghanistan’s

Iran also has valuable experience in combating drug
trafficking, including when it is linked to terrorism.
The fact that, in the past 40 years, 3,815 members of our
law-enforcement forces have been martyred with over
12,000 others wounded indicates our seriousness in this
endeavour. Our activities in combating drug traffickers
have always been acknowledged at the global level.
For instance, according to the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime’s World Drug Report 2019,
Iran had seized the largest quantity of opiates of any
country in 2017, accounting for 39 per cent of the global
total, as well as the largest quantity of opium and the
second-largest quantities of morphine and heroin. We
are determined to continue such efforts despite the

19-3863115/25

A/74/PV.36

27/11/2019

detrimental effects of the United States illegal unilateral
sanctions undermining our capabilities in that regard.

regard to bringing about enduring peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

That is not, however, the only impact of the United
States sanctions. Unfortunately, the sanctions have
serious negative consequences for the lives of the more
than 3 million Afghan refugees in Iran, most of whom
are now seriously contemplating migrating to other
countries, including in Europe. The effects of United
States sanctions on the fate of Afghan refugees should
have been included in draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan to be adopted today, as it is expected
to reflect all realities on the ground. While supporting
draft resolution in the hope that it will contribute to
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan, we
express our discomfort with the use of a particular term
therein despite requests for its deletion.

First,
concerning
national
reconciliation,
democracy and women’s role in the peace process,
an inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process, underpinned by a comprehensive intra-Afghan
dialogue, is of crucial importance. We concur with
the emphasis that the Secretary-General places on
“pursuing a negotiated settlement” in paragraph 60
of his report (A/74/348). All groups must abide by a
democratic process, whereby they accept honouring
the rights of all segments of society, including those of
women and minorities. Women have made important
gains in their representation in some Government and
private organizations. There must not be any reversal,
but only progress in the areas of human rights, the rule
of law and democracy. Indonesia is deeply committed
to supporting Afghan women and enabling their
robust participation in the Afghan peace process and
nation-building.

Finally, in expressing its support for the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran reaffirms its resolve
to continue supporting the fraternal people and the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening this meeting.
Indonesia is fully committed to helping
Afghanistan succeed in line with the aspirations of all
its people. While braving many challenges, Afghans
have been resilient with regard to their homeland. The
world saw their deep commitment once again during
the presidential elections in September, when they
expressed their will, while experiencing a precarious
security situation. We hope that the election results will
not undergo further delay.
We are confident that, with Afghans’ strong will
to build a collective national vision for a peaceful and
democratic future, Afghanistan, sooner than later, will
be bound to reclaim its rightful place in the world. But
we, inside as well as outside the United Nations system,
must also do our utmost to support its advancement.
Indonesia, both as co-penholder with Germany of draft
resolution A/74/L.13, on the issue of Afghanistan,
and as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), as well
as through its peacebuilding efforts in the country, is
playing an active role. In that regard, Indonesia would
like to reaffirm its full support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
effectively carrying out its mandate on the ground. We
would also like to underline the following points with
16/25

In that regard, as we gather here today, Indonesia is
hosting the Dialogue on the Role of Women in Building
and Sustaining Peace: Women as Agents of Peace and
Prosperity for Afghan Women from 27 to 30 November
in Jakarta. The Dialogue provides different segments of
Afghan and Indonesian women to share best practices
and lessons to advance the women and peace and
security agenda. Our Foreign Minister, Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, continues to exert great personal effort in that
area, including as an honorary member of the Group of
Friends of Women of Afghanistan.
Secondly, security should improve. Even one
casualty is one too many. Indonesia is deeply appalled
by the high number of civilian deaths, including those
caused by the most despicable attacks on children and
humanitarian workers. We also condemn the attack on
a United Nations vehicle in Kabul on 24 November,
which claimed the life of a United Nations colleague
and injured others. While Indonesia calls on the Afghan
Government to use its capacities to protect the people,
it also calls on anyone who has any influence on the
insurgents and terrorists to end their attacks.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant also
remains a serious threat. No effort must be spared
to eradicate terrorist groups. Various reports of the
Secretary-General mention parties whose actions
have caused civilian casualties. Indonesia implores all
19-38631

27/11/2019

parties to not violate international human rights law or
international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, with regard to effective State institutions,
we hope that the Government’s institutional reforms
will only be boosted if a different set-up emerges in
future. Well-functioning governance, accountability,
justice, transparency and anti-corruption mechanisms
also build the necessary ownership of the people within
the Government’s vision.
Fourthly, concerning broadly based socioeconomic
development, the Government, with adequate support
from the international community, needs to do more
with regard to enabling the common people across the
country to earn their livelihoods. Easing access for
Afghan products and services to international markets is
also important. The drought, together with the increase
in displaced persons and natural disasters — not
to mention last year’s economic decline — placed
additional strain on national capacities. The world must
step up its support.
Afghanistan is blessed with precious natural
resources and enterprising people. The success of
the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework and
other mechanisms will ultimately be able to spur the
transition to a sustainable and broad-based economy, if
implemented effectively.
Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s full
support for all measures that hasten Afghanistan’s
march towards the dawn of a new era of peace and
prosperity. We must all contribute and stand united
to enable Afghanistan to emerge from its challenges,
rebuild and prosper peacefully.
Mr. Elhomosany (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I express Egypt’s appreciation for the
convening of this meeting to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, given the positive developments that the
country has experienced and the strategic importance
of Afghanistan in Western Asia and its impact on
security and stability in the Middle East.
Afghanistan has suffered for many years from wars
and divisions. The most recent developments in the
country offer a glimmer of hope to guide the country
forward towards increased security and stability,
especially with the adoption by the Afghan Government
of an ambitious development plan for the period 20152024 to support Afghan State institutions. Egypt agrees
with the international community on the importance of

A/74/PV.36

supporting the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan, of
respecting its cultural diversity and of the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community
through its support for the Afghan Government to
achieve security, peace and stability in the country.
We call on all of Afghan parties to cooperate
to achieve peace in Afghanistan through the peace
process under way. We welcome the holding of the 2019
parliamentary and presidential elections as a positive
step in the right direction towards the rebuilding of
State institutions.
Egypt has always stood by the Afghan people
by providing support to the Afghan Government in
many fields, especially that of security. We have been
conducting training courses and capacity-building in a
number of areas, including counter-terrorism, human
trafficking, illegal immigration, border protection
and counter-narcotics and organized crime. We are
also keen to contribute to inclusive development in
Afghanistan through training courses in the fields
of health, nursing, agriculture, irrigation, water and
sanitation, and banking.
We are also cooperating with Afghanistan in the
judicial sphere through the protocol signed between the
Ministry of Justice in Egypt and the Supreme Court of
Afghanistan to train Afghan judges on topics such as
civil law. In addition, Al-Azhar University in Egypt is
playing a paramount role by fighting radicalization and
promoting moderate concepts of Islam by increasing
the number of scholarships for Afghan students, in
addition to the scholarships that are provided by the
Egyptian Government to Afghan students in other
Egyptian universities.
Egypt deems it crucial for the international
community to continue its support for Afghanistan
to build on the positive steps taken so far and to help
the Afghan Government achieve greater success in
future, until such time as the Afghan State has fully
recovered following long decades of wars, instability
and insecurity.
Mrs. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States joins other Member States as a
sponsor of draft resolution A/74/L.13, which is before
us today. We remain deeply committed to Afghanistan’s
future. We also thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for outlining
Afghanistan’s vision and her commitment to the values

19-3863117/25

A/74/PV.36

we share. I wish also to commend Germany on the
cooperative spirit in which it led this process.
My country seeks a durable and inclusive peace
through a political settlement that will benefit all Afghan
men and women. We seek a peace in Afghanistan in
which Afghanistan plays its rightful and obligatory
role contributing to international security and ensuring
that its territory is no longer exploited by terrorists.
We seek a peace that accelerates economic growth
and prosperity for Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
condemn the 24 November attack on a United Nations
vehicle in Kabul, which killed a United States citizen.
Attacks targeting United Nations personnel working
to help the Afghan people are unconscionable, and we
condemn this act in the strongest possible terms.
We have heard directly from the citizens of
Afghanistan that they are ready for a peaceful and
democratic future. To enable that peace, we call
on the Taliban to immediately reduce the level of
violence in order to create an environment conducive
to negotiations, and we urge all sides to commit to a
ceasefire during intra-Afghan negotiations.
We call on the Government of Afghanistan to
appoint swiftly an inclusive national negotiating team
that comprises representatives of the Government of
Afghanistan, opposition political leaders and civil
society, especially women, to negotiate a comprehensive
and sustainable peace settlement with the Taliban.
For our part, the United States continues its support
for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process. Peace
in Afghanistan is possible, and we must all seize
this opportunity.
The United States would like to clarify that
references in the draft resolution to climate change are
without prejudice to United States positions.
In closing today, we reaffirm our commitment to the
Afghan people and welcome the progress that has been
made and the commitment to progress for the future.
Mrs. Maitra (India): I would like to begin by
thanking all delegations that participated in the
consultations on this year’s draft resolution (A/74/L.13),
in particular our German colleagues, for having so ably
facilitated the negotiations. We also appreciate the
thoughtful statement of the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan outlining the recent developments
in her country and articulating the challenges and
opportunities that lie ahead for her people.
18/25

27/11/2019

My delegation attaches great importance to the
consensual adoption of this draft, which is an important
opportunity for the international community to express
its solidarity for peace and stability in Afghanistan.
This year Afghanistan marked a century of
independence. Fittingly, this year has been equally
significant in terms of developments relating to
peace efforts and the consolidation of the democratic
process. We commend the people, the Government
and the security forces of Afghanistan on the conduct
of presidential elections on 28 September amid
extremely challenging circumstances. The enthusiastic
participation of the Afghan people, including women, in
the process, despite threats, intimidation and violence,
reflects their desire and faith in democratic governance
and their rejection of the evil forces of terror and
violence. Whatever may be the result of the elections,
we hope that they contribute to the strengthening of an
inclusive and democratic system in Afghanistan.
The draft resolution before us rightly emphasizes
the importance of an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled peace process. It also reiterates the
importance of safeguarding the achievements of the last
two decades. This is especially important for the gains
made in pluralism, including civil liberties, women’s
rights and children’s education.
We welcome the opportunities created by the
various initiatives towards a formal peace process
at the international, regional and domestic levels.
While the international community must be united in
supporting these efforts, we do not believe in advancing
prescriptions. In any country, it is the people of that
country and the elected representatives of that country
who should have the leading voice in deciding their
future; this has always been one of India’s guiding
principles in its engagement with Afghanistan.
We believe that only durable solution will be one that
has constitutional legitimacy and a political mandate;
that will ensure stability; and, most importantly, that
will not leave ungoverned spaces for terrorists and their
proxies to exploit.
Speaking from this rostrum in September this year,
the Chair of Afghanistan’s delegation to the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session said:
“Peace is our common objective, and terrorists are
our common enemy. We must not rush the former,
19-38631

27/11/2019

at the risk of empowering the latter.” (A/74/PV.13,
p.19)
According to the 2019 Global Terrorism Index,
released just a few weeks ago, Afghanistan lost more
lives to terrorism that any other country in 2018, with
more than 7,000 deaths.
Of equal concern are the deepening linkages
between organized crime, narcotics trafficking and
terrorism financing. In that context, we welcome the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in fighting
illicit drug production and trafficking in Afghanistan.
India has a long-standing historical, cultural and
now economic, development and political relationship
with Afghanistan. Our development partnership with
Afghanistan has a focus on institutional capacitybuilding, health, education and the empowerment of
women and youth, always keeping Afghan needs and
priorities at the forefront.
Building reliable connectivity for landlocked
Afghanistan is a key component of our regional
partnership. In undertaking those endeavours, we are
mindful that all such projects should respect State
sovereignty and territorial integrity and be based on
universally recognized norms, the principles of financial
responsibility and ecological standards. It is in that spirit
that we are engaged in various connectivity projects in
the region, including the Chabahar port project and the
direct India-Afghanistan air-freight corridor.
The courage and resilience of the Afghan people
are a source of pride for our region. India remains
committed to continuing its efforts to strengthen that
spirit by supporting all initiatives designed to end
violence and bring back peace. We urge the General
Assembly to provide its full support to the Government
of Afghanistan and to draft resolution A/74/L.13.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the opportunity to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan in the General Assembly
this morning and to restate our full commitment to
supporting the Government of Afghanistan and the
crucial work of the United Nations in that country.
I want to begin, as many others have today, by
extending our condolences to the family, friends and
colleagues of the United Nations staff member who
died in an attack on a United Nations vehicle earlier
this week. That heinous attack also caused many
injuries to others. There is no justification for that or

A/74/PV.36

any such attack. The United Nations work is vital to
Afghanistan’s security, democracy and development.
The United Nations is there to help Afghans, and its
staff must be protected.
The United Kingdom is grateful to the German
delegation for introducing draft resolution A/74/L.13,
of which we are a co-sponsor. We support it and
encourage all States to do so as well. We particularly
welcome the draft resolution’s clear message
highlighting the need for a political settlement to end
the violence in Afghanistan. We also welcome the draft
resolution’s strong endorsement of the importance of
human rights. In particular, we welcome the emphasis
on protecting and enhancing women’s rights and the
role women can play in all spheres of Government
and society in Afghanistan. It was to highlight that
issue that the delegations of Afghanistan and United
Kingdom launched the Group of Friends of Women of
Afghanistan this past week, and we are grateful for the
support and interest we have received from so many
delegations and agencies.
Despite the able stewardship of negotiations by
the German delegation, we note that negotiations were
difficult and often focused on precedents from previous
years or supposed “balance” between views. The United
Kingdom believes that a shorter text would have more
impact. We would like to propose, therefore, that we
should all aim next year for a shorter text that focuses
only on the key priorities. I would now like to make
three particular points.
With regard to peace, we share the view of the
Afghan Government that only a political process can
deliver a just and lasting peace. A deal between the
United States and the Taliban is crucial to unlocking
intra-Afghan negotiations between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban. We therefore hope that
it will be possible to resume talks between the United
States and the Taliban soon. But in order for that to be
possible, it is clear that there will need to be a reduction
in violence. That will help build confidence between
the sides and an environment conducive to taking
forward direct, inclusive talks between the Government
of Afghanistan and the Taliban that aim to achieve a
sustainable peace.
With regard to elections, the Presidential election
in September demonstrated once again the resilience,
tenacity and courage of the people of Afghanistan in
exercising their democratic right to have a say in the

19-3863119/25

A/74/PV.36

future of their country. However, nearly two months
following that election, a preliminary result has still not
been announced. We welcome the efforts made by the
electoral management bodies to uphold the integrity of
the process, including by handling complaints, and urge
them to continue to work diligently in order to keep
further delays to a minimum. We strongly encourage the
election management bodies to communicate progress
and the decisions they have taken clearly and in a timely
fashion to all stakeholders, but especially to the Afghan
people. At the same time, it is unacceptable that the
Independent Election Commission has been prevented
from conducting ballot recounts in several provinces.
All political leaders must respect the independence
of the electoral management bodies. We call on all
candidates and their supporters to exercise restraint and
to desist from obstructing the electoral process.
Finally, with regard to development, regardless
of what happens in the months ahead, Afghanistan
will continue to have considerable development and
humanitarian needs. The financial commitments
that were made in 2016 at the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan will run out next year. The United
Kingdom welcomes the holding of a pledging
conference in 2020 to address that financing gap and
identify development priorities for the remainder of
Afghanistan’s transformation decade. It is vital that
the international community work together to address
those needs and align support to Afghanistan.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank the President for convening this meeting.
We appreciate the efforts made by the delegations of
Afghanistan and Germany on the draft resolution
related to the situation in Afghanistan (A/74/L.13), for
which we have become a co-sponsor. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
this agenda item (A/74/348).
This meeting reflects the interest and commitment
of the international community to supporting the
Afghan people to achieve their aspirations towards
security, peace, stability, development and building a
State and institutions that are based on the principles of
democracy, respect for human rights, the rule of law and
good governance. The Afghan parties are shouldering
the responsibility to achieve those aspirations. They
must therefore ensure that national interests prevail,
the crisis and the division in the country are put to an
end and measures are taken to strengthen confidence
in and move forward the constitutional and political
process and achieve reconciliation. The international
20/25

27/11/2019

community also has an important role to play to support
Afghanistan in concluding its transitional phase and
overcoming the many challenges it continues to face.
Those challenges include sustainable development and
economic challenges, as well as security challenges,
which remain a grave concern, most notably the
repeated attacks and explosions all around the country,
which primarily target civilians. We have expressed
our condemnation and indignation with regard to those
attacks and reaffirmed our constant position to reject
violence and terrorism, whatever the motivation or
reason behind it may be.
Based on our belief in the importance of seeking
peaceful and political solutions to crises and the great
value we attach to mediation, along with our commitment
to achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan, we are
continuing our good efforts, including the mediation
efforts among the different parties in Afghanistan, to
put an end to violence and bring parties closer together
in order to ensure reconciliation and lay the foundations
for a political solution. That is what will ensure the
achievement of peace and security for the Afghan
people and have a positive impact on bolstering peace
and security at the regional and international levels.
In that context, we support all international efforts
seeking to support peace, security, stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan. As part of our mediation
efforts, we recently hosted the National Afghan
Conference in Doha on 7 and 8 July. Held under the
auspices of Germany and Qatar, the Conference included
the participation of a large number of representatives
from all segments of Afghan society. It also addressed
many issues, including women’s rights, minority rights,
a ceasefire, the freeing of prisoners, the withdrawal of
foreign forces and the political future of the country.
There was also broad representation and participation
by women, which reflects Qatar’s position on the
effective participation of women in peace processes
and efforts to consolidate peace, given their pivotal role
in the creation of peaceful and inclusive societies. The
Conference succeeded in adopting a joint statement as
a first step towards peace and we hope other steps will
follow so that at the end of the day we can end violence
and establish peace in Afghanistan. We have also hosted
many rounds of talks between the United States and
Taliban to find a diplomatic solution to achieve peace
and stability in Afghanistan.
We again welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which sheds light on the importance of peace
talks among the Afghan parties and talks between the
19-38631

27/11/2019

United States and the Taliban facilitated and mediated
by Qatar. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
process will not be sustainable unless it is inclusive
and based on a broad consensus. In conclusion, Qatar
will pursue its support for Afghanistan in every way
possible so as to serve the interests of the Afghan
people and bring about the peace and prosperity that
we are all eager to achieve.
Mr. Hinton (Canada): Canada is very pleased
to be able to co-sponsor and support draft resolution
A/74/L.13, on the situation in Afghanistan. I would like
to thank the German delegation for its skilful chairing
of negotiations over the past weeks. This year’s draft
resolution highlights the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan to respond to peace and security
challenges, build economic security and protect human
rights, including the rights of women. Canada strongly
supports references to the meaningful participation
of women in the peace process, while also noting the
critical urgency of eradicating sexual and genderbased violence.
There remains an urgent need for an inclusive
and sustainable political settlement in Afghanistan
that protects civilians. In that regard, this is a critical
moment for the international community to reinforce
its support for the people of Afghanistan. An Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process is essential. An
agreement that does not bring peace to all members
of society — men and women and all ethnicities
and religions — will not be a durable peace. Canada
encourages all delegations to continue our collective
support for the Government and the people of
Afghanistan and to work to build a broad consensus
across this draft resolution next year.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I commend Germany for its
leadership on draft resolution A/74/L.13, which is
before us today. However, the draft resolution has as
its backdrop the worrisome high levels of violence
in Afghanistan. Norway condemns in the strongest
terms the attack in Kabul this week that killed one
United Nations colleague and injured two others. We
also remain concerned about the overall high levels
of civilian casualties. We urge all parties to exercise
scrupulous due care and fully respect international
humanitarian law.
Making progress towards a political settlement is
now urgent. In that respect, we welcome the progress
made in talks between the United States and the
Taliban. We urge the parties to finalize an agreement

A/74/PV.36

in order to catalyse peace negotiations among Afghans
that are owned by Afghans. As a consistent partner
with Afghanistan, Norway supports an inclusive peace
process. The voices of women and civil society are
critical to reaching sustainable peace. They must be
included in all efforts, both to achieve a negotiated
settlement and to implement it.
Dialogues and conferences can be useful in
preparing the ground for formal intra-Afghan talks.
The event co-facilitated by Qatar and Germany from
7 to 8 July was a milestone. It brought together a
wide range of actors from Kabul, including several
cabinet-level officials and members of the Taliban.
We similarly welcome the past and current efforts of
Russia, China and other regional actors to promote
dialogue. There is, and should be, room for a range of
complementary initiatives.
At the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan nearly
three years ago, the National Unity Government
committed to ensure effective, democratic and
inclusive governance, which includes credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in accordance with
the Constitution. The parliamentary and presidential
elections in 2018 and 2019 showed that only limited
progress has been achieved towards meeting that
critical goal. It is incumbent upon all actors, including
all candidates, to take the next steps in the electoral
process in a responsible and transparent manner so
that the brave Afghan women and men who voted on
28 September can have confidence in the outcome.
While challenges remain, there have been important
achievements in the area of education, including girls’
education. Looking forward, our focus should be on
preserving those achievements and securing a sovereign,
independent Afghanistan, with human rights for all,
as enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. Afghanistan
must also be able to take care of its own security and
defend itself with its own defence forces, without the
need of a continued foreign military presence.
The pledges made at the Brussels Conference
in 2016 will expire next year, and we look forward
to a new donors conference. Afghanistan will need
considerable support in the foreseeable future, and
Norway will continue to be a consistent development
partner. But, before the donors conference, we should
have an open-minded discussion on its approach and
composition and our development assistance, including
reflecting on what has worked and on where we can
collectively do better. Peace will bring both challenges

19-3863121/25

A/74/PV.36

and opportunities, and Afghanistan’s positive record
on adherence to previous commitments should be taken
into account.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his latest report on
Afghanistan (A/74/348).
Bangladesh wants to see a rapid transformation
and institutionalization of democracy in Afghanistan,
which is critical to its journey towards stability and selfreliance and, above all, pursuing a negotiated settlement
to end the devastating conflict, as was observed by the
Secretary-General in his latest report. The Government
and the people of Bangladesh have deep empathy for
the brotherly people of Afghanistan. We appreciate the
enormous ongoing efforts of the Government and the
people of Afghanistan to achieve sustainable peace
and development, which deserve the consistent and
meaningful support of the international community.
The process has to be Afghan-led and Afghanowned. Bangladesh remains consistently and actively
engaged in the reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan
through its participation in various international
meetings and conferences. Bangladesh stands firmly
alongside Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism.
We maintain a zero-tolerance policy towards terrorism
and violent extremism and do not allow our soil to be
used by any terrorist. We condemn the 24 November
terrorist attack on a United Nations vehicle in Kabul.

27/11/2019

Many Bangladeshi non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) are working to contribute towards
Afghanistan’s development. Building Resources Across
Communities, the world’s largest NGO with origins in
Bangladesh, has been working in the socioeconomic
sectors of Afghanistan for a long time, with a focus on
education, health, infrastructure and capacity-building.
Bangladesh has a talented pool of professionals such as
teachers, engineers, physicians, nurses and technicians.
Afghanistan might consider benefiting from the
services of those professionals for the reconstruction
and human resource development of the country. There
is also an opportunity for Afghanistan to learn from the
experiences of Bangladesh in improving its agricultural
sector to ensure food security.
We are steadfast in our commitment to a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. The freedomloving Afghan people are resilient, hardworking and
eager to play a constructive role in the international
arena. They desire and deserve a peaceful life.
Bangladesh hopes that a pluralistic and prosperous
Afghanistan — which is the dream of the Afghan
people — will be realized soon.
We thank the German delegation for once again
facilitating the work on draft resolution A/74/ L.13. We
reiterate our support for it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

We support the United Nations continued
demonstration of unflinching support for Afghanistan’s
development. We also express our support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan and appreciate the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution A/74/L.13, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”. The draft resolution has now closed for
e-sponsorship.

Under the leadership of Her Excellency Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh attaches the highest
importance to its relationship with its neighbours,
particularly those in South Asia. Afghanistan features
prominently in that regard. The relationship between
Bangladesh and Afghanistan is founded on a shared
history, culture and religion. We cherish the centuriesold traditions and values of our two countries. We are
witnessing remarkable socioeconomic development in
Bangladesh, and we stand ready to share our development
experiences with Afghanistan, particularly in the areas
of women’s empowerment, basic education, community
health care, sanitation, human resources development
and humanitarian assistance.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/74/L.13: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New

22/25

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

19-38631

27/11/2019

Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Uzbekistan.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Afghanistan on a point of order.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I take the floor on a point
of order.
It is very unfortunate that, for the second year
and despite concerted efforts and flexibility by many
countries, the draft resolution (A/74/L.13) did not
achieve consensus and a recorded vote has been
requested. However, Afghanistan still strongly believes
that this will not affect the absolute support of all United
Nations States Members for our common objective of
attaining peace, prosperity and stability or their voting
in favour of the draft resolution. Throughout all stages
of the negotiations process, Afghanistan engaged in
constructive discussions in good faith and made the
utmost compromise to accommodate realistic proposals
that aligned with the needs and priorities of the Afghan
Government and the Afghan people, under the principle
of Afghanistan’s ownership and sovereignty.
We believe that, as a General Assembly draft
resolution on Afghanistan, the document should be
in conformity with the realities on the ground and
reflect the overall efforts of the Government and
the international community to address the existing
challenges and ultimately achieve peace in my country.
We believe that the Permanent Mission of Germany to
the United Nations was able to capture this spirit, and
we thank the facilitators once again for accommodating
realistic proposals and presenting a balanced text.
Afghanistan has always served as a platform for
cooperation and collaboration among all regional and
international actors. We hope to continue to see such
collaboration today, as well as in future.
Before I conclude, I would like to express once
again my gratitude to all Member States that expressed
their commitment by co-sponsoring the draft resolution,
as well as to all the representatives who delivered
statements today in support of Afghanistan. I humbly
request that, once again, they express their support
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan by
voting in favour of the draft resolution.

A/74/PV.36

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Germany on a point of order.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would simply like to say
that Germany, in its capacity as facilitator, fully aligns
itself with the statement just made by the representative
of Afghanistan.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North
Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia
Against:
None

19-3863123/25

A/74/PV.36

Abstaining:
Palau, Russian Federation
Draft resolution A/74/L.13 was adopted by 137
votes to none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 74/9).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Jamaica, the
Republic of Moldova and Togo informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation attaches
particular importance to the careful consideration
of the situation in Afghanistan. I listened with great
attention and respect to the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan. Russia and Afghanistan
enjoy friendly relations that nothing can undermine.
We pay tribute to the efforts of all in Afghanistan who
have lost their lives in the fight against terrorism and
express our condolences. We strongly condemn all
forms of violence. There can be no military solution
to the conflict. We traditionally support the General
Assembly’s adoption of a resolution based on true
consensus whose text should take current realities
into account and reflect the international community’s
complex and integrated approaches to the quest for
an effective, long-term Afghan settlement. That is
particularly urgent right now, when Afghanistan is
undergoing truly fundamental changes.

27/11/2019

countries in Central Asia. Terrorist activity is often
presented through the prism of the non-consensual
concept of violent extremism. We are surprised by the
unwillingness of a number of delegations to reflect the
efforts to advance the peace process. The fact is that
all our steps at this stage should be aimed at assisting
the people of Afghanistan in creating a formula for
sustainable national reconciliation that involves all the
country’s social and political forces, including women,
of course. And it is still vital to ensure that Afghans
themselves retain a key role in resolving their State’s
problems. There is no need to say how much we respect
Afghanistan and its people.
Russia is working to ensure that all Afghan political
forces and key external players, without exception, act
on a united platform based on the same rules. The result
should be the practical implementation of the launch
of inclusive inter-Afghan negotiations. This is the aim
of the efforts in the Russia-China-United States troika
format, with the active participation of Pakistan, which
are focused entirely on supporting a peace process led
by Afghans themselves. Meanwhile, the recognition
of the troika’s role is evident in the signals we are
receiving from both Afghanistan itself and key regional
and international partners about their interest in joining
the consultations.

For the second year running, unfortunately, despite
all our active efforts, we encountered attempts by
various delegations in the course of the work on the draft
text of resolution 74/9 to persistently ignore our views
and approaches by pushing through non-consensus
categories, and despite the fact that we are extremely
actively involved in the efforts to reach a settlement in
Afghanistan. In the circumstances, we were compelled
to ask for a recorded vote, which we did as friends
and active participants in the negotiation process on
Afghanistan, because we are trying to ensure that our
views are not ignored but actually taken into account
and reflected in the text of the resolution.

We firmly believe that our common task in
negotiating texts such as that of as today’s resolution is
to avoid a disconnect between United Nations decisions
and the realities in the region. Deviating deliberately
from an objective reflection of the real picture is a deadend street that does not help to resolve the conflict in
Afghanistan. We hope that in the future the facilitators
will try to take greater and more objective account
of the broad range of positions in order to arrive at
a consensus document, especially since the Afghan
people deserve our full support. It is time to think about
making the Assembly’s annual resolution more focused
on modern Afghanistan’s real priorities. Resolution
74/9 has 74 operative paragraphs. Both the United
Nations and the region should stick to the principle of
fewer words and more coherence in their support of
stability and a lasting settlement in Afghanistan. We
are confident that our German colleagues can cope
with the task. Brevity does not mean a lack of balance.

It is disappointing that participants in the work
on the text ignored objective facts pertaining to the
threat that terrorism and drugs pose for the security
not only of Afghanistan but of its neighbours, including

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that the
Russian Federation has consistently supported the
aspiration of the Afghan people to lasting peace in
their country. We are confident that the launch of

24/25

19-38631

27/11/2019

region-wide cooperation, with the most active possible
participation of Afghanistan itself, will contribute to
stable, multifaceted development in that part of the
world. We are ready to continue to work to enhance the
coordination of all States’ activities in the interests of
ensuring peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Cheng Lie (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Assembly’s adoption today of resolution 74/9, on the
situation in Afghanistan, will help the international
community demonstrate its support for the Afghan
Government and people, encourage the Afghan
Government of National Unity to continue to promote
economic and social development, foster peace
and stability, enhance regional cooperation and
connectivity and facilitate Afghanistan’s integration
into regional development.
China is not entirely satisfied with some of the
language in the resolution, and it is regrettable that
some of the text does not fully reflect reality. The part
of the text on regional cooperation could have been
further improved.
The consultation process on the draft resolution did
not sufficiently accommodate the important concerns
of Member States, and China is therefore disappointed
about the vote. Despite that, and in its efforts to show
support for Afghanistan, China still demonstrated its
flexibility by voting in favour of the draft resolution.
China hopes that in future the sponsors of the draft
resolution will strengthen communication with, and
fully accommodate the concerns of, all parties, maintain
unity among the membership and avoid resorting to a
vote. China will continue to help Afghanistan to the
best of its abilities in order to promote the achievement
of peace, stability and development in that country.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in the
exercise of the right of reply, I would like to remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second, and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I take the floor in the
exercise of the right to reply in response to the comments
that the Russian delegation made earlier regarding the
peace talks.

A/74/PV.36

I would like to highlight that we have done our
utmost to compromise in order to incorporate the
key suggestions proposed by our respective Russian
colleagues. As we have said before, our policy on
the issue is very clear: advancing Afghan-led and
-owned peace efforts, as mandated by our Consultative
Peace Jirga. That remains the highest priority for the
Government and for the people of Afghanistan. My
Government is eager to begin direct peace talks with the
Taliban in full consideration of the principle of Afghan
Government leadership. In that regard, we recognize
and welcome all regional and international efforts to
facilitate the start of those talks towards achieving a
political settlement. However, we also stress the need
for the participation of the Afghan Government.
With regard to counter-narcotics issues, we
incorporated major elements of the language proposed
by the Russian delegation, in accordance with the
agreed sequence that appeared in last year’s resolution
(resolution 73/88), in the hope that we could achieve
consensus. There is a need for a real, comprehensive
approach based on the principle of the common and
shared responsibility of the Afghan Government and, of
course, the international community. We need to focus
on the root causes and identify pragmatic solutions.
Addressing the drug problem goes beyond cultivation.
It requires a holistic approach that involves looking into
the entire value chain, including the demand and the
illicit trade and trafficking of precursors from outside
of our country.
Afghanistan is committed to the principles of
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States, based on non-interference and State-to-State
relations with our regional and international partners.
To that end, it is only through genuine cooperation
and confidence building that we can put an end to the
ongoing conflict and create stability in Afghanistan
and beyond.
Finally, we thank the Permanent Mission of
Germany for acting as a facilitator of the negotiations.
In good spirit, they were able to capture all the realistic
proposals and recommendations that have become part
of the current text.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 36?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

19-3863125/25
