United Nations

S/PV.6759

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6759th meeting
Tuesday, 24 April 2012, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Women and peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-31060 (E)

*1231060*

S/PV.6759

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.

In 2011, we supported mediation training for
more than 200 women leaders and some men leaders
from West Africa, the Balkans, and Central and SouthEast Asia.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

The West Africa mediation trainings have already
yielded results. In Senegal, participants took action
during last month’s elections to create a “women’s
situation room for peaceful elections”, working to
ensure women’s protection in campaigning and voting
and providing early alerts of electoral violations.
In Sierra Leone, participants from the same
mediation training are now being encouraged to take
this situation-room approach in the upcoming elections.
In the current crisis in Mali, participants in last week’s
Ouagadougou dialogue on political stabilization
succeeded in ensuring that there is mention of genderbased violence in the resulting declaration.

its

Unfortunately, as a rule, the high level of
women’s engagement in informal efforts does not
I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
translate into a significant presence or influence in
formal conflict resolution or political dialogue. In some
Ms. Bachelet: I wish to thank you, Madam
Arab States, women’s contributions to the front lines of
President, for inviting me to brief the Council on recent
democratization have in the main not yet translated
developments in the area of women, peace and security.
into leadership roles in decision-making institutions.
Today I will focus on advancing resolution 1325
On my recent visit to Libya, I met, of course,
(2000) through women’s engagement in conflict
with the Government, but also with women leaders
resolution and transitional justice and touch briefly on
from civil society. They conveyed their perception that
some patterns that we have observed in recent posttheir contributions to the struggle for democratization
conflict elections.
had been under-recognized and that they were not
Since January 2011, the United Nations Entity for playing the meaningful role they aspired to in the
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women building of a new, democratic Libya. They raised
(UN-Women) and the Department of Political Affairs concerns in relation to the upcoming elections and
(DPA) have pursued a joint strategy on gender and voiced support for sex-segregated polling stations to
mediation to increase the availability of gender counteract pressure to follow family voting patterns.
expertise to mediation teams and the number of women
I reminded them that they must make themselves
mediators, observers and negotiators in peace
relevant to the political process, to demonstrate they
processes managed by the United Nations.
are an important constituency for peace and democracy.
The Department of Political Affairs has increased
We know full well that in political
the number of women candidates on its rosters of
transformations, already organized political interest
mediators to 36 per cent. Rapid-response capacity has
groups are the most successful at seizing power.
been strengthened. The United Nations Mediation
Women’s groups tend to be underfunded and are often
Support Standby Team has a gender expert for the
poorly positioned to seize opportunities to influence
second year running. Guidance on how to address
politics.
sexual violence in peace talks has been developed, and
Member States are now invited to make active use of
Given the current crisis in Syria, this remains a
that expertise to render conflict mediation and matter of concern. Women’s participation is vital both
prevention efforts more inclusive.
in resolving the crisis and in making sure that women’s
interests are addressed in agreements moving forward.

2

12-31060

S/PV.6759

Women’s participation is also needed to improve
reporting on the gender-specific impacts of violence.
To date it has been difficult to obtain information, and
I would urge the Council to be attentive to the gender
dimensions of the crisis.
In conflict resolution, women’s participation and
gender expertise provide a firm foundation for
women’s post-conflict participation. Both numeric and
substantive representation are needed. To that end,
special measures must be taken.
In Yemen, there is now heightened determination
among women’s civil society groups to be involved in
the forthcoming national dialogues. UN-Women, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme are supporting
women’s engagement in Yemen’s upcoming transition.
I am concerned about the early findings of a joint
United Nations assessment of rising levels of violence
against women and of abduction and early marriage
among displaced populations.
In Somalia, during the Second National
Constitutional Conference, held in February, DPA staff
advised the adoption of measures to ensure that women
represent at least 30 per cent of the members of the
future Interim Independent Electoral Commission, the
National Constituent Assembly and the new Federal
Parliament.
Women should also be supported in terms of their
engaging in other peacebuilding encounters such as
international contact group meetings and donor
conferences. In December 2011, efforts were made to
ensure women’s participation in both the Bonn
Conference on Afghanistan and the Washington, D.C.,
Conference for South Sudan.
However, I would like to stress that women’s
participation in such processes should not be dependent
on the willingness of conference organizers to extend
invitations to them.
We need to address the obstacles that women face
in being informed about, and participating in, formal
conflict resolution. An important resource in this
regard is the Council’s continued encouragement to
mediators, envoys, advisers and Member States to
bring women into the process of conflict resolution.
By requesting updates about outreach to women’s
groups, the Council encourages stronger attention to
gender issues on the part of mediators. In that regard, I

12-31060

know that mandate renewals for United Nations
missions, such as the recent one for Afghanistan, have
been explicit about the imperative of women’s
participation. This can be extended to all types of
national, regional and international engagement
processes designed to support reconciliation.
I would note here that progress has been made in
addressing gender issues in rule-of-law and transitional
justice measures.
As the Security Council noted in January, the rule
of law is “one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding” (see S/PV.6705). Since 2004, the
Council has made reference to the rule of law and
transitional justice in more than 160 resolutions.
As the Secretary-General has said, we have
entered into a new age of accountability. That
accountability must include the effective prosecution
of war crimes against women and adequate redress.
In recent months, we have seen an amnesty law
passed in Yemen, amnesty granted in Mali and blanket
amnesties debated in other settings, including Nepal.
One of the concerns raised by women’s groups is that
amnesty for war crimes against women contributes to a
post-conflict environment of impunity for gender-based
violence.
Prosecutions are crucial for the credibility of
efforts to reassert the rule of law after conflict. In that
regard, I welcome the completion of the first case of
the International Criminal Court.
The Council, through its referral mechanism, has
contributed to ensuring the effectiveness of the Court.
In relation to the two ad hoc international courts — the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia — in the past year the Council has
established a follow-up body that will take over when
they close. It is important that this mechanism include
a specific review of the lessons learned from the
prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes. These
lessons should be applied in the work of the
International Criminal Court and in United Nations
peacekeeping missions assisting domestic actors to
prosecute these crimes. UN-Women will work with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda on such a
review.
While prosecutions of individual perpetrators are
crucial, transitional justice measures can ensure truth-

3

S/PV.6759

telling and a process of repair and redress. I draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that, in the past two
years, there has been strong gender analysis evident in
the reports of commissions of inquiry. In the past year
alone the commissions established for Libya, Syria and
Côte d’Ivoire have included gender experts and
produced important findings on sexual and genderbased crimes. The United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is to be commended
for this.
What is needed now is implementation and
support for follow-up. The Commission of Inquiry for
Libya found that, in cases of sexual and gender-based
crime, few victims were willing to come forward due
to the severe obstacles to reporting, including stigma,
family pressure and fear of reprisals. The Commission
concluded that sexual violence played a significant role
in provoking fear in various communities. I had a
meeting with one minister involved in that inquiry who
is seeking methods for encouraging people to tell the
truth in ways that avoid their being stigmatized.
I commend the Government and the National
Transitional Council for implementing many of the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry by
partnering with the United Nations to address conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence. In Libya,
UN-Women has provided the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General with a senior gender advisor to
support the efforts of the Libyan authorities and civil
society on women’s engagement in the transitional
process.
Reparations programmes are also needed in
transitional justice processes. Reparations for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence can link redress
for individuals with efforts to eliminate economic and
social marginalization, thus addressing some of the
root causes of violence against women. As the role of
peacekeeping missions grows in the area of rule of law
and support for transitional justice, the Council can
make a major difference to women survivors of
violence by supporting the early establishment of
comprehensive national reparations programmes.
Allow me to register a particular concern about
the instability of legal frameworks on women’s rights
in post-conflict countries and the threat of a loss of
gains on women’s legal rights.
In March, religious leaders in Afghanistan called
for restrictions on women’s rights, including their

4

mobility and social standing. In countries undergoing
transition, the combination of recent conflict and
weakened social protection threatens to undermine
progress in women’s rights. As a matter of principle,
women’s rights must never be used as negotiating
instruments or a soft bargaining chip to placate certain
social groups. Particular attention should be paid by
the Council to ensuring that women’s rights are not
eroded during mission drawdown.
Country-specific resolutions should encourage
gender-sensitive constitutional and legal reform,
ensuring women’s rights and protection. I strongly urge
the Council to support increased numbers of women in
leadership positions, constitution-making processes
and inclusion in the justice and security sector work of
United Nations missions. Women’s participation in
political, legislative, judicial and security institutions is
perhaps the greatest resource on offer to promote
peaceful and inclusive transitions.
Throughout this briefing, I have stressed that the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions on women,
peace and security requires women’s leadership.
Elections are the key means for the legitimate entry of
more women to public office and for bringing women’s
issues into policy debates. Therefore, I will now make
a few observations about recent post-conflict elections
before handing over to Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous to elaborate further on this topic.
In the five parliamentary elections held in
countries with United Nations missions in 2011, there
were either small declines or just a modest increase in
the number of women elected. The result was an
average of a low 10 per cent of seats in parliaments for
women. Looking ahead, 10 elections in countries on
the agenda of the Council are expected in 2012. To
increase women’s representation, temporary special
measures such as positive action, preferential treatment
and quota systems are required as recommended in the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
In conclusion allow me to quickly restate some of
our suggestions to the Council.
First, continued consultations with envoys,
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
advisors and Member States on women’s participation
in conflict resolution and political dialogue create an
incentive to engage more women in peace making and
peacebuilding processes.

12-31060

S/PV.6759

Secondly, more opportunities must be made
available to women to engage in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding forums, and this can be done by ensuring
that women are invited to a wider range of international
engagement processes and donor conferences.
Thirdly, the follow-up mechanism for the
International Criminal Tribunals in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia offers the opportunity for a review
of lessons learned from the prosecution of sexual and
gender-based crimes; these lessons can be applied to
future international tribunals and domestic judicial
processes.
Fourthly, country-specific resolutions and mandate
renewals
should
encourage
gender-sensitive
constitutional and legal reform and discourage legal
restrictions on women in the name of reconciliation.
Fifthly, early technical assistance to post-conflict
Governments to support reparations programmes can
help address gender-based inequalities and promote
inclusive and sustainable peacebuilding.
Sixthly and finally, steps must be taken to address
the barriers to women’s participation in the upcoming
elections in countries on the Council’s agenda.
Once again, Madam President, I thank you for
this opportunity and I look forward to our discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am grateful for
this opportunity to discuss the critical issue of women
and peace and security. My purpose today is to provide
an update on security, protection and equal
participation of women in countries where our
peacekeepers are operating.
For more than 10 years, resolution 1325 (2000)
has guided us in supporting women in post-conflict
societies. Peacekeeping operations are well positioned
to help advance all the goals of resolution 1325 (2000).
The political engagement and eloquent advocacy of
special representatives of the Secretary-General at the
highest levels are clearly critical factors that increase
the impact the United Nations can have on the ground.
Under their leadership, missions can provide an
extremely powerful platform for support to women in
post-conflict situations.
Last year, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support
completed an impact study on the implementation of

12-31060

resolution 1325 (2000) in peacekeeping. It was a wakeup call. It showed that peacekeeping missions have
supported important progress in some areas, including
in the area of women’s participation in elections and
political institutions. It also showed that in other areas,
including protection, not enough has been achieved.
Today, I shall focus my remarks on these two
critical areas: political participation and protection.
They are especially critical because they represent both
the opportunity for women to make their voices heard
and to shape the peace, but also the risk that women
face from insecurity, sexual violence and targeting of
civilians. Peacekeepers must do their utmost to
maximize the former and minimize the latter.
During my recent visits to peacekeeping
operations, I have seen women participating in greater
numbers as candidates and voters where basic security
is assured. In other contexts, where electoral processes
were marred by violence and intimidation, we must
note that women’s participation remained low. Lack of
freedom of movement, intimidation and all such factors
contribute to lowered participation by women in
electoral processes not only as voters but also as
candidates.
Elections offer the opportunity to advance the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000) in a number of ways,
including temporary special measures to increase
women’s opportunities to win elected office, outreach
to women’s groups, training for female candidates,
better national police protection for women and
encouraging political parties to elicit women’s
participation. As for electoral assistance, we work in
close coordination with the Department of Political
Affairs, which has the General Assembly-mandated
system-wide leading role in United Nations electoral
assistance activities and policies.
With regard to temporary special measures, as we
head towards the June parliamentary elections in
Timor-Leste, the United Nations Electoral Support
Team helped Timorese authorities to draft an
amendment to the electoral law. That amendment
instated proactive policies specifically aimed at
temporary special measures for women, setting
allocations for women in political parties’ slates and in
Parliament. The United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and UN-Women co-chair a women’s
political participation action group, which coordinates
the work of the Mission and the country team.

5

S/PV.6759

In preparation for the 2011 elections, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
provided financial and technical support for a review
of the Haitian Constitution and for a constitutional
amendment to specify temporary special measures for
women. However, while such measures won
acceptance in principle, the amendment itself was
stalled over alleged discrepancies between the
published text and the text voted on in Parliament. No
new women were elected to the Senate — whereas four
took office in 2006 — and in the lower house only five
women were elected out of 99 seats.

process — for example through
monitoring gender mainstreaming.

checklists

for

(spoke in English)

Security is a major determining factor for
women’s participation in elections. The case of Liberia
highlights the need to help national police provide
security for women to participate in elections. Even
though no major security incidents were recorded
during the parliamentary and presidential elections in
Liberia, early reports of possible political violence
resulted in intensified prevention efforts by national
and United Nations actors. United Nations police
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, no
supported the Liberian National Police in its planning
temporary special measures were adopted. According
to prevent violence during the electoral cycle. The
to preliminary results of the November elections, 47 of
number of female candidates, however, declined from
the 483 members of Parliament are women — 9.7 per
nearly 15 per cent to 11 per cent, and the percentage of
cent. That represents a slight increase of 1.3 per cent
women elected to the House of Representatives
over the 2006 elections. Despite that increase, however,
decreased from 16.6 per cent in 2005 to 11 per cent.
the Congo still has the lowest female representation in
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
the parliaments of the Great Lakes region.
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Clearly, instituting special measures to increase
(MONUSCO) trained more than 500 police officers on
women’s representation in legislative bodies is up to
the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence for
national authorities alone. But such measures deserve
the 2011 elections. The United Nations Operation in
consideration because of the real opportunities they
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) has developed sensitization
offer for advancing women’s rights, in keeping with
campaigns in working with political parties, some of
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
which have in fact pledged to enrol more women in
against Women general recommendation No. 25.
their parties. Female representation in the National
Through outreach to women’s groups, United Assembly grew slightly from 8 per cent in 2001 to
Nations actors on the ground can help provide space 10.5 per cent this year.
for women to increase their participation in political
More support should be provided to women’s
processes. Thanks to a generous contribution from the
legislative caucuses at both the regional and the State
Government of Luxembourg, MINUSTAH organized
levels in countries where elections have recently been
360 election-related workshops for 6,500 people, of
held, in order to ensure that newly elected women
which 70 per cent were women. The workshops sought
parliamentarians are empowered to enact genderto augment the number of women in leadership
responsive laws. Our missions remain engaged in that
positions and to foster awareness of the importance of
process, and we welcome our partnership with
women’s participation in decision-making at all levels.
UN-Women and other United Nations country team
Training for female candidates is also an actors.
important activity for some missions. The United
I turn now to the broader issue of sexual violence
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) promoted
and the protection of civilians. It is important to
awareness of gender perspectives in the elections of
reiterate that national Governments are ultimately
2011. It provided training for female candidates and
responsible for the protection of their civilian
other women engaged in voter registration. The
populations. Our peacekeeping missions cannot act as a
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) also
surrogate for State authority. We must do our best to
developed tools for United Nations personnel,
strengthen frail State institutions and to improve their
non-governmental organizations and political party
ability to protect civilians, but we must also be
representatives responsible for facilitating the
prepared to protect civilians directly. Our missions
have received guidelines on developing comprehensive

6

12-31060

S/PV.6759

strategies for civilian protection, which bring together
all mission elements. We can contribute to the
protection of civilians by helping in vetting and
training national security personnel and by ensuring
that women become an integral part of security
institutions in high-ranking, decision-making functions.
We can also do so by strengthening awareness of the
link between stronger national security institutions and
lower instances of sexual violence in areas where
conflict still occurs.
In Haiti, United Nations police have a Gender
Adviser who helps implement protection measures in
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), and
a sexual and gender-based violence team that also
supports the Haitian National Police. Gender training
in the curriculum for national police cadets and
training on sexual and gender-based violence for police
investigators have also been developed. We also help
the Government of Haiti to provide shelter to victims
of sexual and domestic violence. Safe houses for taking
in victims of sexual and gender-based violence are
available in three IDP camps and seven police stations
in the West Department, where the largest number of
rape allegations have been reported. The representation
of women in the national police has grown from 8 per
cent in 2010 to 12 per cent this year. That is also partly
due to the example provided by our international police
units, and I would like to highlight the fact that the
Bangladeshi formed police unit has the highest
percentage of female police officers in the mission.
In Liberia, it is clear that recruiting women into
the security sector remains high on UNMIL’s agenda.
UNMIL works to enhance the capacity of the national
security institutions to respond to the increasing
number of reports of gender-based violence, including
rape. The weakness of the legal and judicial institutions
in Liberia has highlighted the need to develop a
Liberian national police gender policy, as well as to
establish a gender unit and a women’s protection
section at the Liberian national police headquarters.
Again, our mission provides a strong example to
national institutions, and I wish to commend the Indian
Government, which has deployed a female formed
police unit to Liberia.
Similar efforts are being made by UNOCI in Côte
d’Ivoire, where the gender focal point in UNPOL has
helped coordinate gender mainstreaming in all areas of
national police activity. UNOCI also continues to
develop and deliver training on the prevention of

12-31060

gender-based violence to the national police. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has
conducted sensitization campaigns targeting local
women with regard to their role in mitigating conflictrelated sexual violence. I again wish to thank
Bangladesh for having loaned a female formed police
unit, which acts as a role model for the Congolese.
Let me now provide the Council with a brief
update on identifying women protection advisers in our
missions. The strong and close working relationship
that has been established between DPKO, the
Department of Field Support, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights is enabling
progress to be made regarding women protection advisers.
A small number of women protection focal points have
been designated from existing resources in MONUSCO,
UNOCI and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. The United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict Multi-Donor Trust
Fund will also fund a total of three dedicated women
protection advisers between MONUSCO and UNOCI.
And I am pleased to inform the Council that nine
women protection adviser posts have been approved in
the budget of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and their recruitment is under way.
DPKO remains committed to implementing the
sexual violence mandate, of which the time-bound
commitments are an important component. Those
commitments are part of security sector reform and are
a strong tool for preventing sexual violence in the first
place and for ensuring accountability when it does
occur. DPKO is also rolling out new protection-related
training materials for troop-contributing countries.
Our missions are ready to support host
Governments in addressing those commitments. We are
ready to work with national security sectors to ensure
that appropriate procedures are followed when armed
groups are integrated into national security forces. We
are ready to work in close support of national military
and civilian justice systems to ensure accountability for
incidents of sexual violence.
While I have highlighted many activities and new
initiatives, I must say that in too many cases we remain
dissatisfied with the protection offered to women in
many places where we are deployed. Host countries
must do more, and peacekeepers must also do more to

7

S/PV.6759

redress the threats faced by women in our mission
areas. In States where both the civilian and military
justice systems remain weak, renewed efforts must be
made to strengthen judicial and military institutions.
That is definitely the long-term solution to the problem
of providing protection for civilians. The aim is to
support the growing number of military trials of
security personnel found guilty of serious crimes,
including rape and other gender-based violence. We
welcome the support of Member States in ensuring that
such efforts can be sustained and multiplied.
Finally, in order to prevent violence it is essential
to establish security institutions with clear modalities
of operation and with elements that are regularly
trained and that act in compliance with international
law and standards. With regard to implementing more
effective policing on the ground, the formed police
units provided by the Governments of India and
Bangladesh serve as an inspiration to Haitian and
Liberian women and girls and are examples that could
be followed by other police-contributing countries.

8

I have touched on a few issues that I consider to
be of mutual interest to our two partner agencies,
DPKO and UN-Women. I believe that the synergy
created by our coordinated and coherent actions and
policies will support women’s roles in their societies
and increase their security and freedom from sexual
violence. The political participation and protection of
women are cornerstones of our efforts in supporting the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I have
sought to outline a range of priorities, to provide the
Council with some examples of how peacekeeping
operations can assist national actors in taking
advantage of the opportunities that can arise in a postconflict environment.
The President: There are no more items on our
agenda. We have thus concluded our work for this
morning, and I now invite members to consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

12-31060
