TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

,’

MEETING:
NEW

30 March 1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1409) . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

Page

1

. ,,... ... ..,.,. .. ,.,......... ,..,.....

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(b) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8517) . . . . . I . . . . .

1

100

S/PV. 1409

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, nymbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

I-IUNDRED

AND NINTW

Held in New York on Saturday,

MEETING

30 March 1968, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Ousmane Sock DIOP (Senegal).

3. The PRESIDENT (translated j?om French): The
Council will now begin its discussion of the question which
is before it and which is on its agenda. Before calling on the
first speaker on my list, however, I wish to inform the
Council that the Secretary-General is going to submit to the
Council a report which will be circulated in a few moments.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. I now call on the first speaker on my list, the
representative of Jordan,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l409)

1, Adoption

$. Mr. ELeFARRA (Jordan): My Government requested
this urgent meeting in order to put before the Council
another grave situation resulting from the renewal of the
Israeli aggression. That this meeting was requested should
not be surprising to the members around this table; we had
already warned the Council that a new Israeli attack against
Jordan lands and positions wascontemplated. On 27 March
1968 [S/8.505], we referred the Council to a statement
made by the Israeli Prime Minister in which he declared, in
no ambiguous terms, that any Council decision would not
be heeded. He attacked the Council for what he called
failure “to show full understanding of the situation”; he
declared that the state of tension in the area would be
perpetuated, since, in his own view, no Council decision
could make a tangible contribution to the peace in the
region.

of the agenda

2, The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 16);
(bj Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8517).

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda wasadopted.
1. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): The Security Council has been convened because of two urgent
requests, one from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
/S/8.516] and the other from the Permament Representative of Israel (S/851 71.

6, As anticipated, the Israeli Prime Minister and his
delegation in the United Nations in effect rejected the
Council’s decision, Their response to the Council’s decision
was to concentrate more troops in the cease-fire area and
prepare for a new aggression.

The sitjration in the Middle East:
tter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
presentative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/851 6);
(6) Letter
dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/851 7)

7. Yesterday’s happenings should not surprise the
members around this table. They did not surprise us. We
knew that the Israelis were looking for further pretexts for
violence and bloodshed.
8. At 11.30 a.m. local time on 29 March 1968, the Israeli
forces opened fire without provocation and shelled
Jordanian positions on the northern part of the east bank
of the Jordan; they used tanks and mortar fire. Later,
Israeli armoured units, using heavy artillery, moved towards
the river and all along the northern part of the Jordan
valley.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with, the usual practice of the Security Council and
with the agreement of members, I propose to invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table and to participate in the Council’s discussion
without the right to vote. If there is no objection, we shall
proceed accordingly.

9. At 1300 hours local time, the Israeli air force went into
action and indiscriminately bombed Jordanian frontier
villages inhabited by civilians. Al Baqurah, Al ‘Adasiyah,
Shuna Shamaliyah, Tall al Arba’in, Umm Qays, Al Mashari,
Kuraymah, Deir Abu Said and At Tayyibah all were
subjected to heavy bombardment and intensive shelling.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan,l and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table.
1

15. Although the targets may have been different on
various occasions, the Israeli objective is the same. IJ’I
bombing the agricultural lands and destroying the crops and
irrigation facilities, the aim of- the Israelis is clear: they
want to deprive the people of those lands of their only
means of livelihood, they want to terrorize them and create
more difficulties for them, and thus force them to move
further east, creating a new vacuum for Israeli aggressive
designs.

The Karameh refugee camp, which had already been the
target of several Israeli attacks in the past few weeks, was
also attacked, mercilessly shelled and intensively bombed.
IO. At a later stage, the Israelis extended their aerial
bombing to Jordanian positions far beyond the cease-fire
area,
11. The Israelis justify their aggression against my country
on the untenable ground that so-called terrorists receive
support from Jordan. The Jordan Government cannot be
respsnsible for the safety and security of the Israeli forces
which occupy Jordanian territory. We have already stated
that the Jordan Government most emphatically denies that
it has any connexion whatsoever with the incidents alleged
to have taken place in the Israeli-occupied Arab territories.
We have therefore rejected the Israeli warning to Jordan.
We knew, and that must have been obvious to all
fair-minded people, that it was only ‘a pretext for further
acts of aggression,

16. On the question of the resistance of the Palestinian
people, we have said time and again that we are not
responsible for the Israeli security dilemma posed by the
struggle of the Palestinian people. But let me say this to the
Israelis. The answer to the struggle of the people now under
Israeli occupation should be an understanding of their
legitimate rights and withdrawal from their territories. You
cannot break the will of the Palestinian people; and if you
look at the history of Palestine you will find the answer.
The Palestinian struggle against the British Empire is well
known, For thirty years the Palestinians were in armed
revolt against the British. Many of our people in Palestine
lost their lives fighting the British in the sacred cause of
liberty and freedom. Let the Israelis understand that the
Palestidans-Christians and Moslems alike-are determined
to continue their struggle until justice is ensured to them.
The Israelis cannot weaken their morale, for they have
experienced numberless hardships and they have enough
endurance to overcome any future ones. Neither hardship,
nor oppression nor acts of repression have in the past
weakened their determination, nor will they do so now.

12. So-called reprisals are not the answer. Occupation
invites resistance, and the only remedy is the withdrawal of
the forces of aggression, On 22 November 1967, the
Security Council called (resolution 242 (1967)J for the
“Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories OCCUpied in the recent conflict”.
13. In his letter of yesterday Mr, Tekoah alleged that we
had started the shelling of Israeli-occupied positions. But
the whole world knows by now that our actions were
confined to defensive measures. It is the Israelis who are
intoxicated by their military might, which is steadily and
rapidly increasing thanks to the generosity of other nations
and powerful States. The Israeli acts of aggression are a
result of Israeli arrogance of power. The Israelis, through
intimidation,
use military power and sheer brutality; they
endeavour to impose a solution to problems of security.
They believe that they are capable of humiliating our
citizens, weakening the morale of our army, and breaking
the will of our people so that surrender may follow. They
are mistaken. It has been shown in our area and in other
parts of Africa and Asia, and at various times throughout
history, that the will of a nation determined to live in
freedom and dignity cannot be broken.

17. How can any member at this table expect Palestinians
to respond passively when Israeli troops remain in occupation of territories that admittedly are not theirs and to
which their only claim is that of military conquest? What
the Israelis are seeking is,in effect, that the Palestinians
should abandon their lands, forget their homes, and allow
the Israelis to continue their acts of aggression, expelling
people, bulldozing property, annexing lands, bombing,
shelling, destroying and looting, and what not.
18. The acquisition of land by aggression and the subjugation of people should not be tolerated. If you condemn
these acts, do you in all earnestness expect the Palestinians
to react passively and accept the oppressor? The other day
Ambassador Goldberg, the representative of the United
States of America, reminded us that violence breeds
violence. We all know that the presence of Israeli forcesin
Arab lands is, in and of itself, an act of violence. Is not the
Council expected, as advised by the Justice of the United
States, to take effective measures to put an end to this
violence which breeds violence?

14. Yesterday’s Israeli attack was directed against the East
Ghor Canal area, which, together with the West Bank of the
Jordan, now under Israeli occupation, forms the most
productive agricultural area in Jordan. The villages of Al
‘Adasiyah, Shuna Shamaliyah and Al Baqurah which are
situated in that part of the E&t Bank, were subjected to
concentrated Israeli aerial bombing and artillery shelling for
more than seven hours. One can imagine the extent of the
damage and destruction deliberately inflicted on a fertile
area rich in different crops, including all kinds of cereals
and vegetables, and noted for many irrigation projects, The
East Ghor Canal project alone irrigates 120,000 dunums in
the Jordan Valley. The Yarmuk Valley project, one of the
most promising agricultural projects, is also located within
that same area. This area provides vital water resources for
the East Bank, and it certainly constitutes an important
objective for Israeli planes which attempt’ to enforce Israel’s
will in the area.

19. The Council should ponder another important question. The Council is expected to take more effective
measures to bring about the immediate and complete
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from territories forcibly
occupied. Any further delay would lead to the further
deterioration of an already explosive situation. Additional
delay will result in intensification of the resistance movement. Today this movement is confined to the Palestinians.
But through any inaction on the part of the Security
Council it is certainly apt to grow in the entire Arab
2

ent
rile.

on
In

3ps and
c: they ,
ir only
1 create ’
2 move
gressivc
:st.inian
m-e not $
h y the ’
3 to the ?
ti under
f tllt?ir
You

:3.

I if you
%nswer, ;I
is well
armed

destine
ause of
hat the
rrnined

) them,
y have
CIlQUgll

1

Irdship,
lc past
?W.

I

stinians
3cc upa,
and to

? What
stiflions
d allow
rpelling i
umbing, ,
ubjuga.

mdemn :
st inians
her day
United 1
breeds
.~rccsin :
not the
U nitcd
to tllis
F
It clue5 i
ffcctivc i
mplete
j
-w-cibly :
further
3itiod
!

t

IlIOVe’

tinians.

;ccurity
c Arab ;

homeland.
It will have the complete support of a~
freedom-loving
and peace-loving peoples in the world. It
can never be wholly repressed or suppressed. Today the
Israelis
are becoming repressive not because Jordan is
shelling
their positions, but because their occupationrather than their bringing peace-has brought about a new
dilemma,
The answer, the key to this dilemma hoes not lie
in Jordan’s ensuring security for the Israelis, but in the
Israelis withdrawing and heeding the will of the United
Nations.

25. Last week this body did not stop at a condemnation
of Israel but issued a solemn warning that grave violations
of the cease-fire could not be tolerated and that the
Security Council would have to consider further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
the repetition of such acts.
26. A new act of aggression took place yesterday, and we
are asking the Council to be true to its word. The only way
to deter Israeli aggression is by applying and invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter.

20.
Only this morning, Mr. Moshe Kol, the Minister for
Tourism,
claimed that the Israelis had confined their
attacks to a limited area, and threatened that next time, so
he said, the attack would be wider in scope. It is clear that
if no immediate action is taken by the Council, the Israelis
intend
to continue their wilful violation of the Security
Council
resolutions. For the last three days they have been
massing
and concentrating troops in the north in order to
invade
that part of the East Bank. Yesterday’s attack was
another
link in the chain of intimidation against Jordan.
Israel
is intent on pursuing a course contemptuous of the
authority
of the world Organization, contemptuous of its
decisions,
contemptuous of the wishes of the Council
members,
and contemptuous of world public opinion. We
are, therefore, entitled to expect the Security Council, the
highest
organ of the United Nations, should take more
effective measures to cope with the problem.

27. ‘Too many warnings have been issued and certainly
none have been heeded. Any additional warning or mere
condemnation would only put an additional page on the
dark record of Israei. It would not deter Israel. The Israelis
have not taken your repeated warnings seriously. They have
shown contempt for your decisions. In our view, Chapter
VII is the only way open now to the Council. There is no
other course for stopping further Israeli aggression.
28. The PRESIDENT (translated front Frerzch): I call on
the representative of Israel.
29. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It was only last Sunday, 24
March, that the Security Council completed its deliberations on Israeli and Jordanian complaints [1407th
meetingj and adopted a resolution [248 (19681 ‘which,
inter da, deplored all violent incidents in violation of the
cease-fire and declared that violations of the cease-fire
could not be tolerated.

2 1 . We hope that the invocation of Chapter VII will not
be delayed any further because it-has been demonstrated
that
delay will not serve the cause of peace, nor ensure
stability
and security in the Middle East.

30. At the closing meeting of the debate I stated:
“Two States appeared before the Security Council.
Jordan told the Council that it will persist in warfare, that
it will take no action to prevent violations of the
cease-fire by raids, terror and sabotage, that it does not
intend to do anything to prevent the situation from
deteriorating even further.
“What was the response given by the proponents of the
Arab cause to this Jordanian attitude? . . , They would
have given sanction to the war machine of terrorism to
mount its offensive against IsraeI. They would have
promised Jordan and the terrorist organizations to which
it grants sanctuary immunity
from Israel’s defence
measures and from international censure.
“On the other hand, there is Israel, subjected to war for
twenty years, asking nothing of its neighbours but to be
left in peace. We have had our dead and wounded. Our
houses are being dynamited, our roads are being mined,
our children are not safe in their movements.
“What did Jordan and its’supporters propose? That all
this should be of no concern to the Council, that the
Council should be interested in one thing only: that Israel
should not react, that Israel should not defend itself, that
Israel should remain inert and wait passively for the
slaughter.
“Any resolution on the Middle East which would not
have censured terrorist activities would have been most
unfortunate. I said yesterday and I repeat today: Do not
belittle the dangers and the threats and assaults the
people of Israel are facing. Do not disregard the warfare
that is being carried on against us openly, defiantly,

22.
The arrogant and merciless attack against Jordan
yesterday waspreceded by a conference of the chiefs of the
Israeli Defence Ministry missions in Europe. The conference
is now discussing the armament programme for 1968, with
regard to the acquisition of arms and military equipment
from
various countries as well as the expansion of the
military
industry in Israel, The chiefs of mission were
recalled
from the United States, the United Kingdom,
Germany,
Italy and o’ther European countries.
23.
We feel that the first essential step which the Security
Council
can take at the present time, on this complaint of
Jordan,
is to call for an immediate halt to any shipment of
arms to Israel. Certainly those Member States that continue
, to arm Israel, despite its repeated aggression against my
country,
are assuming a great responsibility. It is their
bullets,
their guns, their artillery, their tanks and their other
offensive weapons which make it possible for Israel to take
the law into its own hands, and it is those weapons which
encourage Israel to continue its crimes.
-24.
Hardly a week has elapsed since the Security Council
condemned
Israel for a wide-scale attack against Jordan, my
country,
and once more we find ourselves before you
complaining of a new aggression. As it did in the previous
case, Israel has tried in this one, too, to distort th’e facts and
confuse the issue with a complaint of its own. We are
confident
that the Security Council, ti thil instance also,
will see its way clearly.
3

40. On 25 March, at 0730 hours, an Israeli patrol detected
an anti-vehicle mine on the road 500 metres from Ma’oz
Hayyim in the Beit She’an Valley. The mine, of Chinese
manufacture, wasremoved.

persistently. Do not ignore the armed attacks, the
incursions, the mining bf roads, the killing of innocent
civilians. Understand that the people of Israel love its
land, its hearth, its brothers and sisters like any other
people in the world, Every stone in our land is a witness
to thousands of years of Jewish tenacity, devotion and
sacrifice. Every bla’ae of grass is permeated with Jewish
blood, of those who fought the Roman& the Crusaders,
the Ottomans, the British and the Arabs. We shall not
yield, we shall defend our rights with all the strength
within us.
“Jordan’s reaction to this debate and its conclusion
may well determine whether we will have to do it again
on the battlefield or at the peace table.” [1407th

41. On 25 March, at noon, Jordanian army positions
opened artillery fire on Israeli forces in the Beit She’an
sector.
42. On 27 March, at 2030 hours, the pumping station at
Kibbutz Hamadya, in the Beit She’an area, was seriously
damaged by high explosives. Clear tracks of five infiltrators
led to the Jordan River.
43. The next day, 28 March, at 0940 hours, Jordanian
machine-gun fire was opened on Israeli forces on the
western bank of the Jordan River in the Beit She’an Valley.

meeting, paras, 120-125.1

31. What has been the Jordanian reaction to the Security
Council’s deliberations and resolution? No sooner was the
resolution adopted than the Permanent Representative of
Jordan announced: “The Council has in effect rejected all
Israel’s claims and allegations concerning so-called individual incidents of terrorism.”

44. Yesterday, 29 March, at 0800 hours local time, a
trailer drawn by a tractor was blown up by an anti-vehicle
mine placed in a track near Kibbutz Shaar HaGolan south
of Lake Kinneret, Four Israeli farmers were killed, and a
fifth civilian was seriously wounded. A second mine was
detected in the same area and deactivated.

32. I made clear our misgivings about the Security
Council’s resolution of 24 March 1968. I had not expected
those misgivings to be confirmed so rapidly. The day after
the Security Council’s action, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jordan declared: “The condemnation resolution
is directed against Israel. The paragraph on cease-fire
violations does not concern Jordan.”

45. At approximately 1130 hours local time yesterday,
the Jordanian military positions on the East Bank of the
Jordan River opened fire on Israeli villages and posts across
the river in the Beit She’an and upper Jordan Valley areas.
Fire was returned. Twenty minutes later the Jordanian
forces intensified their fire, employing mortars and artillery. The shelling was directed in particular at the villages of
Gesher, Beit Yosef and Yardena. Fire was returned.

33. Jordanian aggression continued. On 22 March at
approximately 1030 hours local time a tractor working in
the fields of Ashdot Ya’agov was shot at from across the
river.

46. At 1230 hours, the Jordanian forces resumed their
artillery fire on Gesher. At that point it became necessary,
in self-defence, to order Israeli aircraft to silence the
Jordanian artillery positions.

34. On 22 March ag$n, at 1930 hours, an Israeli patrol
encountered a band of marauders south of Kibbutz Gesher,
and an exchange of fire ensued. Jordanian positions on the
East Bank opened fire across the river Jordan on the Israeli
forces to cover the retreating marauders.

47. Between 1300 and 1750 hours Jordanian fire continued intermittently.
It was aimed in particular at the villages
of Kefar Ruppin, Gesher, Ashdot Ya’agov, Massada, Shaar
HaGolan and Tel-Qatzir. Considerable damage was caused
to property, including the children’s homes at Shaar
HaGolan and Tel-Qatzir. Four persons were wounded in
that sector,

35. On the following-day at 2030 hours mortar fire was
directed against a number of Israeli villages in the Beit
She’an area.
36. On 24 March at 1410 hours Jordanian artillery fire
was opened on Israeli forces in the Beit She’an Valley as
well as on a civilian tractor working in the fields.

48. At 1345 hours Jordanian artillery fire was extended
southward along the lower Jordan Valley, as far as Jericho.
Fire was returned. One Israeli soldier was killed and three
were seriously wounded in that sector. One Israeli aircraft
was hit and was abandoned over the Israeli side of the
cease-fire line.

37. On the same day a tractor working in the fields of
Ashdot Ya’agov was blown up by an anti-vehicle mine, and
the driver waswounded.

49. At 1800 hours the exchange of fire stopped along the
entire line,

38. Also on 24 March, at 201.5 hours, an Israeli patrol
encountered a group of marauders near Urn Tzutz in the
northern sector of the Jordan Valley, west of the river. In
the ensuing clash two of the saboteurs were killed.

50. The Beit She’an area, which in recent days has become
the objective of deliberate, concerted attacks from Jordan,
is a densely populated area, a domain of villages in which
farmers and workers seek nothing but the opportunity to
follow their pursuits unmolested. This is a valley region
dominated by the highland and hills on the eastern bank of
the Jordan. On these hills facing the Beit She’ansector the

39. At approximately the same time another Israeli patrol
clashed with a marauder band near Newe Ur in the Beit
She’an Valley. In the exchange of fire one Israeli soldier was
killed and three wounded.
4

ted
I’02

lese
ons
:‘an
1at
1sly
ors
inn
the
ley.
,a
icle
uth
da
liras
w
the
‘0%

:as,
ian
.tll10 f
leir
Iv,
the
tin.
ges
aar
sed
aar
in
led
110.

ree
raft
the
the
bme
Ian,
lich
1to
jon
c of
the

Jordanian army has concentrated a formidable force of ten
artillery batteries, including Long Tom guns with a range of
24 kilometres,
155millimetre
guns with a range of 17
kilometres, 25-pounders, self-propelled guns. In addition
there are eleven batteries of 81 -millimetre and 120-n-$
limetre mortars. This concentration of firing power is well
protected by specially constructed fortifications. They keep
the Israeli villages in the constant shadow of death. When
they attack, as-they have repeatedly been doing in the past
few daG:there is no way to reach them and to silence them
except from the air. That is what it became necessary to do
yesterday.

ready to put up with continued acts of warfare from its
territory and particularly if it carries on aiding terror
organisations to conduct their policy of belligerency,
then it has assumed a heavy responsibility. The Karameh
operation should be a warning to saboteurs and to those
who do not prevent them from doing their murderous
work. It should be proof to Arab rulers that no warlike
operation against Israel can succeed. The realities of the
past ten months show that the only way to bring stability
to the region and peace to its people is through peace. We
are ready to assistin any constructive effort to this end.
However, until peace is achieved, we shall remain on our
guard .”

51. The intensification of Jordanian aggression appears to
have been well prepared, militarily and politically. In a
letter to you (S/850.5/, Mr. President, the Jordanian
representative attempted on 27 March 1968 to create a
smoke-screen that would conceal Jordan’s intentions and
try to shift on to Israel responsibility for any renewed
attacks. That stratagem was unmasked yesterday morning
in a11its macabre stealth.

That statement speaks for itself,
55. The resolution ddopted by the Security Council on 24
March referred expressly to the Israel compIaint arising out
of acts of terrorism and violence from Jordan territory. It
recalled resolution 236 (1967) of 12 June 1967, by which
the Security Council condemned any and all violations of
the cease-fire. It considered that all violent incidents and
other violations of the cease-fire should be prevented, and
that past incidents of this nature should not be overlooked,
and it deplored all violent incidents in violation of the
cease-fire, declaring that they could not be tolerated.

52. What happened yesterday and in the preceding days is
not new or surprising. Jordan makes no secret of the fact
that its war against Israel begun in 1948 continues. The
Permanent Representative of Jordan came before this
Council on 21 March /140lst meeting] and informed it
defiantly that the war was not over and that it would be
pursued, No linguistic acrobatics about Jordan’s alleged
attitude will be able to becloud that fundamental fact.
Jordan still proclaims that it is at war with Israel. Jordan
still proclaims that it does not intend to terminate the acts
of aggression, the raids, terror and sabotage against Israel.

56. The Jordanian Government and its representative in
the Security Council cannot openly misinterpret the resolution, mislead public opinion and try to shed responsibility
for the continued acts of aggression under whatever guise
they might be conducted.
57. Members of the Security Council have made their
position on this matter clear in the course of our previous
deliberations and in particular following the adoption of
the 24 March resolution /248 (1968/l,

53. The Jordanian representative, in a bold reaffirmation
of Jordanian belligerency, made clear to the Security
Council on 21 -March that his Government does not
recognize any Israeli territory. He explained that the
armistice only froze a certain military situation. Obviously
the cease-fire is not a final settlement. To employ Jordanian
terminology,
it did not fix boundaries, it did not fix
borders, there is no territory; the cease-fire only froze the
situation. But today, as in the past, Jordan apparently
thinks that this freezing should apply only to Israel, that it
should mean paralysing Israel while Jordan continues its
acts of aggression. It is high iime for the Jordanian
Government to be disabused of such thoughts, If the
situation is frozen it must be frozen on both sides. If Israel
is not to take military security measures, Jordan must cease
its warfare. If Jordan continues to wage and encourage
aggression, the Government of Israel, like any other
Government in the world, will not remain passive and will
not forgo its right to self-defence.

58. The current wave of violence and murder is the work
of armed organizations openly based on and operating from
Jordanian territory. The Government of Jordan and its
armed forces are openly continuing to give such raids
political, moral and military support.
59. The concept that Governments of neighbouring Arab
States, which are bound by their obligations under the
cease-fire, remain free to aid and abet armed attacks on
Israel through organized infiltration, terrorism and sabotage
is inadmissible. Such activities constitute a continuation of
warlike action under cover of the cease-fire. The responsibility of the Government concerned can on no account be
evaded or obscured.
60. Attempts have been made here to describe the raiders
as enjoying the suppdrt of the Arab population in areas
under Israeli control. This is contrary to the facts. Local’
Arab inhabitants do not support these aggressiveactivities.
The Arab population, like its Jewish neighbours, is weary of
the twenty-year war, What characterizes the situation in
areas under Israel control is, above all, the atmosphere of
normalcy and coexistence between Jewsand Arabs.

54. The representative of Jordan referred to a statement”
made by the Prime Minister of Israel on 25 March in
reaction to a declaration by King Hussein on 23 March, in
which the King had said that he cannot guarantee Israeli
security in Israeli-controlled areas. Mr, Eshkol stated:
“We never asked King Hussein to guarantee Israel
security in Israel-controlled areas. That is up to the Israel
Defence Forces. All the King must do is to observe the
cease-fire commitments he assumed and stop giving direct
or indirect aid to terror organizations. But if Jordan is

61. The raiders, whether they be called marauders, terrorists, saboteurs,’ are simply messengers of hate and death
5

-..--

----

I__

last
e of
-I of
our
ates
rom
105X
We
the

.atic
and
reek
deal
ii to

hilt
e in
r. It
OM

thcr
the
and
,ast.
tion
ms,
967
Ilet,
a+
i of

just

:nts
the
and
ped
the

1 of
and
iate
>of
0th

fter
rch
hat
eeP
rity
I to
3Y’S

t be
4s I
ites
vise
are
rrith
F of
vise
011

:tor

due to the fact that no United Nations observation is
operating in the area’.
“I may take this occasion to Point out that the presence
of United Nations observers in an area can be helpful in
preSeI%TIg
a Cease-fire iI3 ways Other than reporting. The
mere fact of their watcliful presence can be something of
a deterrent to military activity. They can be in position to
report OR indications of the build-ups which often
precede military action. When fighting does break out
they can quickly intervene on the spot with the opposing
local commanders to arrange immediate cease-fires. It
may be noted that, largely because of the Presence of
United Nations observers, the Security Council cease-fire
resolutions are better served and maintained in the Suez
Canal and Israel-Syrian sectors than in the Israel-Jordan
sector.” [5’/793U/Add. 66, paras. I and 2.1

74. Surely the lesson cannot be lost upon this Council or
upon the parties that the violence of yesterday might well
have been brought to an earlier end and prevented from
reaching the proportions it did if there had only been
United Nations Observers on the spot available for immeiliate action. United Nations Observers have time and time
win rendered such services in other cease-fire sectors, and
we believe arrangements should be made so that they can
render such services in the Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector, to
the benefit of both parties, without prejudice to their
positions, and to the benefit of peace,
75. There is, in short, a serious deficiency in the cease-fire
machinery. But it is within this Council’s power to remedy
that deficiency.
76. We are all aware that both parties have not welcomed
this type of initiative. But this Council has its responsibilities, and this Council ought to take an action which is in
the interests of both parties and in no way, as I have said,
Prejudices the respective positions of the parties on
fundamental issues between them. In the discussion last
week, my delegation was prepared for the Council to take
this necessary action, and we are prepared today, in any
appropriate manner-by
resolution, consensus or other
wise-to cdl upon the parties to co-operate fully with the
Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in making arrangements as rapidly as possible
for the placing of United Nations Observers in the
Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector.

69. There is nothing one could add to this pertinent and
wise report by the Secretary-General, except to give it some
effect, as he has previously indicated it is vitally necessary
to do. Now, for ourselves and for my Government, I wish
to make these observations.
70. The first point is that neither side can find security in
violence. It has been true from time immemorial that those
who
live by the sword are in danger of dying by the sword,
that violence involves no problems but simply feeds on
itself. The history of the Middle East conflict for a whole
generation is a tragic demonstration
of this bitter truth.
Yet, the violence still goes on. It continues to inflict its
steady toll of death and injury and desolation on combatants alld on innocent civilians as well. This is not only
pertinent ta our consideration of the problem, but, as I
he
said, it is damaging the all-important peace-making
work of the able United Nations emissary, Ambassador
Jarring.

77. In making that proposal, we are very much concerned
about the recurring nature of the violations of the cease-fire
which have taken place. Indeed, it is surely in the interest
not only of the parties but of every nation represented in
the Security Council that does not want another war in the
Middle East-and I believe no nation here wants another
war in the Middle East-and whatever may be the differences that divide us, to unite on this necessaryaction.

71. My second point is that the Security Council has not
yet by any means exhausted the possibilities of practical
action to curtail, if not stop, these tragic events. In last
Sunday’s resolution (resolution 248 (1968)], which we
adopted unanimously, the Council served notice not only
that actions of military
reprisal and all other violent
incidents in grave violatiori of the cease-fire are intolerable,
but also that the Council would have to consider effective
steps to ensure against their repetition.

78. There is another thing we ought to do. Ambassador
Jarring’s mission is imperilled by what has been going on. In
our discussion last week my delegation proposed that we
indicate our confidence in Ambassador Jarring and that we
call upon the parties to co-operate with him in the conduct
of his fission. All concerned must rededicate themselves to
the principles of the 22 November resolution 242 (1967),
unanimously adopted by this Council. All the parties must
co-operate with Alnbassador Jarring in his important
mission, and to hasten &! achievement of a just and lasting
peacein which every State in the area can live in security. It
is in the fulfilment of the Jarring mission rather than by a
succession of acts of violence that the way to peace can be
found.

72, In the judgement
of my delegation, the time is
manifestly at 1;and for the Council to heed the SecretaryGeneral’s wise advice and to consider and adopt such a step.
Despite the conflicting claims made by the parties, we
believe this new eruption of violence has made clear the
step that now is most immediately required: the stationing,
as soon as possible, of United Nations Observers in the
Israel-Jordan cease-fire sector.

79. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated j?om Russian): The explosion of bombs over

73. Again as the Secretary-General points out, this is the
only sector governed by the cease-fire where there are no
such Observers. The opposing sides in the Israel-Jordan
sector confront each other directly, with no impartial
authority between them, no one to patrol the cease-fire
area, investigate charges and counter-charges, establish
disputed facts and take immediate steps to stop incidents if
they occur and prevent them from snowballing.

Jordanian villages, artillery bombardment across the river
Jbrdan, and machine-gun and tank fire against Jordanian
positions, sowing death and destruction, have once again
brought us to the Security Council room. Neither the
Security Council’s demand for strict compliance with the
cease-fire, nor the Council’s condemnation of Israel’s acts
of aggression
committed against Jordan a week ago, nor the
7

that measures which it has taken for the maintenance of
international peace and security-in this case, the condemnation of Israel’s aggressive acts and the warning against a
repetition of such acts in the future-have proved to be
inadequat’e, then the Council is empowered to take the
more effective measures necessary, namely, sanctions
against the aggressor State.

severe warning issued at that time to Israel that the COUK~
would be forced to consider further and more effective
steps, as envisaged in the Charter, to ensure against such
acts, have8 had the desired effect, Israel continues its
aggression. The pharisaical statements of the Israel representative in the Security Council, which amount to nothing
more or less than a complaint against Jordan, the victim of
Israel aggression, can mislead no one. Today’s statement by
the representative of Israel was designed to play on the
feelings of the Security Council by references to,a threat to
Israel children-a clear attempt to divert the attention of
the Security Council from realities.

86. Either blinded by its military successes of last year,
successesresulting from a number of specific and transient
circumstances at that time, or counting on the support of
certain Western States, which the representative of Jordan,
Ambassador El-Farra, mentioned in his stntemcnt today,
the aggressoris clearly counting on its impunity.

80. After all, Israel is repeatedly committing aggression
from occupied Jordanian territory. As a result of that
aggression there is a threat to the lives of Arab children
living in the occupied territory, not to the lives of Israel
children. Well, that is how it is. For the second time in ten
days we are hearing from the Israel representative facts that
are clearly designed to distort the situation. The Israel
aggressors are once again arrogantly and flagrantly defying
peace-loving States, the United Nations and the Security
Council. Instead of co-operating in the search for a political
settlement of the problems of the Middle East on the basis
of the principles of the Charter, the principles of peace and
justice and the Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, Israel is repeatedly igniting the flames
of war agairist the Arab States. Instead of withdrawing from
Arab lands seized as a result of last year’s pirstical attack on
the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan, Israel troops
are endeavouring to entrench themselves in those lands,
which have never belonged and will never belong to Israel.
Instead of accepting and fulfilling the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 on the elimination of the
consequences of Israel aggression, the Government of Israel
is disrupting the efforts of the Special Representative of the
United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Jarring, undermining
the.-possibility that his mission may succeed, and dashing
the hopes of the peoples for the establishment of a lasting
peace in the Middle East.

87. It is the duty of the Security Council strongly to
condemn the aggressor and to take measures which will put
an end to these calculations, In the preparation of such
measures the Soviet delegation is ready to co-operate with
all members of the Security Council.
88. I have listened with attention to the statement by the
representative of the United States. One could not fail to be
struck by the stress which he laid on the quoted words of
General qdd Bull.
89. But what a fine thing it would be if everyone here in
the Security Council, including the United States representative, laid stress on the need for Israel-which has
committed its second act of aggression within the space of
ten days-immediately
to implement the Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. Such emphosis on the part of the Security Council would be nwre
useful in the cause of peace and a political settlement in the
Middle East, and also for the success of Mr. Jarring’s
mission.
90. The Soviet delegation confirms that, in the event of
the adoption by the Security Council of a decision to take
more effective measures-sanctions against Israel for the
purpose of calling a halt to its acts of aggression-the Soviet
Union will be ready to take part in the implementation
of
these megsures.

81. The new acts of aggression by Israel against Jordan
have made it inevitable for the Security Council to give
urgent consideration to the dangerous situation which has
arisen and which confronts us with three basic facts.

91. Permit me to remind you, Mr. President, in conclusion, that, as was pointed out in the statement of the Soviet
Government on 22 March of this year /S/849.5/, as long as
the leaders of Israel take advantage of the support they
receive from outside to maintain their position of annexation of Arab territory, the Soviet Union and other countries
that are friendly to the Arab States and advocate a durable
peace in the Middle East will help the victims of aggression
because by so doing they would be fulfilling their duty
under the United Nations Charter and acting in the interests
of the maintenance of peace,

82. First, Israel, disregarding the repeated decisions of the
Security Council on a cease-fire in the Middle East and on
the elimination of the consequences of Israel aggression, is
continuing its policy of armed aggression against neigh.bouring Arab States.
83. Secondly, this means that the decisions so far adopted
-by the Security Council for the purpose of halting Israel
aggression have not been effective enough to restore peace
in the Middle East region.
84. Thirdly, it follows that the Security Council is faced
with the necessity to take more effective measures with
regard to the aggressor, as provided for in the United
Nations Charter and in the Security Council resolution
248 (1968) of 24 March.

92. Mr.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated
front
On 24 March the Security Council adopted a
resolution (248 (196811 condemning Israel and warning it
that it would not tolerate any policy based on military
reprisals. Yet five days later that policy of reprisals and
aggression is reactivated, with the use of the same script
that was presented to us at the time of the aggression
against Karameh. That policy is being pursued, we are told,

French):

85. The provisions of Chapter VII of the, United Nations
Charter state that, should the Security Council consider
8

me of
ondem;ainst a
1 to be
tke the
nctions

in order to cope with the resistance of the people ir, the
occupied zones.

3t year,
.ansient
port of
Jordan,
today,

93. This morning, Zionist propaganda is still harking back
to the same theme, moreover it is itself drawing the obvious
parallel with the action of 2 1 March. Thus, reports from Tel
Aviv state that the incidents of Friday occurred three hours
after the explosion of a mine at the Massada kibbutz, south
of Lake Tiberias. They also stress that, in addition to the
Karameh camp, the Israel air force and artillery bombed
and bombarded four Jordanian villages in which, according
to the Israel army spokesman, bases of the El-Fat&
liberation organization were located,

ngly to
will put
of such
Ite with

94. It is indeed curious to note that, still according to
reports from the Tel Aviv authorities, fuel depots near
Manshia were bombed by the Zionist air force. Are we to
suppose that’ in the judgement of the Zionist army those
fuel depots constituted bases for liberation movements?

t by the
Liltobe
lords of

here in
s reprelich has
rpace of
Council
empha)e mdre
rt in the
larring’s

:vent of
1to take
for the
e Soviet
ation of

conclu.e Soviet
s long as
ort they
annexa:ountries
durable
igression
eir duty
interests

1 from
lopted a
arning jt
military
ids and
ne script
ggression
are told,

99. Using the active resistance of the people of Palestine as
their excuse, the Tel Aviv authorities are stringently
carrying out massive military operations, supposedly as a
reaction to the local liberation movement. From that
standpoint, all measures are acceptable, including the
brainwashing of public opinion, that being the purpose of
the orchestrated propaganda to which we are treated every
day.
100. Thus, at a press conference held in Jerusalem on 25
March, the chief Zionist spokesman, recognizing that the
so-called terrorism could not be crushed at one blow, stated
that many more operations would be needed to weaken
Palestinian resistance. It is hardly necessary to add that the
operations in question are in fact large-scale military
operations requiring considerable technical resources, which
the Zionist authorities are not niggardly with.
101. It goes without saying that the facts of the case
would, if that were necessary, disprove the allegations
contained in document S/851 0 of 29 March 1968, which
says that on that same date Jordan opened a large
concerted attack on the territory under military occupation. One does not need to be a military expert to
appreciate the cynicism of such an accusation. It would be
a never-ending task to cite all the intemperate statementsthat is the least that can be said about them-of the Zionist
leaders. If we are to believe a commentary on Tel Aviv
Radio last night, the events of 29 March were set in motion
because the Jordanian Government was no longer able to
control the Palestinian resistance fighters. But this is
tantamount to a shamelessadmission that Israel’s military
operations, the pretext for which is the resistance of the
Palestinian people, are an integral part of a plan of
intimidation and destruction worked out in cold blood and
closely controlled by military strategists using the latest
techniques. Indeed this seems to have been confirmed by
General Barlev, who said that his country would respond to
any acts of resistance with operations sometimes more and
sometimes less massive than those carried out last week
against Karameh.

95. On 2G March, right after the adoption of resolution
248 (1968), at a press conference held at The Hague, the
head of the Zionist diplomacy indirectly informed the
Council that Israel did not intend to take any account of
the Council’s resolutions, when he declared that the
Security Council was incapable of taking constructive
action in the Middle East. Nevertheless, the de facto
authorities at Tel’ Aviv have never concealed the fact that
they meant to make use of the Security Council whenever
its resolutions or debates were such as to favour their plans.
96. That clearly is no longer the case and the Zionists now
intend to apply their own methods in order to bring their
own kind of peace to the Middle East. That artificial
creation, the product of a political situation born of a
chance combination of circumstances-1 mean Israel-like
its protectors, has for many years been assured of an
automatic majority in this Organization. Today, numerous
States in Africa. and Asia, thanks to their peoples’ struggle
for national liberation, have regained their independence
and are taking up their international responsibilities in all
the organs of the United Nations, The natural result of this
transformation has been to change the composition of the
Security Council, in which those States are represented.
Thus it is easy to understand why the Tel Aviv authorities
intend from now on to snap their fingers at the Council’s
resolutions.

102. We, for our part, doubt whether these specialists in
so-called preventive actions are capable of understanding
the deep-seated reasons for the tragedy being experienced
by the Palestinian people in all the occupied territories.
103. If Zionist logic were to be applied to the predictable
course of events, it would seem that the Security Council
may have to convene on many more occasions, for it is
obviously most unlikely that the liberation movement in
the occupied territories should ever cease-not, at least,
until the occupied lands have been reconquered.

97. Of course, the Zionists’ contempt for the Security
Council does not prevent them from deriving such advantages from it as they can. For example, some of the
explanations of vote given after the adoption of resolution
248 (1968) on 24 Ma;ch more or less constituted, or at
least could be interpreted as, a direct encouragement of
their aggressive policy.

104. The eruption on to the international scene of the
Palestinian resistance movement, which some had thought
annihilated for ever, is certainly an embarrassment and a
source of concern to those who are evolving a system of
spoliation and destruction; but it would be a mistake to
think that the rebirth of the Palestinian nation can be
prevented any longer, ztndneither mass repression, so-called
preventive action, nor allegedly graduated retaliatory measures will stop a struggle that has been generated by the
occupation itself.

98. The confusion deliberately fostered by certain Powers
regarding
the proper interpretation
of resolution
248 (1968) gave the Zionists reason to believe that they
would be assured of a more understanding attitude in the
future. Btit the Fsource of the aggressive Zionist policy is to
be found in the programme of territorial expansion which
they intend to pursue come hell or high water. Their
attitude is, moreover, quite logical in its own way.
9

] 11. The second circumstance is our unshakeable loyalty
to the Charter and to the spirit which gave it birth. If we
bear these two factors in mind, our action must be aimed
above all at putting an end to the occupation and to the
repressive measures taken by the occupying Power; and it
must stress that the struggle for liberation is legitimate and
justified, as are all practical and effective efforts to halt and
disarm those who are proving their aggressiveintentions by
their deeds and raising reprisals to the level of policy and
law.

105. The Zionists have invented nothing new, and Algeria
is not alone in knowing exactly how to evaluate what they
wrongly call “counter-terrorism” and boldly make it a
matter of policy.
8.
106. Need we repeat that the blustering attitude of the Tel
Aviv authorities is drawing us into a new strategic deadlock? Their simplistic policy, made plain in countless
declarations, reveals the state of euphoria currently prevailing in Zionist circles. But that euphoria will vanish of its
own accord on the day when, caught in the straits of a
reality which no propaganda can alter and confronted by
the inevitable success of the harsh struggle in which the
Palestinians are now engaged, the international community
finally comes to grips with the substance of the problem.

112. The responsibility incumbent upon this Council 1~s
now become imperative. The Council must act, and act
quickly, to ensure respect for its resolution 248 (1968). If
it fails to take a resolute stand and proceeds in a dilatory
fashion it would give the impression in some quarters that it
has become incapable of action. The Council might do well
to adopt the credo proclaimed, on 26 March last, by
President LBopold Senghor:
“The trials of the Arabs are our trials; their defeats are
our defeats; their hopes are our hopes and their duty to
be reborn and to resist is our duty.”

107. With all due respect to the leader of Zionist
diplomacy, who asserted that the issue in the Middle East is
the existence of the State of Israel and not that of the other
nations there, the substance of the problem is actually the
existence of the Palestinian nation in full integrity and
sovereignty. We for our part are certain that the population
of Palestine will successfully carry out its mission of
reclaiming its national identity, and that the day will come
when those who now seek to oppose this will have to
accept it as a fact.

113. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Hungarian delegation wishes to make a few comments on the problem
before the Security Council.
114. The Hungarian people learned with the greatest
indignation of the most recent act of aggression committed
by Israel against Jordan. This aggression is the most recent
in a long series of attacks by Israel on the neighbouring
countries. It was a prepared, premeditated and deliberalr:
attack, displaying an arrogant disrespect for the Charter, for
international agreements and for international law. It wasa
challenge to the whole world. It was an expression of a
military policy of conquest, domination and expansion
aiming at rule over other peoples by ruthless and violent
force.

108, For this reason my delegation believes that it is time
for the Council to try to solve the problem posed by the
usurpation of Palestine. That is the only way to put an end
to the aggression, the nature of which, as we know, is to
perpetuate itself indefinitely, and also to create the
necessary conditions for a real and stable peace.
109. Only two possibilities are open to the Council’in this
matter. Looking’at the problem from one angle, it could
take the line of least resistance, tolerating, accepting and
permitting the continued occupation of the territories and
the continued subjection of their peoples to the yoke of the
occupation policy, which is like any other occupation
policy. Such an attitude might well encourage certain
people to think of building a wall, an impenetrable barrier,
which would for ever separate all the occupied territories
from the rest of the country. Such an attitude would mean
giving a blessing to the annexation and legitimizing the
expulsion of the local inhabitants. Its end result would be
to reward the aggression and the aggressor,There are some
contradictions which none of us can accept, lest a system
which is, after all, based on a certain balance and harmony
should founder.

115. The duty of the United Nations ,is to stop this kind
of activity, to stop this series of aggressions. The duty of
the Security Council is to call upon those members of the
Council and those Members of, the Organization that
support the Israeli Government by supplying it with the
offensive weapons that are used in its attacks against other
peoples-those States that supply capital and economic
assistance to Israel to strengthen that country’s ambitions,
and that are even supplying volunteers to participate in its
aggressive activities-to call upon those supporters of Israel
to ceasetheir assistance ami co-operation with the aggressor
in the Middle East.

110. Looking at the problem from another angle, the
Security Council can and must, in conformity with the
Charter and with its own decisions, consider taking measures which will be both practical and effective and will
inspire renewed confidence in its authority and capacity for
action. Those measures must necessarily take account of
two circumstances, first of all the one which confronts us
now, namely, that occupation gives rise to resistance and to
an active struggle for liberation. That legitimate struggle
furnishes the aggressor a pretext for further reprisals and
annexations which present a standing challenge to our faith
in the Charter, besides being prejudicial to the integrity of
this Council.

116. The representative of Israel said that his people is
facing a great danger, and that if anyone in the world is
yearning for peace, it is his people. In a way we agree with
that statement-but not with the explanation that was given
with it. The danger which the Israeli people is facing is
created by the aggressive policy of the Government of
Israel, by its series of attacks-against the neighbouring
countries, by its oppression of the population in huge
occupied areas and by its engaging every ,day in warlike
actions. Such actions and such a policy cannot but lead in
the end to the destruction of the aggressor. Arrogant
domination, as history has proved so many times, only
.O

le loyalty
rth. If we
be aimed
nd to the
fer; and it
imate and
3 halt and
:ntions by
lolicy and

)uncil has
, and act
:1968). If
1 dilatory
ers that it
lt do well
last, by
efeats are
r duty to
rjan deleproblem
greatest
)mmitted
1st recent
fibouring
leliberate
.arter, for
8.It wasa
sion of a
ixpansion
d violent
this kind
: duty of
:rs of the
.ion that
with the
:nst other
?conomic
mbitions,
late in its
i of Israel
aggressor
people is
world is
gree with
wasgiven
facing is
lment of
hbouring
in huge
I warlike
tt lead in
Arrogant
les, only

breeds growing resistance, creating as a result the means of
the destruction of the conqueror.
4
117. The representative of Israel seems to be forgetting
certain facts. He stated that it is their homes and their
people which are being destroyed-and that is why they
condemn these incidents. May I remind him and those of
his allies which are unwilling to consider the real facts as
they are, that the West Bank of the Jordan River is still
Jordan territory, that the Sinai Peninsula is United Arab
Republic territory and that the Golan Heights are Syrian
territory, It would be much better if those representatives
did not forget those facts and did not attempt to make the
world accept these military attacks and acts of aggression as
normal events.

strengthen peace in the Middle East and if we want to
contribute to the effectiveness of the m&ion of Ambassador Jarring, the Representative of the Secretary-General
in the area, to implement resolution 242 (1967) of the
Council.
124. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to speak
briefly today on three issues: first, the need to recognize
the futility of force; second, the need to break out of the
political impasse; and third, the desperate need for speed.
125. It is on the basis of those three propositions that I
would wish to appeal to the Council and to all those
concerned in the face of the confused and continued
conflict.
126. I believe that we all recognize the futility of any
attempt to settle the problem before us by violence. The
vicious circle of violence escalates. One outbreak of
violence leads to more and worse violence-all of which we
would all most strongly condemn. We all see and must
accept the hopelessness of force, The Jordan Valley has
become a desolate waste of fire and suffering. Anyone who
imagines that the situation cari be saved or restored by
more violence must be blind. Surely we all have to
recognize, as it has so often been recognized elsewhere, that
there is no military solution for this particular problem. If
we concentrate only on the military factors we shall surely
fail.

118. It was astonishing to hear the representative of the
United States, Ambassador Goldberg, state in this debate
that we should not try to put someone in the wrong,
because that is no solution to the problem. It is strange
indeed to hear such a distinguished lawyer state that he
does not wish to distinguish between the attacker and the
victim.
119. In -this case, as on many previous occasions, a serious
attack has been committed; people have been killed and
homes have been destroyed. This is clearly a criminal act
for which the guilty should be exposed and should be held
responsible, as well as for all the consequences connected
with it.

127. Secondly, we must do everything we possibly can to
ensure that the cease-fire is made effective and we must all
most carefully consider the implications and the necessities
of the report which the Secretary-General has placed before
us this morning; but I believe that no one imagines that to
maintain the cease-fire is enough, important though it
obviously is, If we had no course before us but to attempt
to stop the violence, we might well be very nearly
powerless, If we had no positive course open to us, the
outlook would indeed be miserably hopeless; we could look
only to a descent into greater confusion so dangerous that
we might despair of ever emerging from it. However, as we
all know, we have no need to be negative. We have a clear
course open before us. We have laid down the franiework of
a settlement. We understand that that framework is
acceptable to everyone concerned. We have voted unanimously in this Council. We see the way we must go. We
have every reason to be positive and to insist that we
proceed in accordance with the positive policy which we
ourselves have laid down.

120. The Hungarian delegation is of the opinion that for
those reasons Israel should be condemned for its repeated
aggressive activities and should be called upon to desist
from further attacks against its neighbours.
121. Secondly, the Security Council should recognize the
right of the Arab peoples to self-defence-which is fully
justified-in
the Arab territories. The Hungarian People’s
Republic strongly supports the victims of aggression. We
fully agree with the statement of the representative of
Jordan that Jordan cannot be held responsible for the
safety of the Israeli occupying forces in Arab territories. I
should like to add that the United Nations cannot be held
responsible either for the safety of the aggressors.The duty
of the United Nations, based on the .Charter, is to protect
the interests of the victims of the aggression. We should not
recognize annexation of foreign territories. We should not
condone the stabilization of the occupation of foreign
territories.

128. Had all the parties come forward at once and openly
stated their full acceptance of the whole resolution, the
situation would have been at once transformed. NO one can
pretend that such acceptance of the resolution could be
given without two clear obligations being created: first, to
carry it out in full and, secondly, to co-operate with the
United Nations and with Ambassador Jarring for that
purpose. It was not done before. Why should it not be done
now? What was desirable in the interests of everyone
concerned in November has become essential and desperately urgent in March. We are all obsessed by the thought
that bloody confusion threatens to take over, bringing
suffering to countless innocent people. Surely there can be
no escape except by political action.

122. Thirdly, in the view of the Hungarian delegation the
Security Council should impose .the strongest sanctions
against the aggressive policy of the Government of Israel.
The Council cannot tolerate the contemptuous refusal by
Israel to implement resolutions 242 (1967) and 248 (1968).
This attitude of Israel constitutes a very clear violation of
Article 25 of the Charter, which, as my delegation states
now and has stated so repeatedly, calls for strong measures
against the Government refusing to implement the resolutions.
123. In the view of the Hungarian delegation those
considerations should prevail if we sincerelv want to
11

met with the President and I communicated this information to him. The following day, within twenty-four hours,
the Israelis attacked and the Council condemned that
attack.

129. If those propositions are regarded as self-evident, I go
on to say something else which aiso is surely obvious to us
all, The third proposition I wish to emphasize is the
urgency of political action. When I was speaking in reply in
this Council last Sunday I attempted to emphasize the fact
that there is so littIe time to take the political action
required. With your permission, I should like to state again
what I said then:
“How much harm delay has done already. Only the
devil would advocate d :lay now. Delay has been and is on
the side of conflict. Delay has been and is on the side of
the suffering of the innocent. Delay has been and is on
the side of violence and bloodshed. Delay is 9n the side of
condemning another g:neration in the Middle East to
hopeless hate. All of us! as we comk to the end of our
debate, must surely be anxiously aware that there is no
time to be lost. Now is the time and great is the urgency
to turn from what divides us to what unites us in practical
advance ,” (1407th meeting, para. 45.1

135. So when I come here and warn the Council and they
again attack on the following day, I think that they are in
no position to deny it, because they do not come to the
Security Council with clean hands.
136. The question of children was raised. We deplore any
attack on children. We are human and we do not believe in
inhuman behaviour. But if there is any inhuman behaviour,
it is in the history of Zionism and Israel. When I referred to
Karameh I mentioned that I had been there and had
brought back pictures from Karameh, pictures which are
now contained in a Security Council document (S/8419/.
Here you see the children and here are the fragmentation
bombs, These are the victims of the Israeli fragmentation
bombs. This is a crime admitted by Israel. It is not hearsay
evidence.

What noes urgent last Sunday is still more urgent now. It is
with that thought in mind that we would make an appeal
that this Council at once and urgently call on all concerned
to co-operate immediately and unreservedly on the basis of
the resolution for which we all voted last November.

137. So when Mr. Tekoah comes here and says that we
fired first and speaks about children, I reply: here you see
the children. I shall not mention napalm bombs and other
things which were used in the most inhuman manner last
June; I shall not dwell on them now, as I know the hour is
late.

130. The more we hear accounts of the violence which has
intervened, the more we hear of the intensity of feeling,
and the more we look into the abyss of confusion and
violence which now opens before us, the more necessary it
is to get back on to the road we charted, which is surely tile
only way to escape from the vicious circle which each
week, each day, seems more and more to control the
situation. I trust that we shall never lose sight of the
necessity for that political solution and we shall throughout
our debate urge on everyone concerned that the only
escape now before us is the escape by positive political
action.

138. Mr. Tekoah referred to my statement that the war
was not over. I am not the only one saying this. You-the
Security Council-are
saying this; you have adopted a
cease-fire resolution. Did you adopt anything more than a
cease-fire resolution? Does a cease-fire mean peace, peace
with occupation, coexistence with aggression? That is not
your decision. It is a cease-fire-nothing more, nothing less.
139. Then we heard the statement made that I had said
that the cease-fire was not a final settlement. I should hope
so. That explains why Mr. Tekoah keeps mcnti@ng the
cease-fire agreement-not
the resolution-and
why I continue to hear some members referring-either intentionally
or in good faith-to the cease-fire line. That proves what the
motive is. A cease-fire agreement, a final settlement: was
that your resolution? I know that you all adopted a
cease-fire, and that that is the stand of the Council.

131. The PRESIDENT (translated fronz French): I call on
the representative of Jordan, who wishes to exercise his
right of reply.
132. Mr. EL-FARR4 (Jordan): I have a few observations
to make on the points raised by Mr. Tekoah. He began his
statement by saying that every stone in Palestine belonged
to his fathers and his grandfathers and so on. We wish to
point out that Mr, Tekoah is a newcomer to Palestine: he
comes from eastern Europe. Neither Mr. Tekoah’s father
nor his grandfather, nor his great-great-grandfather, ever set
foot in Palestine.

140. A reference was made to the Karameh operation.
Mr, Tekoah said: “The Karameh operation should be a
warning to all Arab rulers”. No, this is a warning to every
single member of the Security Council around this table.
After the Council adopted a resolution condemning the
attack, it is Mr. T’ekoah wlio is telling you, not Jordan, that
this operation is a warning to all Arab leaders, that reprisal
pays and that “we will do it again and again and again”.
That has no other meaning. So the warning is not to us: it is
to the dignity and prestige of this great body, to the great
values enshrined in our Charter,

133. My second point concerns the question of who first
started the firing. This is an old record by now. Every time
we bring a complaint here we find a counter-complaint and
we find an attempt to-impute t.o us the crime committed by
Israel. Mr. Tekoah said that my letter warning the Council
that there would be an attack on Jordan was a smokescreen.

141. Another point raised here was the question of
turmoil in Jordan., But that is a good sign, it is a sign of
awakening, of more alertness and more realization of
Zionist expansionist aims and aggression. We welcome our
awareness because with awareness there comes under-

134. This is not the first time that I have warned the
Council and it is not the first time that Israel has
committed aggression after the warning, I did warn the
Council three times about the contemplated aggression. 1
12

forms.
hours,
1 that
?
d they
are in 1
to the I
re any 1
ievein /
rviour,
,redto p
1 had :
ch are
:41J].
tation
tation
earsay
lat we
3u see
other
er last
iour is
:e war
u-the
lted a
than a
peace
is not
.g less,
d said
I hope
ig the
f COP
onally
at the
:: was
ted a
,ation.
be a
every
table.
Ig the
1,that
:prisal
gain”,
s: it,is
great
xl of
ign of
on of
ie our
rnder.

purchase the worst food available. Again the servant came
back with a .tongue. The Rabbi asked for an explanation
and the servant gave a very simple one: “there is nothing
better than a good tongue, nothing worse than an evil
tongue”.

standing, and with understanding we know that our
prchlem will be solved on the basis of what is just, what is
right and what the Charter inspires, not what it might
inspire. I said this in my statement today. Everywhere in
the Arab world, not only in Jordan, there is turmoil, there
ls unrest. People refuse to accept this type of illegal and
immoral occupation, So when Mr. Tekoah says that there is
turmoil, it belies his very statement that everything is all
ri&t in the West Bank. The West Bank is part of Jordan,
aadthis realization exists on both sides of the Jordan River,
the West Bank and the East Bank.

147. As regards the situation in Karameh, I would refer
the representative of Jordan to the statement made by King
Hussein in which he explained whom the Israelis engaged
and whom they did not engage in their defensive action.
King Hussein, when asked whether the Israelis fought the
Fedayeen, the raiders and marauders at the Karameh camp,
answered “probably”.

142. I now come to a point raised by the representative of
the United States. He placed some emphasis on the
question of observers. Let me make this very clear. Israel
expelled the machinery of the United Nations just as it
expelled 450,000 citizens of Jordan from the West Bank. Is
it now in the interest of the Security Council to look.for
newmachinery with a new status and a new mandate, or
shculd the Council insist that its same machinery should be
stationed in the same area and in the same building-the
building used by the United Nations-and should work for
the very same aim-not the aim of freezing a cease-fire
resolution or what some members call a cease-fire line, but
the aim of implementing the only existing United Nations
mandate, which is the Armistice Agreement? The Armistice Agreement is still there. Our Secretary-General very
ably said that this machinery is still valid, that no one
whether Jordan or Israel has a veto concerning revocation
of this Agreement. That being so, the Agreement is still
binding on both and it should be the machinery of the
Council. But if the United Nations machinery is expelled by
Israel, should it look for a second front and go backwards?
And if it is expelled again, should it go backwards to a third
line? No, that would not be in the interest neither of peace
in the area nor of the Security Council. The machinery
exists.

148. Again I listened with amazement to the flood of
abuse in the statement of the representative of Algeria. It
does not deserve to be commented on. The Algerian
Government has made its attitude abundantly clear, It is at
war with Israel. It does not accept the cease-fire. The
Charter obligations are of no concern to Algeria. Its
membership in the Security Council imposes no responsibility on it. I think Algeria’s attitude is more of a problem
for the Security Council itself than for Israel-149. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Algeria on a point of order.
150. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
flench): It is not the habit of the Algerian delegation to
interrupt speakers in this Council. The spokesman for
Zionist diplomacy in the United Nations is entitled to make
all the comments he feels it is his duty to make. But that he
should cast a slur on the integrity of the Algerian
delegation, and of Algeria, is something we will not allow.
151. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
representative of Israel will please continue.

143. I am glad and delighted to note that our distinguished and able Secretary-General is not saying that “we
want observers on the cease-fire line or in the cease-fire
area”. He is simply saying: “I may take this occasion to
point out that the presence of United Nations observers in
an area can be helpful” [S/7930/,4&.66/,
leaving the door
open for the armistice machinery to be revived and
reactivated.

152. Mr. TBKOAH (Israel): At a previous meeting I
already suggested, respectfully, to the Soviet representative
that he avoid accepting at face value info’rmation from Arab
sources [1405th meeting, pam. 761. Today the Council is
discussing a grave situation that has arisen as a result of
Jordanian aggression against Israeli territory, Israeli villages,
the Israeli population in the Beit She’an Valley-not in areas
under Israel control on the West Bank of the Jordan River,
as the Soviet representative and some other representatives
have alleged.

144. I hope that those points will be taken into consideration by the members of the Council who are concerned
about peace. I know that they are concerned about peace,
but it should be a peace based on what is right, not a peace
of accommodation.

153. A reference was made here by the representative of
the USSR to aggression. I have before me a document
containing a Soviet draft for the definition of aggression. It
states inter alia:
“1. In an international conflict that State shall be
declared the attacker which first commits one of the
following acts:
“*..
‘ff) Support of armed bands organized in its own
territory which invade the territory of another State, or
refusal, on being requested by the invaded State, to take
in its own territory any action within its power to deny
such bands any aid or protection.

145. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel in exercise of his right of reply.
146. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The representative of Jordan
found it appropriate to make a personal remark concerning
me; I shall not reply to it. I shall only say that it reminded
me of a well-known .and ancient story about Rabbi Gamliel
who one day asked his servant to go to the market and get
the best food available, The servant went to the market and
came back with a piece of tongue. The next day the Rabbi
asked his servant to go to the market again and to find and
13

the USSR representative is raising a point of order. This has
priority, and I therefore call on him.

“2. That State shall be declared to have committed an
act of indirect aggression which:
“(a) Encourages subversive activjty against another
State (a+ctsof terrorism, diversionary acts, etc.).“’

156. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I shall be very brief. I should like
to satisfy the curiosity of the representative of Israel and
explain that the proposal of the Soviet Union on the
definit’ion of aggression envisages not a national approach,
whether Jews, Arabs, Americans, Russians or others are
concerned, but an international political approach, and
relates to all aggressors,regardless of their nationality, The
representative of Israel should understand this by now.

Does the Soviet representative suggest that this definition
should apply to all States except the Jewish State? I
cannot believe that this is an attempt to vindicate the old
Russian saying: “to all except the Jews”.2
154. The problem of crossings of truce demarcation and
cease-fire lines by mar; uders is not a new question. It has
been dealt with before :he Security Council in the past. In
an earlier discussion an important statement was made by a
distinguished representative, and I quote him:
“ . * 1each party should be responsible for the actions of
the individuals or groups on its territory or under its
authority to ensure that their actions do not violate the
truce or lead to a situation that4 would result in a
resumption of military operations. , .
I‘ . . *
‘L. . . the Security Council should adopt a suitable
resolution or issue a warning to the parties . . .“-to the
parties-“so that the Governments and authorities concerned may establish the necessarysupervision over ,individuals or groups whose actions might contribute to a
violation of the truce and a resumption of military
operations . . . .
‘I . . I
“The States which have undertaken to fulfil the
Security Council’s decision on the cessation of military
operations . . , will certainly be able to find ways and
means to punish and call to order or bring to justice the
individuals or groups whose actions might contribute to
violate the obligations imposed upon the various States
involved in the Pales:lne problem and the decisions of the
Security Council.“3

157. A few days ago Israel was formally condemned as an
aggressor by a decision of the United Nations Security
Council. Therefore no verbal rhetoric here on the part of
the Israel aggressor can change ‘the situation or justify
repeated acts of aggression against Arab States.
158. The PRESIDENT (translated from J+ench): I call on
the representative of Jordan in the exercise of his right of
reply.
159. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I do not know why
Mr. Tekoah was upset at my referring to his origin. I think
everyon’e should be proud of his origin. I do not know why,
when Mr. Tekoah speaks about his home and I tell him
“This is my home and your home is in East Europe”, he
calls this a personal remark. This is a statement of fact. He
speaks about the souls of his fathers. This should guide him
to where they are.
160. With regard to the question of the sweet ,tongue, I
certainly agree that Mr. Tekoah, like every single Zionist, is
well trained to use his tongue properly. I think it is this
which is creating the big lie in many big cities. It is because
of this kind of misinformation-I
repeat, misinformationdesigned to mislead and distort. Yes, we are not good at
public relations at times, but they are very good at
distortion and at misinformation.

That statement was made in the Security Council on 19
August 1948 by the representative of the Soviet Union,
Ambassador Malik. I agree with Ambassador Malik.

161. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no more speakers on my list. I therefore propose that the
meeting should be adjourned and that, the rime of the next
meeting should be fixed after consultations with members
of the Council. However, in view of the seriousness of this
situation, I would request members kindly to hold themselves available for a possible emergency meeting of the
Security Council.

155. The PRESIDENT (translated from 8Yenchj: I was
about to call on the representative of Jordan, but I see that
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 51, document A/C.6/L.332/Rev.l.
2 Quoted in Russianby the speaker.
3 Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, No. 107,
354th meeting, pp. 45 and 46.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

14
Litha in U.N.

Price: $LJ.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35426-May

1971-2,100
