S/2008/770

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 9 December 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 28 November
2008 which I received from the Deputy Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-64207 (E) 161208

*0864207*

S/2008/770

Annex
Letter dated 28 November 2008 from the Deputy Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from May to July 2008 (see enclosure). I would appreciate your
making the report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

08-64207

S/2008/770

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
1.
The present report covers the period from 1 May to 31 July 2008. As at 25 July
2008, the strength of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) stood at
49,101 personnel from the 26 NATO nations and 2,215 from 14 non-NATO nations.
2.
Throughout the reporting period ISAF continued to assist the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions. Key themes are that:
(a) ISAF continued to conduct security operations while supporting
governance, reconstruction and development. Security operations focused on
disrupting and defeating the threat from opposing militant forces while
simultaneously developing the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces;
(b) The Afghan National Army increased in size and capability during the
reporting period. Combined Afghan National Security Forces/ISAF operations built
on previous successes in order to counter opposing militant forces intentions and
undermine their capacity for future actions. The greatest challenge to the security of
Afghanistan continued to be found in the southern and eastern portions of the
country, where additional forces, both ISAF and Afghan National Security Forces,
have made a very significant contribution to the mission.
Security situation
3.
The activity of opposing militant forces throughout Afghanistan during the
reporting period was higher than the same period in 2007. For the most part, their
tactics focused on small-scale, asymmetric attacks rather than large-scale, force-onforce engagements against ISAF and Coalition Forces. Also, many opposing militant
forces attacks continued to be directed against the Afghan National Security Forces,
especially the Afghan National Police and civilians who work for or support the
Government. Opposing militant forces attacks that inflicted the greatest numbers of
casualties primarily utilized improvised explosive devices, which accounted for the
overwhelming majority of Afghan civilian casualties. The opposing militant forces
strategy continued to be centred on discrediting and undermining the authority of
the Government, as well as ISAF and the international community, in order to
influence the population, thus creating favourable conditions that would be
conducive to the establishment of a radical Islamic Government within Afghanistan.
The regional security situations were as follows:
(a) Regional Command Capital. Opposing militant forces activity increased
slightly but was within expected seasonal norms. The potential for “high visibility”
attacks against high-value/high-payoff targets remained constant. The suicide
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on the Indian embassy was an
example of the type of spectacular attack that opposing militant forces strive to
achieve in Kabul city. Opposing militant forces weapons caches in the capital and its
surroundings were discovered by the International Security Assistance Force with
the help of local nationals, a positive sign of increasing will to cooperate by Afghan
locals against opposing militant forces;

08-64207

3

S/2008/770

(b) Regional Command North. Opposing militant forces activity within
Regional Command North remained within historical norms. Criminal activity and
illegal armed groups continued to be the primary threats to stability. Although the
Taliban may have had ambitions to establish a greater presence outside of Pashtun
pockets, regional and local power brokers as well as the non-Pashtun ethnic
population continued to limit Taliban influence;
(c) Regional Command West. Opposing militant forces activity slightly
increased during the reporting period, particularly in areas adjacent to Regional
Command South. This is assessed to be due to the effects of continued ISAF and
Afghan National Security Forces security operations against opposing militant
forces in Regional Command South;
(d) Regional Command South. Regional Command South continued to be the
focus of the opposing militant forces main effort, despite the death or capture of a
number of opposing militant forces leaders. ISAF and Afghan National Security
Forces operations disrupted opposing militant forces activity within many
traditional Taliban areas of operation. Taliban in Regional Command South, deeply
anchored into the population, nevertheless remained the primary threat to regional
stability during the reporting period and continued to possess the capability to
conduct a range of attacks against ISAF, Coalition and Government forces;
(e) Regional Command East. Insurgent activity in Regional Command East
increased significantly compared to last year, particularly along the Afghan/Pakistan
border. Opposing militant forces groups routinely transited the porous border in
order to conduct hit-and-run attacks against the International Security Assistance
Force, Coalition and Government forces before retreating back across the border
into Pakistan. The opposing militant forces attack against combat outpost Waynat
(also known as combat outpost Kahler) in Kunar Province demonstrated the ability
of opposing militant forces to conduct punctual large-scale direct attacks against
ISAF and Coalition Forces if conditions are favourable.
Afghan National Army
4.
The Afghan National Army continued to improve in terms of both strength and
capability, as evidenced by several additional formations achieving full operational
capability during the reporting period. Limited international assistance with Afghan
National Army training initiatives, the shortage of mentor teams, and the lack of
adequate equipment support continued to hamper the overall pace of development.
(a) Capability. The Afghan National Army continued to develop into a
respected and professional force, with over half of Afghan National Army units
partially capable of conducting counter-insurgency operations with ISAF and
Coalition Forces support. The remaining units grew in capability and are expected to
meet developmental goals in accordance with established timelines. Afghan
National Army participation in security and stability operations continued to climb,
mirroring the Army’s growth in capability and capacity, with more than half of ISAF
operations conducted jointly with Army units;
(b) Manning. The manning of the Afghan National Army continued to grow
steadily, with approximately 60,000 personnel currently assigned by the end of the
reporting period. “Present for duty” numbers increased proportionally, with
approximately 35,000 personnel available for operations in July 2008;

4

08-64207

S/2008/770

(c) Equipment. The equipment situation improved, albeit at a slower rate
than desired. The fielding to priority units of a limited number of weapons provided
by the United States of America progressed;
(d) Training. The failure to source the required number of operational
mentoring and liaison teams continues to be the most significant contributing factor
restricting ISAF ability to accelerate the pace of Afghan National Army
development. Sourcing additional teams therefore remained the number one forcegeneration priority of NATO.
Afghan National Police
5.
Although the efforts of the international community to enhance Afghan
National Police capabilities by transforming the Afghan uniformed police into a
service loyal to the Afghan people and Afghan national interests continued, the
Afghan National Police still requires significant support to transform it into a “fitto-purpose” security institution. Having reached the level of approximately 78,000
personnel during the reporting period, the Afghan National Police continued to rely
on substantial support from the international community in order to support security
operations in Afghanistan. The focused district development programme, conducted
by the Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan during the reporting
period, remained the primary focus of support to Afghan National Police
development. An acute shortage of police mentor teams remains a critical challenge
to the continued implementation of the programme across Afghanistan.
Counter-narcotics
6.
The link between the illegal narcotics industry and opposing militant forces
was further confirmed during the reporting period, and continues to fuel instability
and corruption. This continues to threaten all levels of governance, including police
authority and the wider rule of law. Ultimately, the effect of the illegal narcotics
trade jeopardizes meaningful reconstruction and development. Key points are that:
(a) ISAF support to counter-narcotics operations focuses on cross-agency
coordination with the Ministries of the Interior, Counter-narcotics and Defence, as
well as with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
(b) Within its mandate and resources, ISAF supported the Afghan Special
Narcotics Force and the National Interdiction Unit, which are the key Afghan
interdiction forces. The Government, supported by ISAF, conducted a pre-planting
information operation campaign that appeared to have achieved some positive
results. ISAF also provided logistical support to a number of Afghan interdiction
operations.
Neighbouring countries
7.
Movement of opposing militant forces between Pakistan and Afghanistan
persisted across what is a largely porous border. Criminal elements continue to use
smuggling routes across Central Asian countries neighbouring Afghanistan to access
Europe and Asia. Reports of foreign fighters arriving in Afghanistan from Central
Asia continued as well.

08-64207

5

S/2008/770

Judicial reform and rule of law
8.
There was no significant change from the last reporting period. Public access
to justice remains limited. The prison system continues to lack sufficient
infrastructure and personnel, and the majority of Afghans were unaware of their
rights and the legal process. The judicial system continues to remain weak with
widespread corruption. Slight progress was noted with respect to judicial training.
Governance
9.
The military mission of ISAF, as mandated by the relevant Security Council
resolutions, is intended to assist the Government in providing security across
Afghanistan. Events on the ground during the reporting period reinforced the view
that security, development and governance are interdependent. Reinforcing the
positive influence of the creation of the Afghan Independent Directorate of Local
Governance, ISAF continued to engage with the Afghan Government at all levels in
order to help extend its authority and improve its capabilities. Provincial
reconstruction team leadership remained vital in buttressing the Government’s
authority against the effects of continued efforts by the opposing militant forces
and/or criminal elements to frustrate this process. Deeper and wider engagement of
the central Government and proof of its impartial beneficiary effects for the whole
population, at the grass-roots level, remained a priority for sustained improvements.
Capacity-building at all levels of the Administration remains a prerequisite for
extending Government authority.
Development
10. The Joint Force Command Brunssum provincial reconstruction team
conference held in May 2008, with participants from ISAF troop-contributing
nations, the international community and the Government, provided a venue for
coordinating long-term guidance and direction. The outcome was an action plan to
further align NATO support for reconstruction and development with the Afghan
national development strategy. In terms of building better governance, it was agreed
that provincial reconstruction teams should provide support to the five-year plan of
the Independent Directorate of Local Governance. This could best be achieved
through enhanced coordination with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan at the regional level as well as increased emphasis from a reinvigorated
provincial reconstruction team executive steering committee, co-chaired by the
Independent Directorate of Local Governance rather than the Ministry of the
Interior.

6

08-64207
