A /77/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

64th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 29 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
In the absence of the President, Mr. Dang
(Viet Nam), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Draft resolution (A/77/L.58)
The Acting President: I would like to acknowledge
the presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and His Excellency Mr. Alatoi
Ishmael Kalsakau, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Vanuatu.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Earlier this month, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
confirmed that humans are responsible for virtually
all global heating over the past 200 years. The IPCC
report showed that limiting the overall temperature
rise to 1.5°C is achievable, but time is running out. The
window for averting the worst effects of the climate
crisis is closing rapidly. This is the critical decade for
climate action. It must happen on our watch. And those
who have contributed the least to the climate crisis are
already facing both climate hell and high sea levels. For
some countries, climate threats are a death sentence.
Indeed, it is the initiative of those countries, joined
by so many others — along with the efforts of young

people all over the world — that is bringing us together.
Together, we are making history.
The General Assembly is meeting today to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.58, which requests that the
International Court of Justice render an advisory
opinion on the obligations of States in respect of climate
change. Advisory opinions of the Court — the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations — have tremendous
importance and can have a long-standing impact on the
international legal order. Advisory opinions can provide
much-needed clarification on existing international
legal obligations. If issued, such an opinion would
assist the General Assembly, the United Nations and
Member States in taking the bolder and stronger climate
action that our world so desperately needs. It would
also guide the actions and conduct of States in their
relations with one another, as well as towards their own
citizens, and that is essential. Climate justice is both a
moral imperative and a prerequisite for effective global
climate action. The climate crisis can be overcome only
through cooperation between peoples, cultures, nations
and generations. But festering climate injustice feeds
divisions and threatens to paralyse global climate action.
For those on the front lines, already paying the
price for global warming that they did nothing to cause,
climate justice is both a vital recognition and a tool.
It is a recognition that all people on our planet are of
equal worth, and it is a tool for building resilience to the
spiralling effects of climate change. I have presented
an acceleration agenda aimed at closing the emissions
gap and massively fast-tracking climate action by every
country and every sector in every time frame. We have

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08930 (E)

*2308930*

A/77/PV.64

never been better equipped to solve the climate crisis.
Let us work together to get the job done. It has been said
that there is nothing more powerful than an idea whose
time has come, and now is the time for climate action
and climate justice.
The Acting President: I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Alatoi Ishmael
Kalsakau, Prime Minister of the Republic of Vanuatu,
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.58.
Mr. Kalsakau (Vanuatu): I am making this
statement on behalf of a core group of States that includes
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Costa
Rica, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Morocco, Mozambique, New Zealand,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Uganda, Viet Nam and my own country, Vanuatu.
We are pleased to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.58, entitled “Request for an advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the obligations
of States in respect of climate change”. We would also
like to express our gratitude and deep appreciation to
the membership for its active engagement and support
as we navigated the drafting process.
Climate change is the defining existential
challenge of our times. The science is settled. In its
Sixth Assessment Report, the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) states, in the clearest terms,
that anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases are
unequivocally the dominant cause of the global warming
that has been observed since the mid-twentieth century.
The evidence demonstrates that climate impacts and
risks are already advanced, including in low-lying
coastal cities and settlements and small islands. At
the same time, the IPCC underlines that in all sectors,
options exist to at least halve emissions by 2030, thereby
paving the way for a long-term and sustainable limiting
of global warming to 1.5°C, as well as reducing the
impact of climate change.
The global impact of climate change has been
devastating to many countries and populations around
the world, and the prospect that in the absence of bold
and immediate action the situation may become much
worse is profoundly unsettling. Earlier this month, my
own country, Vanuatu, was struck by two consecutive
category 4 cyclones within days of each other. Mere
weeks ago, Cyclone Freddy battered Mozambique,
2/32

29/03/2023

making landfall twice in the space of a month and
breaking records for the duration and strength of
tropical storms in the southern hemisphere.
Moreover, there have been continued droughts in
the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, centenary floods in
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Viet Nam, and, last summer,
extreme heat in Canada and Southern Europe, not to
mention the floods in Germany — all causing death
and destruction. The countries hit the hardest are
often those contributing least to global greenhouse-gas
emissions. Sadly, catastrophic and compounding
impacts of climate change like this are growing in
number around the world.
Faced with challenges of such magnitude, it is the
firm belief of the core group that we must use all the
tools at our disposal to address the climate crisis and its
threats to human, national and international security.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Paris Agreement have provided an
invaluable platform for cooperation and action on
climate change. But as we all know, the level of ambition
under current nationally determined contributions is
still far from what is needed to achieve its target of
limiting the increase of global average temperature to
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
It is in this context that the core group is leading
the initiative to seek an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice to clarify the rights
and obligations of States under international law
in relation to the adverse effects of climate change,
especially with respect to small island developing
States and other developing countries particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, and
importantly to achieve climate justice. As the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, and a judicial
body considered as a World Court, the International
Court of Justice is uniquely positioned to make this
contribution. An advisory opinion is a constructive and
unconfrontational route to pursue such an initiative. It
is not legally binding; however, it does carry enormous
legal weight and moral authority. We believe the
clarity it will bring can greatly benefit our efforts to
address the climate crisis and further bolster global
and multilateral cooperation and State conduct in
addressing climate change.
The core group is in many ways representative
of the United Nations membership: cross-regional,
with wide-ranging interests, perspectives and levels
23-08930

29/03/2023

of development. A task of this core group was to
conceptualize and balance the text of the draft resolution
and legal questions to go to the International Court of
Justice. The core group deliberated in great depth and
at great length on the draft resolution before sharing it
with United Nations membership in November 2022.
This then led to the core group presenting the draft
text, which was followed by three rounds of informal
consultations and several informal expert consultations
and engagements with the broader membership.
These consultations were used to gather comments
and feedback to put into what is now the final text we
have introduced in the General Assembly. The intense
and engaged negotiations within the core group and
with the broader United Nations membership were
an indication of both the importance of this initiative
and the collective desire to work towards addressing
the climate crisis. This is not a silver bullet, but it can
make an important contribution to climate action,
including by catalysing much higher ambition under the
Paris Agreement.
The legal questions contained in the draft resolution
represent a careful balance achieved after extensive
consultations while safeguarding its integrity. At the
heart of the question is a desire to further strengthen
our collective efforts to deal with climate change,
give climate justice the importance it deserves and
bring the entirety of international law to bear on this
unprecedented challenge. We believe the International
Court of Justice can do this.
This initiative builds upon prior endeavours, and in
our efforts, we stand on the shoulders of those who first
began this conversation. I also wish to highlight the
important role of the young law students in the Pacific
who inspired this initiative and who brought it to the
attention of the Vanuatu Government in 2019. This
initiative has spurred a movement around the world, and
we celebrate the efforts of these groups in broadening
awareness and mobilizing support for the initiative.
The world is at a crossroads, and we, as
representatives of the international community, have
an obligation to take urgent action to protect the
planet. We believe in and are committed to the values
of multilateralism, values that bring us together at
the United Nations to work for a better future. This
initiative is an embodiment of those values.
We seek the support of all Member States present
today to adopt this draft resolution. It and the advisory

A/77/PV.64

opinion it seeks will have a powerful and positive impact
on how we address climate change and ultimately
protect present and future generations. Together, we
will send a loud and clear message, not only around
the world, but far into the future, that on this very day,
the peoples of the United Nations, acting through their
Governments, decided to set aside differences and work
together to tackle the defining challenge of our times,
climate change.
Finally, we take this opportunity to thank the
121 countries that have joined in co-sponsoring draft
resolution A/77/L.58, and we humbly encourage all
others to do so as well. I pray that we may be bound in
one accord.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider the draft resolution A/77/L.58. There are no
statements in explanation of position before action is
taken on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.58, entitled “Request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
obligations of States in respect of climate change”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
pertaining to the relevant operative paragraph of the
current draft resolution, A/77/L.58, is made in the
context of rule 153 of the rules and procedures of the
General Assembly. The present statement has also been
distributed to Member States.
The request contained in the operative paragraph
would constitute an addition to the workload of the
International Court of Justice and entail additional
resource requirements in the amount of $236,000 net of
staff assessments in 2024. Detailed cost estimates and
their underlying assumptions for the requirements are
provided in the annex to this statement as distributed.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/77/L.58, additional resource requirements
estimated in the amount of $236,000 for 2024. $57,200
for 2025 and $3,000 for 2026 would be included in the
respective proposed programme budgets under section
7, International Court of Justice, for the consideration
of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth, seventyninth and eightieth sessions, respectively.

23-089303/32

A/77/PV.64

29/03/2023

The statement I have just read out will also be
available in the United Nations Journal under the
e-statements link for today’s meeting.
The Acting President: I thank the representative
of the Secretariat.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/77/L.58, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Armenia, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Burundi, Dominica,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Haiti,
Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Mali,
Mongolia, Niger, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste and Uruguay.

Agreement. We attach great importance to climate
issues and are making every effort to limit the causes
of climate change. We are committed to implementing
international standards and conventions. We also
acknowledge that requesting an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States in respect of climate change reflects the desire of
the requesting countries for Member States to live up
to their international legal obligations. We participated
in the negotiations on the resolution and provided our
comments and observations.
Accordingly, we stress the need for having
multifaceted solutions to address the problem of
climate change and climate issues in accordance with
the international climate conventions, foremost among
which are the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. The
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and capabilities among States requires that we take
into consideration the special circumstances of
the least developed countries when implementing
the aforementioned international principles and
conventions, as noted in the seventh preambular
paragraph of resolution.

adopted

We must work together to support States in
addressing the negative effects of climate-change
policies. We must also take into account historical
responsibility for emissions which should not adversely
affect the efforts of States to achieve development.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.

Mr. Al-edwan (Jordan): We would like to thank
the Permanent Missions of Vanuatu and Morocco
for facilitating the informal meetings, and we wish
also to extend our thanks to the core group for their
tireless efforts.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/77/L.58?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/276).

A/77/L.58

was

Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
deliver this statement on behalf of the delegations of Iraq
and of my own country, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The delegations of our two countries decided to join
the consensus on resolution 77/276, entitled “Request
for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the obligations of States in respect of climate
change”. Our decision reflects our acknowledgement
of and firm support for the inherent right of States to
request the International Court of Justice to set forth an
advisory opinion on important and controversial issues.
We recognize the importance of uniting efforts to
implement the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris
4/32

Jordan considers resolution 77/276 to be of utmost
importance and timely, as it touches upon a significant
topic that our world and future generations face. This
unprecedented challenge will tremendously affect the
small island developing States in the near future, in
addition to having negative impacts on other States,
including landlocked States. In this regard, Jordan
reiterates its unwavering support for the resolution.
We wish to underscore the urgency of tackling
the issue of climate change globally. We therefore
urge the International Court of Justice to consider, in
accordance with the relative operative paragraph of
the resolution, the legal consequences for States’ acts
and omissions that have caused significant harm to the
climate system, with respect to all States, in particular
23-08930

29/03/2023

small island developing States, regardless of any State’s
degree of development or geographic circumstances.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I wish to begin by
congratulating the President of the General Assembly as
well as all the members of the Assembly on this historic
day. We have just adopted, without a vote, a resolution
requesting an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect of
climate change (resolution 77/276). This is an important
milestone in our decades-long struggle for climate
justice, and Bangladesh, having been part of this
historic process, is both proud and grateful. We thank
all members of the General Assembly for supporting
the resolution as a strong signal of unity in our common
fight against global warming.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our most
sincere appreciation to the Government of Vanuatu for
its extraordinary leadership. I also thank all the fellow
members of the core group for their commitment, passion
and tenacity in drafting the resolution just adopted.
Climate change is an existential challenge for
Bangladesh. We are a low-lying coastal State with great
exposure to the hazards caused by climate change,
sea-level rise and associated disasters. Apart from the
increased frequency and intensity of floods, cyclones,
droughts and loss of biodiversity, climate change is
severely affecting our food, energy, water, health and
economic security. The economic loss for Bangladesh
is grossly disproportionate to its contribution to the
problem of climate change. Climate-change-related
weather events account for the loss of at least 2 per cent
of our gross domestic product every year, whereas our
carbon footprint is negligible, contributing less than
0.6 tons per capita emissions as compared to a global
average of 4.5 tons. Climate change has also been
directly or indirectly forcing millions of people to leave
their homes and livelihoods, leading to widespread
displacement and migration within and across borders.
Successive reports of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change have alerted us to the risks that
climate change poses to humanity. The latest synthesis
report published this month, says,

A/77/PV.64

“risks ... and projected adverse impacts and related
losses and damages [from climate change] escalate
with every increment of global warming”.
Moreover, it adds,
“[c]limate change impacts and risks are becoming
increasingly complex and more difficult to
manage... [M]ultiple climatic and non-climatic risks
will interact, resulting in compounding overall risk
and risks cascading across sections and regions”.
Those statements are based on the estimate of
reaching the 1.5°C target in the near term in considered
scenarios and projections. A greater rise in the global
temperature is also being predicted, something the
Secretary-General has called a road to climate hell. If we
look at the current scenario of extreme weather events
and losses and damages caused by climate change, it
is easy to conclude that the implications of continued
temperature rise will be deadly for the planet and its
inhabitants. For Bangladesh, with its limited capacity
as a least developed country to adapt, the questions of
equity, justice and a just transition are not mere words,
but questions of our very existence.
Bangladesh has demonstrated a strong commitment
to fighting the impacts of climate change within its own
means. That has led us to take many transformative
measures to tackle the perilous impacts of climate change
consistent with implementing the Paris Agreement and
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. During
our term as Chair of the Climate Vulnerable Forum, we
launched the Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan, which is
aimed at putting Bangladesh on a sustainable trajectory
from vulnerability to resilience and climate prosperity.
However, given the enormity of this global
challenge, the efforts of Bangladesh, with a very low
carbon footprint, can only be considered a drop in
the ocean. We are deeply concerned that the global
response to climate change is nowhere close to what is
needed for the survival of humanity. There are serious
gaps between projected emissions from implemented
policies and those from nationally determined
contributions, and financing flows fall far short of the
levels needed to meet climate goals across all sectors
and regions, particularly in adaptation efforts in
developing countries.
We are still far removed from a convergence of views
on the issue of climate displacements. There is also a
huge trust deficit when it comes to climate financing.

23-089305/32

A/77/PV.64

There is no agreed definition of climate financing.
Furthermore, despite greater needs in financing just
transition and adaptation, we see growing expenditure
in military budgets and armaments and in funding wars
and conflicts, or even bailing out companies during
financial crises.
Against this backdrop, resolution 77/276 presents
a defining moment for us. We hope the resolution and
the resultant advisory opinion will provide a better
understanding of the legal implications of climate
change under international law and the rights of
present and future generations to be protected from
climate change.
As a member of the core group, we will remain
engaged throughout the process, including by making
submissions to the Court, as and when invited to do so.
We call upon all States Members of the United Nations
to do the same.
Before I conclude allow me to repeat what Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina said in the General Assembly,
“The impact of climate change is one of the
biggest threats to humankind. In the past, we
have seen a vicious cycle of promises being made
and broken. We must now change this course.”
(A/77/ PV.11., p. 12)
We believe resolution 77/276, adopted today, is an
important step in that direction.
Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia): I
make this statement on behalf of the 12 Pacific small
island developing States represented in New York.
I align our statement with the one to be delivered by
the representative of Tonga on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum.
On this momentous occasion, we warmly welcome
one of our leaders from our region, His Excellency
Mr. Alatoi Ishmael Kalsakau, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Vanuatu, and his delegation from the capital
to our meeting today. We thank the Prime Minister
for his introductory remarks on this very important
resolution just adopted (resolution 77/276) and for
Vanuatu’s excellent leadership and commendable work.
We also want to thank the members of the core group
for their leadership and commitment to the principles
contained in the resolution.
We wish to draw particular attention to the following
major elements of the resolution: climate justice and
6/32

29/03/2023

equity, including in the context of legal consequences
for loss and damage caused by climate change; the
centrality of scientific consensus for climate action; the
need for legal clarity on obligations to address climate
change arising from multiple multilateral instruments
and intergovernmental processes in addition to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change; the key interlinkages under international
law between climate change and the enjoyment of
human rights by individuals and peoples, including by
indigenous peoples and local communities; the status
of small island developing States under international
law as specially affected States in the context of their
particular vulnerabilities to the adverse effects of
climate change; and the need for urgent and ambitious
action to counter the existential threat of climate change,
including by limiting global average temperature
increase to no more than 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels. These elements are important not only for the
Pacific but for the world, and we urge the International
Court of Justice to address these elements, among
others, in the eventual advisory opinion.
Resolution 77/276 was born out of a call from
Pacific youth to our leaders to use international law as
an instrument to further highlight the pressing need to
undertake ambitious action on climate change. I would
also like to recognize the members of World Youth for
Climate Justice for their passion and for bringing out
this important issue in their own countries.
This call has been accepted and echoed at all
levels in the Pacific, from our youth to our civil society
organizations to our leaders, and we are heartened
that it reverberates today in this great Assembly Hall
through the sponsorship of more than 130 countries. We
thank all delegations that co-sponsored the resolution
and those that did not co-sponsor but supported it.
We commend the approach by Vanuatu and the core
group in conducting open, consultative and transparent
consultations that have enabled the wide participation
of the entire United Nations membership. The
remarkable attendance at all the informal consultations
demonstrates not only the importance of this critical
issue to the wider United Nations membership but
also our increased willingness to work together as a
global family.
Today’s adoption comes at a pivotal moment, at
a time when multilateralism is regaining momentum.
In November 2021 and 2022, we saw the successful
23-08930

29/03/2023

adoption by consensus of major cover decisions for
the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh sessions of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Glasgow
and Sharm El-Sheikh, respectively, which create a path
forward on climate ambitions. In December 2022,
parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
agreed to the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework to halt and reverse biodiversity loss. And
earlier this month, States agreed on the text for an
international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction.
The adoption of this resolution is yet another marker
that multilateralism is still one of our most effective
tools to solve the problems we have together. The fact
that the resolution was adopted with such wide support
sends a powerful, unambiguous signal to the Court of
the strong interest and commitment of Member States
to protect the climate system and give confidence to the
Court to provide a comprehensive and robust answer to
the international community.
In conclusion, we want to remind all Member
States that today’s adoption, while important, is just the
beginning of the process, and we call on all States and
stakeholders at this meeting today to begin preparing
for the next phase of submissions. We encourage good
faith submissions done in concert and constructively
that will support and assist the Court in answering the
question that we, the General Assembly, have asked of
it. Climate change affects us all, and we should ensure
all our voices and concerns are heard by the Court
to enable a robust and effective advisory opinion on
climate change.
This is a significant moment for all of us as we
steer the world from climate devastation. We call on
all States to turn their attention to the essential actions
that we need to address the existential threat of climate
crisis and to create a world where our children and
future generations can live and thrive in a clean, safe
and healthy environment.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): It is an honour to
address the General Assembly on a historic day such
as this one, and I will do it on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its 27 member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, the Republic

A/77/PV.64

of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the potential
candidate country Georgia; as well as Monaco and San
Marino align themselves with this statement.
We would like to extend our appreciation to Vanuatu
for its leadership and the core group as a whole for the
initiative and the extensive consultation process that
led to resolution 77/276 being adopted today. The EU
and its member States are united in their support for the
strict observance and the development of international
law. We are also committed to promoting the individual
and collective action of States to prevent and respond
to the threat of climate change and to show solidarity
with those particularly vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change.
The EU is at the forefront of climate action.
Strong and ambitious mitigation action is the best tool
to prevent increased adaptation needs and to reduce
loss and damage associated with the adverse effects
of climate change. In the light of the findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
we have been taking determined and decisive action
to reduce our net greenhouse-gas emissions by at least
55 per cent by 2030 as compared to 1990 levels to reach
and achieve climate neutrality by 2050 at the latest and
to aim for negative emissions thereafter.
At the same time, we are the world’s biggest
contributors of climate financing to developing
countries. The EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate
Change contains a strong international dimension, in
particular in terms of increasing support, including
financial, for international climate resilience and
preparedness and strengthening global engagement and
exchanges. Lastly, the EU is and will remain committed
to scaling up assistance to developing countries that are
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate
change in responding to loss and damage. For those
reasons, we supported the decision to establish new
funding arrangements responding to loss and damage
at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and look forward to contributing to the work of
the Transitional Committee.
Although legally non-binding, the requested
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
has the potential to make a significant contribution to
the clarification of the current state of international law.
The EU and its member States appreciate the choice
of engaging the Court through advisory proceedings,

23-089307/32

A/77/PV.64

29/03/2023

whose non-contentious nature avoids disputes and
encourages the continued pursuit by the international
community of further ambitious and effective action,
including through international negotiations, to tackle
climate change.

courts and tribunals, our eventual involvement in the
advisory proceedings initiated by the resolution will be
guided by that commitment and by our understanding
of the applicable law, as well as the aim and content of
the resolution.

We recall in that regard the pre-eminent role of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the regular
meetings of the Conference of the Parties in reflecting
the most recent and dynamic expression of States’
understandings of their commitments and their nature,
as well as their responsibilities in respect of climate
change. That includes the unique legal character of
each provision of the Paris Agreement.

The EU and its member States are pleased to
have constructively engaged in the process that led
to the adoption of this resolution by consensus and
commend Vanuatu once again for its leadership. All
EU countries have co-sponsored the resolution. As an
intergovernmental organization that is also a party to
the Paris Agreement and other international agreements
referred to directly and indirectly in the request, we
look forward to contributing to the proceedings before
the International Court of Justice.

States’ obligations and State practice under treaties
other than the Paris Agreement may contribute, within
their respective scope of application, to achieving the
Paris Agreement goals. They can further shed light on
how those goals are to be achieved.
With the aforementioned in mind, the EU and its
member States welcome the explanation provided by
Vanuatu that its intention in leading this effort has been
that the Court “will not place additional obligations
or responsibilities” on States, but rather “provide
legal motivation for all nations, including emerging
and high-emitting developing countries, to build
greater ambition into their Paris Agreement nationally
determined contributions and to take meaningful action
to curb emissions and protect human rights”.
Thus, in line with the aim and the content of the
resolution, we expect the advisory opinion to, first,
answer the legal questions on the basis of the current
state of international law and with regard to all States;
secondly, identify and, to the extent possible, clarify
the obligations of States under applicable international
law and the legal consequences for all States for the
breach of those obligations. The resolution does not
prejudge whether and when breaches have occurred, are
occurring or will occur in the future but rather focuses
on the consequences thereof for all States.
The EU and its member States have an unwavering
commitment to limiting global warming to 1.5°C,
which is the best way to mitigate climate change and its
effects, as the recent IPCC synthesis reminded us. In the
pursuit of those objectives, we are determined to deepen
international cooperation. While the present statement
of the EU and its member States is naturally without
prejudice to the content of our possible submissions
before the International Court of Justice and other
8/32

We see today’s resolution as another step adding
urgency and unity to our collective action.
Ms. Vea (Tonga): I have the honour to deliver
these remarks on behalf of the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum with presence at the United Nations,
namely, Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, the Republic of Marshall Islands, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and my own
country, Tonga. We also acknowledge the guidance
and support of the Cook Islands as Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum (PIF).
In their 2022 communiqué, our leaders called on
the General Assembly to adopt a resolution requesting
the International Court of Justice to provide an advisory
opinion on the obligations of States under international
law to protect the rights of present and future
generations against the adverse impacts of climate
change and looked forward to close collaboration on
the development of the specific question to ensure
maximum impact in terms of limiting emissions to
1.5°C, including the obligations of all major emitters
past, present and future.
I would like to express the gratitude of our PIF
member States to fellow Forum member Vanuatu for
its commendable and wide-ranging efforts which
have brought us from that call to the historic adoption
today. We recognize the significant engagement and
coordination efforts undertaken by all members of the
International Court of Justice core group in support of
Vanuatu, including the Federated States of Micronesia,
New Zealand and Samoa, members of our Forum family
and fellow stewards of our Blue Pacific continent.
23-08930

29/03/2023

We welcome the sovereign recognition by the more
than 120 sponsors of resolution 77/276 of this important
endeavour and the utmost urgency of this cause. We are
optimistic that today will join other landmark junctures
of global leadership in accelerating deeper global
cooperation on climate change, which our leaders
have confirmed as the single greatest existential threat
facing the Blue Pacific.
Our leaders have accordingly declared a climate
emergency in our region, underscoring the urgency of
limiting global warming to 1.5°C through rapid, deep
and sustained reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Our resolve has been further demonstrated in the PIF
Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face
of Climate Change-related Sea-level Rise and the
currently under way regional Conference on Preserving
Statehood and Protecting Persons which explores legal
options and institutional responses to the impacts of
sea-level rise in the context of international law.
While we sit in the General Assembly today, our
Forum is conscious of the many individuals and groups
who have brought us to this point. We recognize that
much of this work began with our Pacific youth, whose
energy and vision we continue to draw inspiration
from, but who also stand to lose the most if we let the
goal of 1.5°C slip from our collective grasp.
We further recognize our civil society representatives
who have worked at the margins of society to mainstream
the voices of women and girls, minorities, the disabled,
the disadvantaged and otherwise too often unheard into
our regional perspective, further legitimizing our Blue
Pacific narrative.
We pay tribute to the voices of indigenous peoples
in the Pacific region and to those in local and coastal
Pacific communities who face the reality of a warming
climate every day. We pay further tribute to our
scientists and the holders of traditional knowledge
in the Pacific region who continue to work tirelessly
to harness our collective wisdom in the fight against
climate change.
Much work remains to be done, and the Pacific
calls on the global community to embrace the spirit
of solidarity demonstrated by today’s adoption. Our
Forum family remains committed to fully implementing
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, including
our collective aim to achieve carbon neutrality in the
Pacific by 2050. And we invite development partners
to commit to providing more support to Forum Island

A/77/PV.64

countries in reaching that goal in line with our 2050
Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent endorsed by
PIF leaders.
In conclusion, our members look ahead to the
twenty-eighth conference of the parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Dubai with great anticipation and to working alongside
our United Arab Emirates hosts and the global
community to continue this most important work of
combating the climate crisis for the sake of present and
future generations.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica is proud of the historic adoption of
resolution 77/276. It is a milestone for multilateralism
in the fight against climate change and a giant step
forward for international law, climate justice and
human rights.
Today we are concluding a process that was inspired
by the youth of the world. It is the largest generation of
young people in the history of humankind, and they are
calling for a radical change of course, for a better future
and, especially, a viable future for their generation and
future generations.
Costa Rica had the honour of endorsing the initiative
of the Republic of Vanuatu from its very early stages,
convinced of the legal and moral value of the draft
resolution. It was also honoured to have contributed
to the core group that led the intergovernmental
negotiations to ensure a resolution that was balanced
and inclusive, and above all ambitious and visionary, in
line with the magnitude of the challenge posed by the
triple planetary crisis of climate change — pollution
of the land, sea and air — and the accelerated loss of
biodiversity
My country thanks the Assembly for its support
and welcomes the co-sponsorship of a strong majority
of Member States, reflecting a clear resolve to intensify
climate and environmental action, as well as to obtain
clear, comprehensive and fundamental answers based
on international law and human rights to the crucial
questions raised in the draft resolution.
I come from a small country whose first line of
defence is international law, and which, like other
small and large States, has placed in it its hopes and
political will for the determination of its obligations
and rights, the peaceful settlement of disputes, human
rights and peace.

23-089309/32

A/77/PV.64

Costa Rica today welcomes the decision made
by consensus in the General Assembly to entrust the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations with
addressing the existential issue of climate change in
an unprecedented context and with an unequivocal
focus on human rights, redistributive justice and
intergenerational equity.
Indeed, the fight against climate change concerns
us all, but it also affects us differently. In its sixth and
most recent assessment report, the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change gave us a final warning to
reduce emissions by half by 2030 if we want to avoid
what, in the words of the Secretary-General, would
be a “death sentence”, especially for countries whose
geographic circumstances and level of development are
particularly vulnerable to climate change.
Actions taken and commitments made at the global
level remain inadequate to achieve our climate goals
and will lead to a catastrophic rise in temperature by
at least 3°C by the end of the century. Paradoxically,
it is the most vulnerable countries that are stepping
up their adaptation and mitigation efforts, while the
largest carbon emitters and those responsible for the
climate disaster continue to perpetuate a status quo
that, according to science, we know is unsustainable.
The climate crisis is undoubtedly the greatest threat
to the enjoyment and realization of all human rights, be
they health, food, water or adequate housing. However,
even in the midst of this bleak context we can see signs
of hope. Less than a year ago, the General Assembly
recognized through resolution 76/300 the universal
human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment, solidifying a long history of linking
human rights and environmental law. The recognition
of that fundamental right affirmed the transformative
potential of adopting a human rights approach to
climate change.
At the most recent Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP), COP 27, we reached a landmark
agreement to establish and operationalize a loss
and damage fund, which was a crucial step towards
climate justice.
Just a few weeks ago, the United Nations agreed
on another historic treaty on the biodiversity of the
high seas, after nearly two decades of negotiations,
which keeps alive the promise to protect 30 per cent
of the world’s oceans by 2030. Those milestones
10/32

29/03/2023

form a multilateralism that is more relevant than
ever and more focused on addressing, from a human
rights-based perspective, the greatest existential
threat to humankind. It also reflects the international
community’s willingness to act, with all the tools
available, to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained,
as stated in the Preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations, and to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom.
The adoption of the resolution therefore is a giant
step forward when it comes to clarifying the legal
obligations of States in addressing climate change.
The request for an advisory opinion will provide the
International Court of Justice with the opportunity
to consider, through the lens of human rights, the
experience of those people most affected by climate
change, as well as the obligations of Governments to
protect their rights. We hope that the understanding
of those legal consequences will contribute to States
ramping up their efforts, for example, to put an end to
the dependence on fossil fuels that have caused and
continue to exacerbate the climate emergency.
The gap between the current promises of the States
and what is actually needed to address the warnings of
science is a source of serious concern, especially for
present and future generations in the communities and
nations geographically most vulnerable to the effects of
climate change.
The Court’s advisory opinion could help guide
other courts that are ruling in cases of climate disputes
on whether the commitments of nations under the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change are sufficiently robust
and what would be needed to strengthen human rights
and international justice.
The questions posed to the Court in the resolution
are complementary and comprehensive, with the
promising potential to establish a common language
that facilitates more ambitious commitments by States
in future climate negotiations.
Finally, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice could clarify what happens in
circumstances of the potential death of a State due to
loss of territory as a result of climate change, as stated
years ago by the Head of State of Palau, and address
the obligations of the nations that are causing global
23-08930

29/03/2023

warming for those that are already bearing that burden,
as well as for future generations.
For all those reasons, Costa Rica reaffirms its
full support for the resolution and its hope in the next
stages of the request for an advisory opinion to the
International Court of Justice.
We affirm, together with the youth of the world,
that we are all Vanuatu. And we urge the international
community to redouble its commitment in words
and actions with truly transformative climate action
anchored in human rights for our brothers and sisters,
our children and future generations.
Mr. Browne (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to have joined the overwhelming
majority of Member States that have co-sponsored
resolution 77/276 to seek an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice on one of the most
significant challenges of our time — climate change.
I would like to express my delegation’s deepest
appreciation to the core group for meaningfully
engaging the membership in bringing forward this
request to the General Assembly for consideration,
and I commend Vanuatu for its outstanding leadership
throughout this process.
At the outset, I wish to underscore that this
initiative has been fully endorsed at the highest levels
of the Government of Trinidad and Tobago from its
inception. We firmly believe that the adverse impacts of
climate change not only threaten lives and livelihoods,
but also directly impede our aspirations to achieve
sustainable development.
The most recent report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, released just last week,
issued a dire warning to world. We are running out
of time. Global emissions have continued to increase,
extreme weather events and climate extremes have
worsened. Accordingly, in the absence of deep, rapid
and sustained reductions in carbon emissions, global
warming is likely to exceed 1.5°C, with catastrophic
consequences, especially for vulnerable communities.
We remain extremely concerned that the climate
financing commitments made by developed countries
have not materialized.
We must act now. The urgent need to scale
up climate action and support, through financing,
capacity-building and technology transfer, to address
the adverse effects of climate change, as well as to

A/77/PV.64

minimize the associated loss and damage, particularly
in small island developing States, such as Trinidad and
Tobago, cannot be overstated, as the very existence and
viability of small island States are being threatened.
While the Court’s opinion is non-binding, Trinidad
and Tobago is of the view that such an represents a
major step in gaining greater understanding and clarity
on how international law can promote climate justice,
especially for those on the front line of this existential
threat, many of whom are already disproportionately
shouldering this heavy burden.
For many small island nations, who have contributed
little or nothing to climate change and sea level rise
but who are the most affected, today’s landmark
adoption by the General Assembly restores faith in
the multilateral process. It is our hope that the Court’s
opinion can lend weight to strengthening international
law and the obligations of Member States to ensure the
protection of the global climate system for present and
future generations.
On that note, and in conclusion, I would
like to reassure Member States of Trinidad and
Tobago’s commitment, as a responsible member of
the international community, in ensuring that our
obligations under the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change remains unwavering.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to begin by thanking the core group,
especially Vanuatu, for submitting resolution 77/276 on
the request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect
of climate change.
Extreme climate change can undermine the
sustainable development of all countries. The
international community has been striving to address that
challenge through the actions and measures contained
in various agreements, particularly the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
as the cornerstone of actions and commitments, and
the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC, in pursuit of
the objective of the Convention and its principles, in
particular the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities.
Like other developing countries, climate change has
taken its toll on Iran. A serious decline in rainfall and an
increase in temperature and the incidence of dust storms
and sandstorms, thereby exposing Iran to the adverse

23-0893011/32

A/77/PV.64

impacts of climate change and affecting the country.
The sustainable use of scarce water resources, together
with protecting wetlands and combating dust storms
and sandstorms with mainly transboundary origins, are
among the relevant pressing national challenges.
Iran attaches great importance to combating severe
climate change and its environmental ramifications.
In that regard, our Supreme Leader endorsed the
general policies for the protection of the environment, a
forward-looking manifesto for sustainable development
with significant impacts on the environment in Iran.
It also serves as a strong sign of commitment to the
protection of our planet Earth. It is obvious that
humankind is facing a global crisis, which not only is
all-consuming, complex and multifaceted but also has
immense impacts on all aspects of human life, as well
as global affairs. Such a cross-border and common
challenge requires common solutions and joint
efforts in order to be tackled. The nature, scope and
consequences of the challenge have an immediate and
direct linkage with the nature, scope and level of the
commitments and responsibilities of States. The Paris
Agreement has recognized the differentiation among
developed and developing countries in terms of their
specific needs and different levels of capacities to deal
with the major areas, such as mitigation, adaptation,
technology transfer and development, financing and
capacity-building.
In addition, there are situations and circumstances
that prevent States from fulfilling their environmental
obligations in full or in part. Bearing that in mind,
it is up to the Court to consider the well-established
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
as set out in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development.
We regret that the final text does not incorporate my
delegation’s suggestion to explicitly request the Court
to identify and consider situations and circumstances
that also preclude States’ required actions. It also
unduly focuses on one assumed cause of climate
change. We believe that it is necessary for the resolution
to ask comprehensive questions and for the Court to
consider the matter holistically and comprehensively.
The current resolution does not bring such clarity and
therefore lacks the much-needed balance.
On global issues such as climate change, we all are
in the same boat. We are facing the same crises and are
condemned to the same destiny, but all do not share the
12/32

29/03/2023

same capacities and capabilities to counter that common
challenge. Furthermore, all do not have similar roles and
responsibilities regarding the challenge and its elusive
future. We can forgive those who were historically
involved in degrading our planet and its environment,
but we cannot ignore their historical responsibilities
and subsequent obligations to fulfil their commitments
to redressing it.
It is unfortunate that those in the global North who
have the historical responsibility for the emerging global
challenge continue to disregard their international
responsibilities through their actions or omissions,
especially towards developing countries. In addition
to the lack of development, technology, know-how and
adequate financial resources, the imposition of unilateral
coercive measures is the most crucial barrier, preventing
targeted countries from meeting their environmental
obligations. Unilateral coercive measures prevent us
from accessing the relevant technologies, knowledge
and financial resources. As an example, my country
has been denied Global Environment Facility resources
during its recent cycles simply through the pressures
exerted on the implementing agencies to withhold from
and refuse Iran’s projects. There are clear and specific
reasons as to why we proposed an amendment to the
draft resolution during the negotiations and what we
expect the International Court of Justice to take into
consideration when reflecting on the obligations of
States and their legal consequences.
Even in the absence of unilateral coercive
measures, it is hard for developing countries to fulfil
their environmental obligations if the means of
implementation are not adequately available. While we
have previously highlighted the nature of environmental
crises and the challenges that the world continues to
face, there is a dire need to be clear: we are not talking
about the voluntary commitment of or contributions
by the global North. It is the obligation of developed
countries to provide the means of implementation, such
as capacity-building, the transfer of technologies related
to the mitigation of the environmental crisis to fulfil
international obligations and the provision of support,
as well as the mobilization of climate financing for
developing countries.
In addition, all protections emanating from
intellectual property rights for environmental inventions
and technologies, which significantly contribute
towards mitigating climate change and helping
countries to meet their environmental obligations,
23-08930

29/03/2023

must be removed. We expect the International Court
of Justice to address the obligatory nature of developed
countries’ international commitments when it comes
to their environmental obligations towards the rest of
the world. The Court is also expected to stand by the
principle of the sovereignty of States, while also taking
into consideration their national priorities in State
policy-making.
While recognizing the mutually reinforcing link
between the need for a healthy environment and the
realization of economic, social and cultural rights, as
well as the right to development, the Islamic Republic of
Iran underlines that the linkage between human rights
and the environment lacks not only a clear definition
but also an understanding among States and does not
appear at the core of international human rights treaties.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
announced its readiness to mitigate its greenhouse-gas
emissions, as compared to the business-as-usual
scenario, subject to the termination of all sanctions
and access to financial resources and the required
technologies. Accordingly, Iran welcomes cooperation
and partnership in the implementation of our globally
agreed agenda.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, is often called the world’s court. In its
important role, it is able to give advisory opinions when
requested by the main organs of the United Nations
authorized to do so, including the General Assembly.
That provides the Assembly with a key tool to promote
the rule of law and help to provide the international
community with clearer legal understandings.
The importance of the International Court of
Justice’s advisory role is mirrored in the relevance of
its engagement with pressing issues of global concern.
Indeed, the historic resolution 77/276, which we
adopted this morning, begins, in its first preambular
paragraph, by:
“Recognizing that climate change is an
unprecedented
challenge
of
civilizational
proportions and that the well-being of present and
future generations of humankind depends on our
immediate and urgent response to it”.
There is no issue of more pressing global concern
than climate change, which is in many ways the defining
crisis of our time. The report of the Intergovernmental

A/77/PV.64

Panel on Climate Change issued last week is an urgent
reminder of the limited window that we have to deal
with the climate crisis. From weather extremes to sea
level rise, all regions of the world are affected by the
devastating consequences of climate change. In the
words of Secretary-General Guterres, “we are in the
fight of our lives”.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
provides us with a blueprint for the prosperity of our
planet and recognizes the interlinkage between the
fight against climate change and tackling poverty,
hunger and other challenges. Recent meetings of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change have fallen
short of the promise to build on the Paris Agreement.
It is clear that an exclusive focus on that path, as
indispensable as it remains, will nevertheless not be
enough. We therefore also need to pursue other avenues.
In that respect, many stakeholders have already chosen
different legal avenues at the national, regional and
international levels in order to move forward in the
fight against climate change.
Today we opened a new legal avenue together.
That is why Liechtenstein was proud to be a member of
Vanuatu’s core group on this initiative. The group was
responding to a global youth movement, in particular to
act, and to act ambitiously. We commend the youth for
calling on all of us to take up this issue, and we thank
Vanuatu for its leadership in mobilizing support for this
initiative. In many ways, the core group is a testament
to effective multilateralism. It was small enough to be
effective, but at the same time representative of the
United Nations membership, and both cross-regional
and inclusive in terms of national perspectives, as
well as deliberative and thorough in its approach. The
engaged negotiations within the core group and with
the broader United Nations membership should be a
model to follow for similar international initiatives.
Last but not least, the initiative is further testament to
the ability of small States to place crucially important
initiatives before the General Assembly. We thank our
friends from Vanuatu for that as well.
We are confident that the International Court
of Justice will provide us with clarity regarding the
complex questions of international law pertaining
to climate change through its advisory function. The
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
will provide important authoritative guidance, including
on questions at the intersection of climate change and

23-0893013/32

A/77/PV.64

human rights. Climate change is indeed one of the
greatest threats to the human rights of our generation,
posing a serious risk to the fundamental rights to life,
health, food and an adequate standard of living for
individuals and communities across the world.
We are encouraged that the resolution, adopted
by consensus today, prominently references the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and recalls the
relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council on
climate change and human rights. It is in that vein that
Liechtenstein strongly supports this resolution, which
we hope will result in one of the landmark decisions
in the long and rich history of the International Court
of Justice.
Mr. Fepuleai (New Zealand): New Zealand
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Tonga on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum members with a presence at the United
Nations and the Cook Islands as Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum.
Aotearoa New Zealand is pleased to be a member
of the core group supporting the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion and commends Vanuatu for
its leadership on this important initiative. The sheer
number of co-sponsors reflects a growing international
consensus that climate change requires us to develop
global solutions.
The best available science is unequivocal. Human
influence is warming the atmosphere, ocean and land.
That is causing wide-ranging harmful impacts, from
sea level rise to the increased frequency and intensity
of extreme weather events.
New Zealanders are acutely aware of the
devastating impacts that such events can have. Just last
month, Cyclone Gabrielle caused widespread damage
and displacement across our country, leading to New
Zealand declaring a national state of emergency for just
the third time in our history.
In our broader region, the Blue Pacific, climate
change remains the single-greatest threat to livelihoods,
security and well-being. Globally, more than 3 billion
people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to
climate change.
Addressing those pressing challenges requires
the collective ambition of all countries. It is critical
that the international community employ all the tools
at its disposal. Utilizing the advisory jurisdiction of
14/32

29/03/2023

the International Court of Justice is one such tool.
New Zealand considers that an advisory opinion can
play a helpful role by bringing clarity and coherence
to international climate law. In doing so, it can help
to ensure ongoing compliance with international
obligations, lift ambition and inspire action.
The request for an advisory opinion is not
about the merits of climate science. The science is
unequivocal. Rather, it is about States’ obligations
under international law.
The question before the General Assembly reflects
months of careful deliberation by the membership of
the core group, in consultation with a wide range of
other States Members of the United Nations. That group
includes a diverse range of interests and perspectives,
but the common goal of finding global solutions to
climate change.
The scope of the question is intended to empower the
Court to consider the full slate of relevant international
law, consistent with its mandate. The question is broad,
but climate change is broad too. It impacts every aspect
of the world in which we live.
In that context, Aotearoa New Zealand is pleased
that resolution 77/276 was adopted by consensus. In
this Hall today, we took an important step towards a
safer, more prosperous and more sustainable future.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): What an important day this
is. Climate change is an urgent global challenge and the
single-greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and
well-being of the Pacific. That is why it is so important
that Pacific voices are at the centre of international
climate discussions. We commend Vanuatu’s climate
leadership, including in driving this important initiative,
in partnership with the core group, for an International
Court of Justice advisory opinion on climate change.
We know that climate change is increasing the
frequency and severity of disasters globally. Indeed,
as we meet today, Vanuatu is recovering from the
devastating impacts of two consecutive category
4 cyclones earlier this month. Our hearts are with
Vanuatu. Together with the rest of the Pacific family,
Australia will continue to support the Ni-Vanuatu
people as they recover and strengthen their resilience
to the increasing impacts of climate change.
Today’s request for the International Court of
Justice to clarify the obligations and the related legal
consequences for all States under international law to
23-08930

29/03/2023

ensure the protection of the climate system can provide
impetus for global efforts to accelerate climate action in
order to keep the 1.5°C temperature goal within reach.
As Pacific Islands Forum leaders called for in
their July 2022 communiqué, and as they reaffirmed in
February, the International Court of Justice will provide
an advisory opinion on the obligations of all States,
including all major past, present and future emitters.
The broad co-sponsorship of resolution 77/276
affirms that there is a shared responsibility for all States
to act on climate change and a shared commitment to do
so. We strongly welcome the resolution’s priority focus
on small island developing States and least developed
countries, given their particular vulnerability to the
impacts of climate change.
We recognize that climate change has broad and
cross-cutting impacts and requires action across a
range of international agreements and initiatives. In
that regard, we note that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change remains the central,
indispensable forum for international cooperation on,
and commitments to, climate action.
We welcome the resolution’s potential to make a
real contribution to achieving the goals of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and accelerating
ambitious climate action. Australia is proud to
co-sponsor this resolution. We urge all Member States
to support a strong, forward-looking and collective
outcome today and in the process ahead.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself
with the statement that was delivered by the Prime
Minister of Vanuatu on behalf of the core group of
countries. Singapore fully supported resolution 77/276,
adopted today, and we welcome the fact that it was
adopted by consensus. The resolution that we adopted
requests the International Court of Justice to provide
an advisory opinion on States’ obligations in relation
to climate change, especially with respect to small
island developing States. We are honoured to have
been part of the core group of countries that drafted
the resolution and that led that initiative. We are happy
that the resolution enjoyed overwhelming support in
the General Assembly today. On this significant and
historic occasion, I wish to make three points.
First, Singapore is confident that the resolution
will result in an advisory opinion that will advance
our collective, multilateral and rules-based efforts

A/77/PV.64

to address climate change. Like other small island
developing States, Singapore is disproportionately
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and we
have consistently advocated for solutions founded on
international law to address that most existential of
global challenges.
Secondly, the request for an advisory opinion on
climate change is very timely. The recently released
sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change makes it abundantly clear that
there is an urgent need to accelerate action and raise
the level of ambition. There is therefore no doubt that
the planet is at a crossroads with respect to the climate
crisis. The increasing frequency of extreme weather
events around the world and rising sea levels are clear
warnings that time is running out. We must therefore
use all available tools to assist us in our efforts to
address the climate crisis. At this stage, one of the most
important potential tools that had not been utilized was
the advisory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. The resolution adopted today is therefore
significant because it seeks an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice, which will help to
clarify the state of international law and thereby provide
impetus for further climate action.
The third point that I want to make today is that
the request for an advisory opinion seeks to clarify the
law, having regard to all relevant sources, including
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. The resulting advisory opinion will therefore
be complementary to the existing climate regime. That
is very important for Singapore, as we fully support
the multilateral framework of cooperation on climate
change under the UNFCCC. We are confident that the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
will have a positive impact on the ongoing processes
within the UNFCCC framework, including by
accelerating mitigation action, climate financing and
the political will for increased climate ambition to meet
the goals of the Paris Agreement.
I wish to conclude by highlighting the fact that the
adoption of the resolution today takes place shortly
after the successful conclusion of the negotiations
on an international legally binding instrument on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (BBNJ).
The conclusion of the BBNJ treaty a few weeks ago
and today’s consensus adoption of a resolution seeking

23-0893015/32

A/77/PV.64

an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice are small steps of victory for multilateralism
and a victory for the United Nations and the governance
of the global commons. Our successes in recent weeks
send a clear and positive signal that the United Nations
can deliver results when nations work together for the
common good. But we cannot take our successes and
become complacent. We must continue to work together
here in the General Assembly in order to achieve results
for our people.
Mrs. Le (Viet Nam): Never before was a resolution
requesting an advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice adopted by consensus (resolution 77/276).
Never before was such a resolution co-sponsored by
such a large number of States Members of the United
Nations. Rarely did such a resolution command so much
attention and support worldwide, from communities
in Vanuatu to victims of the unprecedented floods in
Pakistan. Such a phenomenon speaks volumes.
First, it speaks of the magnitude of the consequences
of climate change — an existential threat that knows no
borders. As the Prime Minister of Vanuatu just said,
those impacts have been devastating to many countries
and populations around the world. They threaten the
well-being of future generations. The latest report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, issued
just a few days ago, made it clear that the impacts
and risks of climate change have already increased,
including in low-lying coastal cities and settlements
and small islands.
Secondly, such a phenomenon speaks of the
urgency for further bold actions. Under international
frameworks, including the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, countries
have strived to strengthen the global response to the
threat of climate change by mitigating greenhouse-gas
emissions and increasing support and cooperation in
national adaptation efforts. National and international
commitments were made. Several States, including
Viet Nam, issued net-zero commitments. However, the
situation is getting worse.
Thirdly, it speaks of the belief and high expectation
of the international community in the legal authority
and moral weight of the International Court of Justice,
the world court. This landmark resolution adopted by
the General Assembly is fully in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the
16/32

29/03/2023

International Court of Justice. On that basis, the Court
is requested to give an advisory opinion on an issue of
long-term magnitude that touches the future of Member
States and future generations. Such an opinion will
be able to provide even greater momentum to global
climate action. It will clarify our obligations under
existing international law regarding climate change. In
that regard, Viet Nam believes that this resolution could
also help us to reaffirm the critical role of international
law in addressing the most pressing global issues of
our time.
Fourthly, the overwhelming support for this
resolution stems, in large part, from the meticulous
efforts and able leadership of Vanuatu since the very
beginning. Viet Nam is proud to join other members of
the core group in supporting Vanuatu’s initiative. We are
grateful for the active engagement of all Member States,
especially those that co-sponsored the resolution. We
are also deeply thankful to the Secretary-General for
his leadership on climate action, and for his valuable
support for this resolution in particular.
This resolution will be another clarion call for
further actions and for support to all actors that strive
tirelessly for our planet and future generations. Our
consensus today sends a powerful message to the
international community that we are committed to
those ends.
However, this resolution is just the beginning of a
longer process. It is now up to us to ensure that the
International Court of Justice is able to carry out its
work effectively and efficiently. Like other members of
the core group, we call for, and look forward to, the
active participation of Member States in the proceedings
of the International Court of Justice so that the Court
is presented with evidence and submissions to the
greatest possible extent when it takes up this request in
the months ahead.
Let me conclude by reiterating Viet Nam’s
consistent commitment to stronger climate action for
the well-being of our world and future generations.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Mr. Alatoi Ishmael Kalsakau, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Vanuatu, on behalf of the core group of
States, including Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone thanks the Government and the
people, in particular the young people, of Vanuatu for
23-08930

29/03/2023

conceiving of and leading the initiative that culminated
in the submission and adoption of resolution 77/276.
Acting on behalf of the people of Sierra Leone, in
particular its young people, the Government of Sierra
Leone is honoured to be part of the core group of States,
recognizing the importance for States to take action to
address the adverse effects of climate change, compelled
by the principle of intergenerational equity. As the
resolution outlines, climate change is an unprecedented
challenge of civilizational proportions, and the wellbeing of current and future generations of humankind
depends on our immediate and urgent response to it. The
science is incontrovertible. Anthropogenic emissions
of greenhouse gases have unequivocally been the
dominant cause of the global warming observed since
the mid-twentieth century.
Sierra Leone faces multiple risks from climate
change. We are ranked as the third-most vulnerable
nation to the adverse effects of climate change. It
has been noted that our vulnerable population has
a low capacity to adapt to climate change, and the
rural population is the most affected because of its
high dependence on rain-led agriculture and natural
resource-based livelihoods. According to the science
of climate change, those impacts are likely to continue
to affect Sierra Leone in the future, despite it being
least responsible for the problem, since Sierra Leone’s
contribution to global emissions of greenhouse gases
is negligible. Sea level rise threatens low-lying coastal
areas and will cause coastal regions to experience
more frequent coastal flooding events and an increase
in average precipitation. Heavy rainfall events may
induce more flooding and increase stream-flow
rates. Regrettably, on 14 August 2017, for instance, a
mudslide reportedly killed more than 1,000 people in
the mountain parts of the capital of Freetown, sweeping
away houses and leaving residents desperate and
extremely vulnerable. The mudslide occurred after
three days of torrential rain.
A core function of the International Court of Justice
is to render advisory opinions on the legal questions
put to it by the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 96 of the Charter of the United Nations. As
such, in delivering advisory opinions in accordance
with its Statute, the Court contributes to promoting
and clarifying international law and strengthening the
multilateral international legal order. The importance
of the advisory opinions on legal questions referred to
the International Court of Justice, including the request

A/77/PV.64

contained in resolution 77/276 for an advisory opinion
on the obligations of States in respect of climate
change, cannot be overstated, as the recognition of the
urgency of the climate crisis must at least be matched
by the level of climate action necessary to prevent a
civilizational catastrophe. Fully respecting the rules
and working methods of the Court, Sierra Leone will
appeal to the Court to adopt the level of efficiency,
rigour and judiciousness it would accord to a request of
that nature by General Assembly.
Let me conclude by thanking all co-sponsoring
delegations and all Member States for adopting
resolution 77/276 by consensus.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): This is a historic and
hopeful moment for both multilateralism and climate
action. After a long process, the General Assembly
today adopted by consensus resolution 77/276 to seek
an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made by
the Prime Minister of Vanuatu on behalf of the core
group and the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our
time, posing a grave threat to humankind as a whole and
an existential threat to the most vulnerable populations.
Sea level rise, for instance, threatens to render low-lying
island nations uninhabitable, while more frequent and
severe extreme weather events have already resulted
in immense suffering throughout the world. While the
international community has recognized the urgency of
the climate crisis, our progress to date has fallen far
short of achieving the level of climate action necessary
to prevent environmental catastrophes. Germany
takes that challenge very seriously. In the Federal
Climate Change Act, Germany committed to achieving
greenhouse-gas neutrality by 2045. In addition,
emissions in Germany must be reduced, as compared
to 1990 levels, by at least 65 per cent by 2030, and by at
least 80 per cent by 2040.
Germany is a proud member of the core group
leading the initiative to seek an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice to clarify the
rights and obligations of States under international
law in relation to the adverse effects of climate
change. We trust that seeking an advisory opinion is
a constructive route to addressing the climate crisis
and shaping States’ conduct as it pertains to dealing

23-0893017/32

A/77/PV.64

with climate change. That trust is based on the firm
belief in the crucial contribution that the Court,
when asked to give its advisory opinion, can make to
clarify the extent and status of relevant obligations
under international law with regard to all States.
Given the urgency of taking climate action that keeps
a warming limit of 1.5°C within reach, we especially
share Vanuatu’s intention to provide a legal motivation
for all nations, including emerging and high-emitting
developing countries, to build greater ambition into
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and nationally
determined contributions and take meaningful action
to curb emissions and protect human rights. Germany
hopes that the initiative will contribute to further
strengthening international cooperation, which is key
for achieving the Paris Agreement objectives. Such
cooperation is possible even in politically sensitive
areas, as the Global Shield Against Climate Risks,
jointly initiated by the Vulnerable 20 and the Group of
Seven, has shown.
Vanuatu deserves recognition for bringing
together a representative core group, encompassing
various perspectives and interests. Vanuatu is to be
commended for steering a process that today allowed
us to adopt a critical initiative by consensus. In that
process, Germany’s goal was to formulate paragraphs
and questions for submission to the Court that are
future-oriented. The aim was to produce a text that
clearly addresses the current obligations of all States
on the basis of the current state of the law with regard
to future developments on the issue of climate change.
While the resolution does not limit the Court in its
analysis, especially with regard to the time horizon, we
believe that the core group could have gone further in
that respect in order to make the initiative even stronger
in its potential to promote climate action. At the
same time, we fully recognize the enormous success
reflected in the number of sponsors, and we reiterate
our trust in the Court’s deliberations. The adoption of
resolution 77/276 by consensus sends a strong and clear
message underlining our collective preparedness to
address climate change. It attests convincingly to our
commitment to the values of multilateralism.

29/03/2023

for its active engagement and support as we navigated
the process.
Climate change is a defining challenge of our
times and one of the greatest challenges we face. Our
collective effort to fight climate change is an irreversible
process that must continue. However, we are compelled
to point out that despite contributing an insignificant
amount of global greenhouse-gas emissions, the
African continent — like many developing regions
of the world — suffers the effects of climate change
to a disproportionate degree. Uganda, for instance,
continues to experience prolonged droughts, the
melting of ice caps on its highest mountain, Mount
Ruwenzori, floods, erratic rainfall patterns and
landslides. Uganda is extremely vulnerable to climate
change and variability. Its economy and its people’s
well-being are inextricably linked to climate. Climate
change caused by humans has the potential to halt or
reverse the country’s development trajectory in the
coming century. In particular, it is likely to result in
increased food insecurity, shifts in soil erosion and
land degradation, flood damage to infrastructure
and settlements and shifts in agricultural and natural
resource productivity.
The request for an advisory opinion allows the
International Court of Justice to make a unique
contribution to the issue of climate change. As the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, the
Court is uniquely positioned to make that contribution
and the General Assembly must give it the opportunity
to do so. To be clear, an advisory opinion is the most
constructive and non-confrontational route within the
entire palette of international adjudication for pursuing
such an initiative. An advisory opinion could give
clarity and greatly benefit our efforts to address the
climate crisis. Furthermore, the legal weight and moral
authority of such an advisory opinion could further
bolster State conduct as it pertains to dealing with
climate change.

Mr. Ikondere (Uganda): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the Prime Minister of
Vanuatu, Mr. Alatoi Ishmael Kalsakau, on behalf of the
core group, of which Uganda is a member.

The legal questions contained in resolution 77/276
represent a careful balance achieved after extensive
consultations. At the heart of the question is a desire
to further strengthen our efforts to deal with climate
change, give climate justice the importance it deserves
and bring the entirety of international law to bear on
that unprecedented challenge.

We would first like to express our thanks and
deep appreciation to the United Nations membership

In conclusion, Uganda is committed to the values
of multilateralism — values that bring us together at the

18/32

23-08930

29/03/2023

United Nations to work for a better future. This initiative
is an embodiment of those values. Uganda thanks all
Member States for their support in adopting today’s
resolution, which will have a strong and positive impact
on how we address climate change and ultimately on
our ability to protect present and future generations.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and appreciates the contribution of the core
group of States.
Today is truly historic. The adoption by consensus
of resolution 77/276 has shown that Vanuatu and other
small island developing States and vulnerable countries
around the world are not alone in their fight against the
effects of climate change. Vanuatu has played a unique
role in shaping the response to the global climate crisis by
demonstrating that climate change is an environmental
issue that unquestionably reaches beyond the legal
framework on international environmental law.
International courts and tribunals can play an
important role in the formulation and development of
the rules of international law that guide the conduct
of States and other actors in dealing with the causes
and implications of the climate crisis. We appreciate
Vanuatu’s historic initiative in requesting an advisory
opinion on climate change from the International Court
of Justice on climate change and international law.
Latvia was proud to be a sponsor of the resolution and
is seriously considering involvement in the advisory
proceedings in order to contribute to the development
of international law.
The International Court of Justice has made
landmark contributions to the development of the rules
of international law addressed by the request. As long
ago as 1996, in its advisory opinion on the Legality of
the threat or use of nuclear weapons (A/51/218, annex),
the Court recognized that the environment is not an
abstraction but represents the living space, the quality
of life and the very health of human beings, including
generations unborn. The existence of the general
obligation of States to ensure that activities within their
jurisdiction and control respect the environment of
other States or of areas beyond national control is now
part of the corpus of international law relating to the
environment. In later decisions, the Court has explained
and developed international law on the environment,
the law of the sea and human rights law in other
important respects. We are confident that the requested

A/77/PV.64

International Court of Justice advisory opinion will
bring greater legal clarity on the climate crisis.
As we continue to respond to the crises unfolding
across the world, we must not lose sight of the
commitment to working together to create a sustainable
and resilient world for all nations, large or small.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister
of Vanuatu for the statement he delivered on behalf
of the core group of States and to put on record our
appreciation for the important role that Vanuatu played
in the lead-up to today’s adoption of resolution 77/276.
The adoption that we have just witnessed in the General
Assembly is a major achievement, and its success
is made even greater by the fact that it was adopted
by consensus. Romania is proud to have been able to
contribute directly and substantially to that extensive
effort as a member of the core group of initiators, led
by Vanuatu. The significance of our actions today
is twofold.
First, the resolution we just adopted reflects
the united voice of the General Assembly and
the international community in recognizing the
importance of fighting climate change and standing
up for the most vulnerable countries and peoples.
Romania has long recognized the negative effects of
climate change and their wider implications for peace
and security around the world. Our interest and efforts
have especially targeted the legal aspects of climate
change and its effects, including from the perspective
of sea level rise. While debates on connected topics
are ongoing in the International Law Commission and
the Legal Committee of the Assembly, today we have
added a missing link by entrusting the International
Court of Justice with clarifying existing obligations in
connection with climate change.
Secondly, placing the responsibility of analysing
that crucial topic on the International Court of Justice
is a very clear sign of the full trust of the international
community in the activity and professionalism of the
Court. The advisory jurisdiction of the Court is a very
important tool at our disposal and the General Assembly
has once again shown its willingness to make good use
of it. Beyond its advisory function, the Court is being
asked more often than ever to play a role in the overall
international community’s efforts to preserve peace and
security and stability. In our view, this is a momentous

23-0893019/32

A/77/PV.64

time to look into ways of encouraging wider use of the
Court’s jurisdiction.
With that goal in mind, Romania has presented
an initiative to promote the broader recognition of the
International Court of Justice’s jurisdiction, building
on previous efforts in the area. Together with a group of
supporting countries, we have formulated and issued a
declaration that lists the main arguments for accepting
the Court’s contentious jurisdiction and encourages
States to confer jurisdiction on the International Court
of Justice by any of the means envisaged in its Statute,
as deemed appropriate. The document reaffirms
the Court’s important contribution to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the promotion of the rule of
law globally and invites States to make better use of
that potential. The text is open for endorsement by all
States as a renewed expression of their adherence to
international law. And we would like to take advantage
of this occasion to renew our call to all States to sign
the declaration and take an additional step in support of
the Court, following the historic resolution we have just
adopted today.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We thank Vanuatu
and the core group of States that presented resolution
77/276 for the positive and constructive approach they
took towards negotiations. We particularly welcome the
presence of Prime Minister Kalsakau at this meeting.
The United Kingdom is committed to taking
ambitious action to tackle climate change, biodiversity
loss and environmental degradation. We were proud
to host the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP26) in Glasgow, where all 197 parties
agreed to the Glasgow climate pact. At COP26, nature
also moved from the margins of the debate on climate
change to the heart of it. The United Kingdom will
continue to lead and engage with regard to climate
change and nature to ensure that promises are kept and
delivered to the highest standards, working with all
partners to maintain momentum.
The United Kingdom is especially proud of its work
with small island developing States (SIDS) and leastdeveloped countries, both in its capacity as President of
COP26 and beyond. The United Kingdom recognizes
that all States are vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change and that SIDS are some of the most vulnerable.
In that regard, the United Kingdom set up climate
and development ministerial meetings to focus on the
20/32

29/03/2023

priorities of climate-vulnerable States. We co-lead
with Fiji the Taskforce on Access to Climate Finance
to improve access for SIDS and climate-vulnerable
States. We have also created programmes such as the
Small Island Developing State Capacity and Resilience
programme and the Infrastructure for Resilient Island
States facility. In addition, the United Kingdom was
instrumental in securing agreements and funding to
set up and develop the Santiago Network to provide
technical assistance for the implementation of
approaches for averting, minimizing and addressing
loss and damage.
We welcome the International Court of Justice
considering the current obligations of all States under
international law to ensure the protection of the climate
system and other parts of the environment from
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases, as well
as the legal consequences when States, by their acts or
omissions, breach such obligations, causing significant
harm. By looking at the obligations as they are today,
the questions are clearly focused on assisting States in
understanding their obligations under international law
so that they are able to comply with them in the future
and understand the consequences if they breach them.
In particular, we are pleased to make the following
four observations on the questions. First, they are not
determinative of whether there are obligations or where
they flow from. Secondly, they do not prejudge whether
breaches have occurred, are occurring or will occur, but
look at the consequences if and when they do. Thirdly,
they are not limited to considering the obligations
and legal consequences for any specific State or
States. Fourthly and lastly, they are not determinative
of whether any States have been specially affected
or injured.
The United Kingdom’s sponsorship of the
resolution today is without prejudice to its position
on, and interpretation of, the obligations, instruments
and concepts to which resolution 77/276 refers, or to
any submissions by His Majesty’s Government before
the International Court of Justice and other courts and
tribunals. We also note that the first question is focused
on the obligations relating specifically to anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases. Increasing climate
action is a top priority for the United Kingdom. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says
that, in order to keep the 1.5°C target alive, we need
emissions to peak in 2025, halve by 2030 and reach
net zero by 2050. We recognize the United Nations
23-08930

29/03/2023

Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC)
as the primary intergovernmental negotiating forum for
climate action. An advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice may help us refocus efforts to deliver
on climate commitments in this critical decade, which
would support the agenda of the UNFCCC. We are
pleased to have sponsored resolution 77/276 today.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the request for an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice that
we adopted in resolution 77/276, which will surely
make it possible to determine with greater precision
the legal regime relating to the legal obligations and
consequences of States with respect to climate change.
The adoption of that resolution reflects the importance
that the international community attaches to climate
change in particular, and to the climate crisis in
general. It is also a reaffirmation of our confidence
in the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. Furthermore,
we are strengthening today the trend of resorting to
international law to better deal with the various issues
that, as a result of their global nature, concern us all,
as they affect us all. That holds especially true with
regard to environmental matters. A few days ago,
we were able to reach a historic agreement on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction. We are confident
that the implementation agreement under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea will soon be
translated into a legally binding instrument.
Moreover, the International Law Commission is
working on sea level rise in relation to international
law. At the same time, the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea has also received a request for an
advisory opinion on the impact of climate change on
the oceans, while the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights has received a request for an advisory opinion
on the effects of the climate emergency on human
rights. All those processes, including the one that
concerns us today, are specific in character but have
complementary effects. They also send a clear and
forceful message: we must urgently address the climate
crisis, and international law is one of the best tools
available to us for that purpose. Everything I just said
takes on greater importance in the light of the most
recent alarming report by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change.

A/77/PV.64

Mexico appreciates the advisory powers of the
International Court of Justice and its capacity to prevent
and resolve conflicts. Despite 29 appeals in its entire
history, its advisory jurisdiction can play an extremely
meaningful role in moving forward issues that are of
pressing concern for the international community and
preventing new disputes by strengthening the rule of law
at the international level. As we have repeatedly stated,
that is why we believe that the Secretary-General must
have the authority to request advisory opinions from
the Court. That option, which was originally proposed
by former Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar,
is perhaps today even more urgent, as it involves a
mechanism for strengthening the Secretary-General’s
preventive diplomacy efforts. We must also prioritize
expanding the Court’s jurisdiction to settle disputes.
Therefore, we urge those States that have not yet done
so to recognize its jurisdiction as compulsory, withdraw
their reservations, negotiate and accept the provisions
that grant it jurisdiction under international treaties,
and join the declaration on promoting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, which 33 countries
have already signed.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates its support for
the International Court of Justice in both its advisory
and judicial work, and acknowledges its valuable
contribution to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the progressive development of international law.
Mr. Moon (Republic of Korea): First of all, the
Republic of Korea appreciates the work done by
Vanuatu and the core group. We welcome today’s
consensus adoption of resolution 77/276, which
requests the International Court of Justice’s advisory
opinion on climate change, in which we are pleased to
have participated as a sponsor.
No one in the world is immune to the impact of
climate change. No State is free from the burden of
tackling that global crisis, which poses existential
threats, especially to small island developing States.
The recently published report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change warns — alarmingly — that
limiting warming below 1.5°C will not be possible with
the nationally determined contributions announced at
the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
It is undeniable that more ambitious and coordinated
efforts from the international community are essential.
The Republic of Korea has been doing everything it
can to contribute to strengthening climate action. Our

23-0893021/32

A/77/PV.64

Government recently drafted our first national plan
for carbon neutrality and green growth, based on our
framework act on carbon neutrality and green growth
for coping with the climate crisis, which lays out our
climate action by sector and year. In line with that, we
will expand our green official development assistance
with our financial contributions to the Global Climate
Partnership Fund, the Global Green Growth Institute,
the Adaptation Fund and others. In Seoul in 2021
we also hosted the P4G Summit, with a declaration
that reiterates the importance of public-private
partnerships and green recovery from the pandemic.
We will strengthen our international engagement with
multilateral initiatives, including the Global Methane
Pledge, the Partnership for Action on Green Economy
and the Rising Nations Initiative.
The international community has been working
to address the climate crisis on multiple fronts, and
the Republic of Korea supports climate action by the
international community through the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the primary
intergovernmental forum for such action. In that regard,
my delegation would like to mention a few points.
First, just as the questions in the resolution we
have just adopted are framed in terms of law, the
opinion that the resolution seeks from the Court is
firmly based on law. The applicable law in this case is
meant to be existing international law rather than law
in the making. My delegation is of the view that the
established distinction between lex lata and lex ferenda
still remains valid in this evolving area of international
law. We therefore expect the Court to maintain a clear
legal focus and uphold judicial integrity, distancing
itself from any legislative moves.
Secondly, it should be noted that the questions
in the resolution do not presuppose any existence of
obligation or breach. Moreover, the second question
addresses the issue of legal consequences, if and when
any breaches of obligation occur, and serves as a
forward-looking catalyst. We trust that the endeavour
is not intended to apportion responsibility for the past
but to find collective wisdom for the future from legal
sources in order to galvanize our resolve to tackle the
challenge common to all of us.
Thirdly, we recognize that resolution 77/276 is
intended to help us better understand legal aspects of
the area of climate change, especially the obligations of
States. The ensuing process will be advisory in nature,
22/32

29/03/2023

with a non-binding outcome, but its opinion will be
far-reaching in its implications beyond any limited
disputants. In the absence of any disputing parties in its
advisory proceedings, the Court is supposed to arrive
at an opinion with the help of all the elements of the
information available to it. Given the complexity of the
issues, my delegation hopes that the Court will draw
on sound scientific and technical expertise, and when
necessary obtain the views of States with regard to their
practices and opinio juris.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the other
international legal bodies working in parallel. The
International Law Commission has been working on
the topic of sea level rise in relation to international
law. The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
recently received a request for an advisory opinion with
regard to that issue. While no entity has an exclusive
mandate on climate-related legal matters, we hope that
some convergence will ultimately emerge.
The resolution’s significant number of sponsors
and adoption by consensus are a demonstration of
the common understanding of Member States that the
climate crisis should be addressed with all the tools
at our disposal. After all, it is our collective resolve
that is fundamental to overcoming the climate crisis.
The Republic of Korea will continue to engage in
every effort by the international community, including
the advisory proceedings of the International Court
of Justice.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to thank the Prime
Minister of Vanuatu for his statement made earlier on
behalf of the core group.
In its latest report, entitled Provisional State of
the Global Climate 2022, the World Meteorological
Organization notes that the last eight years have
been the warmest on record. The degradation of the
environment is an undisputed fact, including with
regard to the effects of climate change that threaten
us all and that the international community must face
together. The various scientific reports of recent years
are extremely alarming, and all indicate that climate
change is the number-one existential challenge of our
time. Morocco is concerned about the current and
future adverse effects of climate change, such as rising
ocean temperatures, ocean deoxygenation, sea level
rise and ocean acidification. Despite the fact that my
country is a low emitter of greenhouse gases, through
23-08930

29/03/2023

its non-financial defined contribution the Kingdom of
Morocco is committed to reducing its greenhouse-gas
emissions by 42 per cent by 2030 and hopes to exceed
that threshold. Likewise, we are resolutely committed
to the renewable energy sector. Morocco has set a goal
of ensuring that such sources account for 52 per cent of
its national electricity production by 2030.
The consequences of inaction in the face of the
climate crisis will be disastrous for current and future
generations. By 2030, as many as 118 million of
Africa’s poorest people could be directly threatened by
extreme weather events. That is why, as Member States,
we now have an opportunity and a duty to support
resolution 77/276, so as to demonstrate the shared and
collective commitment of the States Members of the
United Nations to human rights and the environment.
It was based on those beliefs that Morocco joined
the core group that submitted the draft of today’s
resolution, entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States in respect of climate change”.
As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice is called on
to contribute to clarifying the rights and obligations
of States under international law with regard to the
adverse effects of climate change. Resolution 77/276
is the result of negotiations among geographically
diverse countries in both the northern and southern
hemispheres, including both States that are vulnerable
to the climate crisis and some of the historically largest
emitters. It represents the culmination of the best kind
of multilateral effort, in which compromise is key, as we
saw in the fact that it was sponsored by 130 delegations
and adopted by consensus. The resolution thereby
strikes a delicate balance between climate justice and
a forward-looking perspective. It acknowledges that we
must learn from the past if we are to build a just and
sustainable future and that international law has a role
to play in righting our current course. It is because we
believe in the power of multilateralism that we helped
to bring this initiative forward, in order to clarify this
important issue for current and future generations. We
earnestly hope that the Court’s response will strengthen
the negotiating position of developing countries and
solidarity with those that are most vulnerable to the
effects of climate change.
Lastly, it is important to underscore that the view
of the Court could highlight the issue of compensating
victims of climate disasters for loss and damage,

A/77/PV.64

which was a key multilateral topic of the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change . It is now
our collective duty to continue working together on
the progress that has been made and supporting the
countries most vulnerable to climate change.
Mr. Valtýsson (Iceland): At the outset, let me
thank Vanuatu and other core group members for this
important initiative and the constructive approach
that they took to the negotiations on the text of
resolution 77/276.
Iceland became a sponsor of the resolution in
recognition of the fact that climate change is the
defining issue of our time and of how important it is for
small island developing States and other States that are
particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
Throughout the process leading up to the adoption of
the resolution, it has been clear that more than anything
else, our hope is that the initiative becomes part of a
collective push towards greater climate action. Likewise,
in response to the report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change released earlier this month,
the Secretary-General submitted a plan to supercharge
efforts — namely, the Acceleration Agenda. The time to
act is now. Iceland is committed to climate action. Our
Government has set an ambitious emissions reduction
goal, as well as a national carbon neutrality target,
through climate legislation. That means that our laws
state that Iceland must achieve carbon neutrality no later
than 2040. In addition, Iceland must reach full energy
conversion no later than 2040, which will make Iceland
fully free of fossil fuels. Also, our Government will not
issue any licences for oil exploration in our exclusive
economic zone. Internationally, Iceland has stepped up
its contributions to climate financing by doubling its
commitment to the Green Climate Fund during the past
two years and joining the Adaptation Fund. We thereby
recognize the crucial role of adaptation, for which the
need can be most dire within the States and among the
people who have least contributed to climate change.
Our multilateral development cooperation is also
increasingly focused on climate financing.
Regarding the text of resolution 77/276, we
welcome the request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice to shed light on the
obligations of States under applicable international law
and the legal consequences for all States for breaching
those obligations. We expect the Court to answer the
legal questions on the basis of the current obligations of

23-0893023/32

A/77/PV.64

all States to ensure the protection of the climate system
and other parts of the environment from anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases. The questions to the
International Court of Justice and the resolution as a
whole do not prejudge the nature of such obligations
and do not pertain to whether breaches have occurred,
are occurring or will occur. Furthermore, we note that
the preambular part refers to a number of matters that
are not related to legal obligations, and as such would
not be expected to have any bearing on the Court’s
advisory opinion. Our sponsorship is without prejudice
to our position on, and interpretation of, the obligations,
instruments and concepts that the resolution refers to,
or to any eventual submissions before the International
Court of Justice and other courts and tribunals.
Iceland actively and constructively participated
in the process that led to the adoption of resolution
77/276 today. We were positive about the idea from the
outset and happy to have become one of the resolution’s
sponsors. We remain committed to climate action
and recall the primary role of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement, in that regard.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I would like to align
my statement with the statements delivered by the
representative of the European Union in its capacity of
observer and the representative of Vanuatu, and I would
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Climate change is the defining issue of our time.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General, now is
the defining moment to do something about it. As
we learned just a few days ago from the most recent
synthesis report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, time is running out. There is a rapidly
closing window of opportunity to secure a liveable
and sustainable future for all. There is still a feasible
pathway to avoid humankind’s defeat, but it will require
accelerated, bold and effective climate action on all
fronts. The initiative led by Vanuatu, which Portugal is
proud to have supported from its inception as a member
of the core group that developed resolution 77/276, is
yet another important tool — a tool to promote climate
action, incentivize cooperation at all levels, raise the
level of ambition in our collective efforts and further
advance the crucial dimension of climate justice and
solidarity, which is particularly crucial with respect to
those most affected and most vulnerable to the effects
of climate change, especially small island developing
States. In doing so, the initiative supports the concurrent
24/32

29/03/2023

efforts being carried out within the framework of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and discussions in forums such as the International
Law Commission.
Portugal is a staunch supporter of international
law, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the key
role played by the International Court of Justice, as a
bedrock that both upholds and promotes the multilateral
order underpinned by those core tenets. We therefore
recognize the Court’s ability to support the fight against
climate change and the promotion of climate justice.
By contributing to the clarification and development of
international law, the Court’s advisory jurisdiction is
a tool that, coupled with other instruments developed
by the international community to that end, can
encourage further action to tackle climate change and
bring justice to its victims. The historic adoption by
consensus of resolution 77/276 and the fact that more
than 120 States co-sponsored it are a clear testament to
the significance of the initiative, the crucial role that the
international community ascribes to the International
Court of Justice and the urgency of taking further and
accelerated action to address climate change for present
and future generations.
Ms. Morel (Seychelles): Seychelles commends
the Republic of Vanuatu and the core group for the
notable initiative taken to seek an advisory opinion on
climate change from the International Court of Justice,
especially at a time when the urgency of this existential
crisis is becoming ever-more accentuated.
The most recent — sixth — assessment report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change sounds
the alarm on the dismal realities of our world today and
the calamitous future that we could face if we do not
take action now. The report warns us that the current
pace and scale of climate action are insufficient and
that extreme risks escalate with every increment of
global warming. Climate change is having detrimental
impacts on planetary health and human well-being
everywhere, but it is the most vulnerable populations,
which historically contributed the least to the unfolding
climate calamity, that are being disproportionately
affected by its consequences. Small island developing
States such as Seychelles face both immediate and
slow-onset impacts from the rise in temperatures,
ranging from extreme weather events to coastal erosion
and sea level rise. Undoubtedly, that renders us the
23-08930

29/03/2023

least resilient and the least able to respond to the severe
threats posed by climate change.
Such an important advisory opinion will put a
spotlight on the obligation of States to ensure that we
all have the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment. The process being proposed today through
resolution 77/276 reminds us that the inextricable link
between climate change and human rights exists and
that States have an obligation to protect our precious
planet. Seychelles stands behind the resolution, and we
are encouraged to see that the General Assembly has
given it the broadest possible support, which it deserves,
as a symbol of our commitment to incite transformative
climate action that will give the next generations the
promise of a sustainable future.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks Vanuatu and the core group for submitting
the important resolution 77/276, which my country
co-sponsored. We believe that it strikes a balance among
the various positions of delegations. We therefore
commend the General Assembly for having adopted it
by consensus. Chile believes that requesting an advisory
opinion on climate change from the International Court
of Justice is timely and useful, as it will make way
for important clarifications on the obligations of the
States on that subject, which will ultimately have the
significant effect of enabling the promotion of greater
cooperation among States in order to respond more
decisively to the climate emergency. My delegation
would like to make three general remarks.
First, for Chile, there is a very clear link between
human rights and the obligations of States to address
climate change. We therefore support the references in
the resolution on the human right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment, as well as other universal
human rights instruments. In that regard, I would like to
mention that on 9 January Chile and Colombia requested
an advisory opinion from the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights on the climate emergency and human
rights, which we will provide to the International Court
of Justice as a precedent for its consideration. That
request is in addition to the request submitted by the
Commission of Small Island States to the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, and both initiatives
complement the request that has been submitted to the
main judicial organ of the United Nations.
Chile believes that the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment derives from the

A/77/PV.64

principle of respect for human rights and is consistent
with the obligation to prevent transboundary damage.
Both of those are relevant principles that can be used to
apply general international law to inter-State relations
on climate change.
The second aspect that I would like to highlight
is that it is relevant for the International Court of
Justice to enlighten us on the obligations of States in
this matter. To that end, in addition to considering
the various treaties identified in the resolution, the
Court may inquire into the legal value and content of
other sources of international law, including general
principles and norms of customary international law,
such as the international responsibility of States, the
duty of due diligence and the duty to cooperate, from
all of which derive general and specific obligations for
States in the context of the climate emergency.
It is also relevant for the Court to bear in mind other
principles such as equity, the principle that the polluter
pays and the principle of territorial integrity and legal
stability in relation to the maintenance of baselines
and the outer limits of maritime zones in accordance
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, as well as the non-refoulement obligations of third
States with respect to persons affected by sea level rise,
which have also been discussed by the Study Group of
the International Law Commission on sea level rise in
relation to international law.
Finally, I would like to highlight adaptation, which
within the response to climate change should be seen
not as an option but an imperative need. The climate
crisis forces us to look carefully at our jurisdictional
obligations to protect the most vulnerable. What is
essential for those groups is the ability to adapt to the new
realities imposed by global warming, which threatens
their food security, housing, access to water, health
and ultimately their lives. It is important to analyse
the obligation of States to take public action vis-à-vis
their own inhabitants in situations of vulnerability, but
also to ensure that the developed countries honour their
obligation to mobilize funding for developing countries
in a way that maintains a balance between mitigation
and adaptation.
Chile trusts that the International Court of Justice
will thoroughly review the practice and opinions of
the States on these matters, and in that regard it will
certainly be able to count on the assistance of States,

23-0893025/32

A/77/PV.64

which we hope will actively intervene both in writing
and in future oral debates held before the Court.
Ms. Juul (Norway): As one of the sponsors of
resolution 77/276, Norway would like to thank Vanuatu
and the core group for this important and timely initiative
and to congratulate them on its successful adoption.
Climate change poses an existential threat to
both current and future generations. Protecting the
climate system and the environment from human-made
emissions of greenhouse gases, will be, to quote the
Secretary-General, “the defining issue of our age”.
Addressing that issue is a top priority for Norway.
All States are vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change, and we recognize that small island developing
States will be among those especially affected. In
its sixth and most recent Assessment Report, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates
that 896 million people from low-lying coastal zones
will be particularly exposed to changes in the ocean
and the cryosphere, notably through sea level rise
and the associated loss of biodiversity. The factual
consequences of those changes prompt important and
complex questions of international law. The changing
coastlines may affect the location of maritime limits.
National boundaries may be affected, and in certain
instances particularly vulnerable States risk losing the
land territory that is the basis for their existence. People
may be forced to leave their homes to find assistance
and protection abroad. Those issues pertaining to sealevel rise in relation to international law are on the
agenda of the International Law Commission, and we
welcome the Commission’s contribution to assisting
States in clarifying and exploring the international law
relating to this pressing and topical issue.
Norway welcomes the consideration by the
International Court of Justice of the current obligations
of States under international law to ensure the protection
of the climate system and the environment, as well as
the legal consequences where by their acts or omissions
States breach such obligations, causing significant harm.
We believe that improved legal clarity is important to
strengthening our shared ability to comply with those
obligations in the future. From Norway’s perspective,
the greatest value of the resolution is in the elaboration
it presents on current obligations, and through that,
its ability to lay a foundation for improved future
compliance and great0er ambition on climate action.
26/32

29/03/2023

We are therefore pleased that the questions posed to
the Court are focused on improving the understanding
of existing obligations under international law with a
view to preventing future breaches. We also welcome
that the questions are related to obligations and possible
legal consequences for all States, and are not limited
to a specific State or group of States. We note that the
questions are not determinative of whether there are
such obligations or where they flow from. We also note
that the questions posed to the Court do not prejudge
the nature of such obligations or their consequences,
but are openly paraphrased. Furthermore, we note
that the questions do not assume that breaches of
any relevant obligations have already occurred or are
occurring now, but look rather to clarify the existence
and content of obligations and the legal consequences
if breaches occur.
Norway’s sponsorship of the resolution is without
prejudice to its position on or interpretation of the
obligations, instruments and concepts to which the
resolution refers. It is also without prejudice to any
submission made by Norway before the International
Court of Justice or any other court, tribunal, or treaty
body on the issues to which the resolution refers.
Responding to climate change will require both
practical and legal solutions. Discussions about the
legal consequences of climate change must therefore be
conducted in tandem with our political determination
to address this pressing issue, and must not overshadow
it. Recognizing that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, together with the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, is the primary
negotiating forum for developing and implementing
international climate framework, it is our hope that
the Court’s consideration of the questions put to it
through the resolution will contribute constructively to
strengthening both global and national climate action
and raising our ambitions.
Mr. Mead (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
recognizes that climate change is one of the major global
challenges of our times. All actors should take concrete
and ambitious action to address this immense challenge
and build a more sustainable world. We are doing our
part by taking ambitious measures at the national level
and supporting international cooperation.
(spoke in English)
At home, we are advancing a broad range of
measures to reduce Canada’s emissions by 40 to 45 per
23-08930

29/03/2023

cent by 2030, and have enshrined our commitment
to meet net-zero emissions by 2050 into domestic
law. Internationally, we support the full and effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and work with global partners to promote
concrete action, including through the Global Carbon
Pricing Challenge and the Powering Past Coal Alliance.
Canada also doubled the amount of its international
climate financing to $5.3 billion over the period
2021–2026 in order to support developing countries
in the fight against climate change, which includes a
commitment of 40 per cent for adaptation financing,
supporting local action on the ground, women’s rights
and the rights of indigenous peoples.
Canada joined others in co-sponsoring resolution
77/276, on the request for an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States in respect of climate change. In Canada’s view, it
is important that the Court look at States’ obligations in
the context of the instruments and principles mentioned
in the resolution. Due regard needs to be given to whether
the instruments mentioned are binding or not, the fact
that States are bound only by those treaties to which
they are parties and the specific temporal and territorial
limits of certain obligations. Canada would also like to
note that there is currently no common, internationally
agreed understanding of a number of concepts referred
to in the resolution, such as the right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment. Canada’s co-sponsorship
of resolution 77/276 is without prejudice to its position
on the various instruments and aspects mentioned
therein, or to any submissions Canada may eventually
present to the International Court of Justice or other
adjudicative bodies.
Resolution 77/276 seeks the advice of the
International Court of Justice with regard to what
obligations and legal consequences for current or future
breaches States face, or could face, pursuant to both
various international treaties and the well-established
obligations of customary international law. The Paris
Agreement on Climate Change is built on the need to
mitigate future emissions, because that is the only way
to avert the worsening impacts of climate change.
(spoke in French)
Canada hopes that the opinion rendered by the
International Court of Justice will contribute to
advancing the negotiations of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Paris

A/77/PV.64

Agreement and other forums. We hope that the opinion
will enable all States to enhance their ambition to
combat climate change so that we can all collectively
focus on addressing that global challenge.
Mr. Hill (United States of America): Addressing
the climate crisis is of the highest priority for the
United States, both at home and abroad. In that context,
the United States reaffirms its fundamental view that
diplomacy is the best pathway for achieving our shared
climate goals. Domestically, President Biden has taken
the strongest climate action in United States history.
Through the Inflation Reduction Act and other efforts,
we are on track to achieve our ambitious nationally
determined contribution under the Paris Agreement,
which is consistent with keeping a 1.5°C temperature
limit within reach.
Internationally, the United States has put the climate
crisis at the centre of our foreign policy and diplomacy.
President Biden, Secretary of State Blinken, Special
Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry, Cabinet
officials across the United States Government and our
diplomats around the world have worked tirelessly to
advance global climate ambitions in order to keep a
1.5°C limit on temperature rise within reach and help
countries adapt to and manage climate impacts, and
more. That has taken many diplomatic forms.
For instance, President Biden has convened fellow
leaders of the world’s largest economies three times
since taking office — and will do so again in April — to
press for countries to enhance their ambitions in line
with what the science tells us is needed to keep the
1.5°C limit within reach, complementing our broader
efforts to drive the ambitious implementation of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change at the meetings
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and other
key milestone events to be held throughout the year.
We have also been promoting emission reductions
in sectoral forums such as the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the International Maritime
Organization, spearheading bilateral and multilateral
cooperative initiatives, such as the Global Methane
Pledge and the Green Shipping Challenge and launching
the President’s Emergency Plan for Adaptation and
Resilience — PREPARE — initiative, aimed at working
together with developing countries to help more than
500 million people worldwide adapt to climate change.

23-0893027/32

A/77/PV.64

And we are focused on mobilizing resources
to support developing countries as they address the
climate crisis, not only by providing assistance with
our own public resources but also by mobilizing
support from the private sector and the multilateral
development banks — including by holding critical
and ongoing discussions about their reform and
evolution — and other sources and by working to align
broader global financing flows with the goals of the
Paris Agreement. We are also focused on minimizing
the risks of sea-level rise for small island and low-lying
States and working to address its impacts through our
policies and support. That includes our commitment to
preserving the legitimacy of States’ maritime zones and
the associated rights and entitlements that have been
established consistent with international law. In that
context, the United States engaged in the discussions on
resolution 77/276 with a view to considering how best
we can advance our collective efforts. We considered
that carefully, recognizing the priority that Vanuatu
and other small island developing States have placed
on seeking an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice with the aim of advancing progress
towards climate goals.
However, we have serious concerns that that
process could complicate our collective efforts and will
not bring us closer to achieving those shared goals. We
believe that launching a judicial process, especially
given the broad scope of the questions, will likely
accentuate disagreements and not be conducive to
advancing ongoing diplomatic and other processes. In
the light of those concerns, the United States disagrees
that the initiative is the best approach to achieving our
shared goals and takes this opportunity to reaffirm
our view that diplomatic efforts are the best means by
which to address the climate crisis.
While we recognize that this process will go
forward, in the light of the significant support enjoyed
by the resolution, we underscore our continuing belief
that successfully tackling the climate crisis is best
achieved by doubling down on the types of diplomatic
efforts that we are engaged in, including multilateral
engagement under the Paris Agreement and other
forums, plurilateral initiatives and bilateral efforts that
advance solutions to the multifaceted challenges caused
by the climate crisis. The United States will welcome
the opportunity to share our legal views and engage
with States and the Court on the questions posed. For
28/32

29/03/2023

now, we would like to share a few observations with
respect to the text of resolution 77/276.
First, with respect to the chapeau of the question,
while the Paris Agreement sets forth a number of
climate change obligations, as well as many non-binding
provisions, the reference to other treaties should not be
understood to imply that each of those treaties contains
obligations to ensure the protection of the climate
system. In addition, we emphasize that references to
certain principles and duties should not be understood
as reflecting any conclusion about the nature, scope
or application of any such principles or duties to the
question at hand.
Secondly, we note that the question asks about
obligations and the related legal consequences under
those obligations for all States. The question does not
prejudge the nature of any such obligations or the legal
consequences for any breaches of those obligations.
Neither does it presuppose that such breaches
have occurred or are occurring, but asks about the
consequences if and when they do, whether now or in
the future.
Thirdly and lastly, with respect to the preambular
paragraphs, we note that several of them, such as those
related to non-binding goals, address matters that are
not related to legal obligations, and therefore are not
relevant to the questions posed. In that regard, the
matters addressed in the preambular paragraphs should
not be assumed to have any bearing on the Court’s
advisory opinion.
Mr. Luteru (Samoa): Today is a historic day
for climate justice. As a member of the core group,
Samoa aligns itself with the statement made by the
Prime Minister of Vanuatu. Samoa fully supports the
Assembly’s historic consensus adoption of resolution
77/276, which seeks an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States in respect of climate change. The key principles
of human rights and justice are well enshrined in
our Charter of the United Nations and supported by
international treaties — principles and values that bind
us as citizens and custodians of planet Earth.
We are currently witnessing unprecedented and
unparalleled changes in our climate system that will
have long-lasting effects if we do not come together and
reverse the current trend in greenhouse-gas emissions.
The Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change is yet another stark reminder
23-08930

29/03/2023

of how urgent it is that we act now. The science is clear
and irrefutable.
Vanuatu’s initiative in bringing resolution 77/276
to the General Assembly is timely. It is also an urgent
global call to action. The right to the environment
is now accepted as a universal human right by the
Human Rights Council and by the Assembly through
its resolution 76/300, which recognized the right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment. This is
about climate justice, and it is a human rights issue that
will affect both current and future generations. At the
moment, the financial burden of climate change falls
almost entirely on the nations affected and not on those
most responsible for its adverse effects. Seeking an
advisory opinion to clarify the rights and obligations
of States under international law pertaining to climate
change is morally the right thing to do. As a small,
vulnerable State, Samoa relies on the rule of law as
one of the few shields we have to protect its people.
We firmly believe that the rule of law will also assist
in the future work of the United Nations and the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
I commend Vanuatu and all Member States for
championing this vitally important initiative for all of
us, and I assure the Assembly of Samoa’s continued
unwavering support. We encourage Member States
to stay engaged in the next phase and to share their
ideas and comments with the International Court
of Justice in due course. As members of the global
community affected by climate change in one way or
another, let us move forward together, in line with the
principles of climate justice and human rights. I call
for the Assembly’s continued valuable support for
this initiative.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
First, let me join others in congratulating Vanuatu
on starting and leading this successful initiative. We
appreciate that Vanuatu, together with a core group
of States, conducted an extensive and inclusive
consultation process resulting in our adoption today of
resolution 77/276. For Austria, the possibility for the
real involvement of all interested parties is essential to
the legitimacy and success of such an initiative. As the
Assembly is aware, Austria is a steadfast supporter of
multilateralism and international law. The resolution
before us strengthens both of those, with the objective of
countering climate change altogether. Climate change

A/77/PV.64

is the prime example of a challenge that we cannot
address alone — we know that. We need concerted
global action and multilateral coordination, and we
need international legal clarity.
As a small, independent country, Austria relies
on other States’ compliance with international law
for security. In short, international law keeps our
citizens safe. We therefore have full sympathy and
understanding for States whose existence and security
depend on global efforts to address climate change
and that want to make use of the obligatory power of
international law to help keep their citizens safe and
make life on their territories sustainable. International
law should keep their citizens safe too.
Austria has been and will remain a steadfast
supporter of strong global action on climate change and
the environment. Last year we supported the Assembly’s
landmark resolution 76/300, which recognized the right
to a safe, healthy and sustainable environment. Today’s
resolution will help generate further legal clarity with
regard to States’ obligations on climate change. The
commitment to international law and the rule of law
includes the strict observance and equal application of
existing laws and norms and the continued development
of the law, principles that we have agreed must be
respected and implemented by all States, large and
small, developed and developing. Advisory opinions
of the International Court of Justice can be useful in
clarifying legal obligations, and since the process leading
to today’s adoption was inclusive and transparent,
enabling all interested parties to participate, we expect
that a subsequent advisory opinion will have a positive
impact by clarifying the legal obligations of all States
in respect to climate change, which in turn will help us
all meet those obligations.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): Let me begin by
extending Papua New Guinea’s warm welcome to Prime
Minister Kalsakau and the delegation of the Republic of
Vanuatu, our fellow Melanesian Wantoks and Pacific
neighbours, to today’s very important meeting. We
thank Vanuatu for its excellent leadership and work
on the landmark initiative on requesting an advisory
opinion on climate change by the International Court
of Justice. We welcomed Mr. Kalsakau’s resounding
statement today. I also want to recognize the important
role played by the members of the core group of
countries, as well as the many other delegations,
including my own, that have supported Vanuatu and
the core group in this process. And I would like to say

23-0893029/32

A/77/PV.64

a special word of thanks to the young people of the
Pacific region, supported by their peers around the
world, who sowed the seeds of this initiative, which has
so remarkably sprouted and been given life. It augurs
well for intergenerational equity and leadership on the
climate agenda, which must be further encouraged. We
would also like to convey our profound appreciation to
all the sponsors of resolution 77/276 — a two-thirds
majority — and for the support of others who may not
be sponsors. Their support for today’s resolution is a
distinct legacy on the right side of history.
Today is indeed a historic day, with the resounding
consensus adoption for the very first time in this Hall
of a General Assembly resolution (resolution 77/276)
on an advisory opinion on climate change from the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, namely,
the International Court of Justice. The outcome today
also attests to what multilateralism can deliver when it
is inclusive and consultative and leaves no one behind.
From that standpoint, we appreciate the inclusive, open
and transparent manner of the process and the adequate
time afforded to progressing such important work. That
historic outcome today will no doubt set the stage for
the important days ahead.
The climate change narrative for all of us, in
particular small island developing States (SIDS),
including those from our Blue Pacific continent, is
well known. Suffice it to say that, as canaries in the
coal mine, the strong commitment and advocacy
of Papua New Guinea and our other Pacific SIDS in
combating climate change with a sense of urgency and
comprehensively — including through partnerships
under the multilateral architecture, such as the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and similar
important forums — will remain steadfast, consistent
and unrelenting, given our lived reality today. For us,
the stakes are too high. That is not only due to our
vulnerabilities and constraints in how we respond to
climate change and the serious consequences for our
sustainable development that stem from it, but more
important, for some of our low-lying atoll members
it is also an existential threat to their survival as
peoples and nations. That is why the leaders of the
Blue Pacific continent have declared climate change
as the single-greatest threat to the livelihoods, security
and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific. It is
therefore critically important and urgent to address our
vulnerabilities and build resilience through mitigation
30/32

29/03/2023

and adaptation measures in cooperation with each other
and with other development partners.
It is also why today, as we usher in this landmark
development in our Blue Pacific continent, our
leaders, officials and partners are now convening to
discuss and plan for our increasing serious concerns
over the question of statehood and the protection of
persons affected by sea-level rise, given the increasing
serious challenges posed by rising sea levels to our
peoples’ lives and livelihoods and the security of our
communities and countries. We therefore welcome and
strongly support today’s milestone consensus by the
General Assembly to request an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the questions posed to
it on climate change.
My delegation recognizes the critical importance of
the mandate of the International Court of Justice. Since
its establishment, the International Court of Justice
has made significant contributions to the rule of law
at the international level. It has a critical role to play in
promoting stability, equity and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Its decisions and opinions, including its
advisory opinions, have important implications for the
international community, as they develop and clarify
international law and strengthen the international legal
system. Papua New Guinea therefore appreciates and
strongly supports the work of the International Court
of Justice.
Papua New Guinea notes that the advisory opinions
of the International Court of Justice are not binding and
that the Court has no enforcement power. However,
they can have great impact. We are firmly supportive of
the role of the International Court of Justice in issuing
advisory opinions in accordance with its mandate. The
important role of the International Court of Justice
is particularly critical with regard to legal questions
relating to the existential threat of climate change, by
which Pacific small island developing States, including
my own country of Papua New Guinea, are especially
affected. An advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on climate change could be the most
authoritative statement to date of the obligations that
international law imposes on States with respect to
greenhouse-gas emissions. States that care about
international law and international opinion will take
that very seriously.
We also note that an increasing number of domestic
courts around the world are considering the issue of
23-08930

29/03/2023

climate change and citing international agreements and
the decisions of other countries’ courts. An advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice could
become the leading authority to which those domestic
courts would look in framing their own decisions. Such
an opinion would also be looked to by the international
human rights bodies and tribunals that are considering
climate change and its impacts. Going forward, we are
committed to the important work in the next phase
ahead of us, and to the final outcome of that process.
In conclusion, I align my delegation’s remarks with
those made by the representatives of the countries of
the Pacific region.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): The Republic of
the Marshall Islands aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the Federated States
of Micronesia, on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States, and by the representative of Tonga,
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.
The Marshall Islands is pleased to have joined as
a co-sponsor of resolution 77/276 and congratulates
Vanuatu and the other core group members on
successfully facilitating a resolution that ultimately
serves to strengthen understanding of the obligations
and actions of States with regard to climate change
under international law. It is important that the
resolution was adopted with the strong support of the
General Assembly. Even if there are reservations by
some participants on the exact references or detailed
terms, it is nonetheless imperative that the United
Nations not shirk its wider global responsibility for
enriching and engaging with international law. Such
an outcome could be an important reference point
and marker for future action between States. We must
all look to a deeper responsibility and look past the
divisions at the negotiating table. The advisory opinion
is not an exercise in which the International Court
of Justice will go further than where we ourselves,
as Member States, have been able to reach. Without
dispute and as emphasized repeatedly by the SecretaryGeneral, global efforts are falling well short of what
was agreed. The years of repetition have proved
inadequate in implementing common obligations as
the global community. Despite a stronger structure,
ambition has repeatedly fallen short. Atoll nations such
as my own are now the first to face some of the sharpest
and harshest impacts of a wider global threat and crisis.

A/77/PV.64

In the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, States parties agreed to “prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system”. Those cannot be empty words, and they are not
general terms, but that obligation in particular remains
unmet, even though it serves as a driver for a stronger
multilateral effort. While the international community
has expanded its understanding into the Human Rights
Council and its core treaties, the law of the sea and the
Security Council, much more remains to be done to
connect and better realize the common threads across
international law.
As the Marshall Islands, we will remain as we are
now on the political map under our boundaries and
baselines. Even as seas rise, our Government is tirelessly
committed to ensuring our right to remain, as well as
the right of our youngest and future generations to live
in and know our proud island nation and culture. Those
are inalienable rights that cannot be denied. But the
best protection of our population may demand complex
outcomes and actions, locally and globally — and our
pathway to achieving those is uncertain at best.
From the perspective of a low-lying atoll State and
small island developing State, the current projections
of sea level rise threaten to overtop our land with no
higher ground. That certainly seems to be the result of
the “dangerous interference” that the world is obligated
to prevent. Even if it is difficult to understand further
under international law what else, beyond the direct
terms of international conventions, is a legal obligation,
we should at least be able to comprehend that the
dramatic scale of the projections for the Marshall Islands
and other atoll nations ought not to happen. Everyone in
this Hall today knows that such an outcome is wrong,
unjust and beyond a lawful basis.
Today it is long overdue for the General Assembly
to forge an opportunity to initiate strong and effective
international action that may spur greater political will.
We cannot afford to stay silent, no matter how complex
the issue. As we look ahead to the comprehensive
process of involving Member States in addressing
an advisory opinion, we urge their wide and robust
participation in the multilateral process. Whatever the
different interpretations of law or negotiations may be,
all of us Members of this organ should remind ourselves
that we are all underpinned by an international rulesbased order and that our collective progress must be
driven by international law. We owe it to the world to
spare no effort in achieving a strong and responsive

23-0893031/32

A/77/PV.64

outcome. Today’s adoption reminds all of us that this is
exactly why the United Nations exists.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of El Salvador welcomed the
presentation of resolution 77/276, which the General
Assembly has just adopted by consensus. We consider it
an important milestone in international environmental
law, as well as a contribution to international efforts to
fight against climate change.
My delegation recognizes that the triple planetary
crisis of climate change, pollution and the loss of nature
and biodiversity has many repercussions, including
for the enjoyment of the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment. Recognizing
the importance of protecting the global climate for
humankind’s present and future generations, as well
as the need to address its impact on our planet, is
therefore of fundamental importance and should be
a priority for the international community. With that
in mind, El Salvador decided to become a sponsor of
the resolution, in the light of our country’s location in
Central America’s Dry Corridor, an area that is highly
vulnerable to the effects of climate change and that is
continually experiencing the kinds of loss and damage
that mainly affect vulnerable populations.
We believe that clarifying the scope of States’
obligations with regard to guaranteeing the protection
of the climate system under international law,
both conventional and customary, will facilitate
the interpretation of how compliance with those
commitments can systematically support the protection
of the human rights of peoples, taking into account the
various specificities of their regions. In that context, if
we are to respond effectively to the adverse effects of
climate change we must not forget the urgent need to scale
up action and support — including through financing,
capacity-building and the transfer of technology — to
enhance adaptive, mitigation and resilience capacities
and implement collaborative approaches.
Given the enormous benefit that the study of the
legal issues raised in the resolution represents, El
Salvador would like to emphasize the importance of
acknowledging that the advisory opinion is not a form
of judicial recourse for States, nor is it intended to be

32/32

29/03/2023

functionally equivalent to it. It therefore represents
the means by which the General Assembly and the
Security Council, as well as other organs of the United
Nations and those bodies specifically permitted to do
so, in accordance with Article 96, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations, may seek an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice to assist
or facilitate their activities. In issuing an advisory
opinion on the interpretation of the legal issues raised
for consideration in the resolution, my delegation hopes
that the International Court of Justice will always
keep in mind the general and customary rule of the
interpretation of international treaties that implies the
simultaneous and joint application in good faith of
the ordinary meaning of the terms used in the treaty
concerned, as well as their context, object and purpose.
El Salvador also encourages the promotion of
dialogue in the international court system so that the
exercise of its advisory function may be carried out
in a harmonized manner by providing the relevant
clarifications to requests filed by States — for
example, the efforts that have been promoted by the
inter-American system to request an advisory opinion
on climate emergency and human rights.
Finally, we express our support for the efforts of the
Court in the exercise of its advisory function to provide
elementary clarifications on matters of international
law. However, let us not forget that the primary
commitment to undertaking action-oriented measures
and responding effectively to the adverse effects of
climate change, as well as avoiding, minimizing and
addressing loss and damage related to those effects, lies
with us, the States Members of this Organization.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. I would like to thank the
interpreters for extending their services to this late hour.
We shall hear the remaining speakers this afternoon,
immediately after the consideration of agenda item 29,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”, at
3 p.m. in this Hall.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 70.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

23-08930
