A /77/PV.23

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

23rd plenary meeting

Monday, 31 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
In the absence of the President, Mr. Fifield
(Australia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme budget for 2022
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/535/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records.
Therefore, if there is no proposal under rule 66 of
the rules of procedure, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the
Committee which is before the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.

Add.1), I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take a decision in the same manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 6 of
its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Revised estimates relating to the programme
budget for 2022 under section 3, Political affairs,
and section 36, Staff assessment: special political
missions — United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan”. The Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 77/4).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.

May I remind members that, in accordance
with decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far as
possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in
the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee, and that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

Agenda item 71 (continued)

Before we begin to take action on the recommendation contained in the report of the Committee (A/77/535/

Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the President of the International

Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/77/305)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/77/306 and
A/77/307)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.7)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66288 (E)

*2266288*

A/77/PV.23

Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing (see A/77/PV.22)
and his leadership, which has allowed that body to
continue to play a very important role in combating
impunity for crimes that offend the shared values of
the international community. We also appreciate the
Secretary-General’s report on the Court’s activities in
2021 and 2022 (see A/77/305).
Draft resolution A/77/L.7, introduced by the
representative of the Netherlands and co-sponsored
by Ecuador, strikes a balance among the positions
expressed by member States during its consideration in
response to the appeal that the General Assembly adopt
it by consensus.
On the twentieth anniversary of the Court’s
establishment, Ecuador reiterates its support for
the work of the International Criminal Court and its
management, complementing national jurisdictions,
to ensure that those responsible for atrocity crimes
are brought to justice. The Court is one of the key
players in promoting and ensuring the rule of law
at the international level. I take this opportunity to
repeat my appeal to States to ensure the progressive
universalization of the Rome Statute.
I recall that, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, since its establishment, the International
Criminal Court has opened 31 cases, involving 50
suspects or accused. For Ecuador, as a member of
the Bureau, it is a pleasure to note that the Court has
made considerable progress during the past year and
broadened its activities despite the difficulties caused
by the pandemic, as evidenced by the two trials that have
been launched, two others that continue, and a fifth that
has entered the preparatory phase. Another element of
relevance is the implementation of reparation orders
in four cases, alongside assistance projects benefiting
more than 17,000 victims.
Beyond its judicial activities, the Court plays
an active role in the review process to strengthen
the institution and the Rome Statute system as a
whole. Ecuador continues to follow with interest the
implementation of the recommendations deriving
from that process. The achievements of the ICC were
made possible thanks to the work of all its associates,
including the judges, the Prosecutor, the Registry
and the Assembly of States Parties. Its budget must
be duly financed to ensure the proper functioning of
the ICC, which is especially relevant in light of its
increased activities. Ecuador stresses the importance
2/28

31/10/2022

of the contributions of the States parties and the need
to enhance the mechanisms that attract greater support
and cooperation at the international level for the Trust
Fund for Victims.
Multilateral cooperation represents one of the
pillars of the good functioning of the Court because
it contributes to the efficiency and fairness of its
activities. Ecuador therefore appreciates and recognizes
the United Nations support for the Court in various
areas, as well as the support of States parties and
other stakeholders.
Lastly, my country supports efforts to strengthen
the programme to identify national experts, which is
an effective tool to generate capacities under the Rome
Statute and the Court’s proceedings.
Mr. Francis (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this
debate on agenda item 71, “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. We have taken note of the reports and
the note of the Secretary-General contained in documents
A/77/306, A/77/307 and A/77/305, respectively.
We wish to register our deep appreciation for
the presence and participation of the President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge
Piotr Hofmański, whom we thank for his ample and
informative presentation of the annual report of the
Court (see A/77/PV.22).
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Rome Statute and the sixtieth
anniversary of Trinidad and Tobago as a Member of the
United Nations, permit me the latitude to briefly reflect
on the contribution of a distinguished son of Trinidad
and Tobago to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. I speak of none other than the late
Arthur N. R. Robinson, former Prime Minister and
President of Trinidad and Tobago who, in collaboration
with others, worked indefatigably to bring the Court
into existence.
In his autobiography entitled In the Midst of It,
the late President chronicled that in 1971, he accepted
an invitation from Professor Robert Woetzel to a
meeting in Racine, Wisconsin, where he met “many
distinguished scholars and eminent personalities”.
On that occasion, the late President planted a blue
spruce tree to signify the beginning of the campaign
to establish the International Criminal Court. In 2002,
the author returned to Racine, where a ceremony was
22-66288

31/10/2022

held to recognize his work towards the establishment
of the ICC.
Forming the backdrop of that event was the tree
that he had planted over three decades earlier, which
had grown over 30 feet tall. The spruce tree, by its very
nature, has been associated by some to be the Tree of
Birth or a symbol of resilience. It was that very spirit of
dedication and resilience that inspired the late President
to opine that
“my conviction is that in spite of whatever opposition
exists or may arise in the future, the Court will be
hailed as one of humanity’s greatest achievements”.
As we observe, often with horror and disbelief,
what is happening in some parts of the world today,
we cannot avoid the conclusion that, with the very
existence of the Court and its near pristine record of
performance, we are indeed reaping the fruits of that
long-held vision for the creation of the world’s first
permanent, treaty-based, international criminal court
to investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of the
worst crimes committed against humanity. While the
primary mission of the Court is accountability, it also
discourages impunity. Trinidad and Tobago therefore
proudly reaffirms its unwavering commitment to
the Court, contributing as it does to the elevation
of humanity.
Trinidad and Tobago applauds the critical and
necessary role played by the ICC in assisting States to
strengthen their institutions, as well as promoting peace
and justice, in alignment with Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 16. As such, the ICC continues to be a
beacon of hope for victims of atrocities who are seeking
justice. Such victims often include the most vulnerable
groups in society, such as women and children.
As a long-standing supporter and advocate of the
Court, Trinidad and Tobago is convinced that events
around the world confirm that if, in fact, the Court
did not exist, it would have had to be created in order
to ensure accountability for what appears to be an
increasing number of acts of impunity. We therefore
underscore the continuing importance of preventing
such crimes and ensuring that those responsible do not
escape justice. It is against that background that Trinidad
and Tobago continues to urge States to cooperate with
the ICC, as necessary, at all stages of investigations
and proceedings, including in the issuance of arrest
warrants and the transfer of suspects to be tried by
the Court. In that regard, it is our considered view that

A/77/PV.23

those that refuse to cooperate with the Court are, in
effect, actively contributing to a culture of impunity,
thereby weakening the rule of law; besides which, such
inaction amounts to an affront to victims and survivors
of the most egregious crimes against humankind.
Trinidad and Tobago is not unaware that there exists,
in some quarters, a certain misconception of the Court
as in some way posing a threat to national sovereignty.
On the contrary, there is a pervasive lack of evidence
to support that view, which seems to ignore the fact
that, consistent with the principle of complementarity,
the jurisdiction of the Court can be invoked only when
States are either unable or unwilling to prosecute those
accused of having committed crimes falling within the
competence of the Court. Based on international law,
the presumption of innocence has universal appeal and
an individual is presumed innocent until proven guilty.
Therefore, no individual or State should fear the ICC,
as it is a court of last resort.
Trinidad and Tobago views the protection and
advancement of gender equity and gender equality
within the overall framework of the promotion and
protection of human rights. We welcome the progressive
initiatives the ICC has undertaken in the realm of
gender equality and gender equity and commend the
Court for its activism in that area. We have noted that
gender perspectives are important considerations in ICC
proceedings, including when reparations are ordered to
victims. Further, Trinidad and Tobago remains hugely
gratified that there is gender balance among the Court’s
current 18 judges. We are honoured to be counted among
those States that have contributed to the attainment of
gender balance among the sitting judges, following the
elevation of our learned countrywoman, Justice Althea
Alexis-Windsor, to the bench in 2020.
In alignment with SDG 16, sustainable development
can be achieved only where there is unwavering
commitment to peace, justice and strong institutions.
It is in this context that Trinidad and Tobago renews its
encouragement to all States that have not yet done so to
ratify and fully implement the Rome Statute of the ICC.
We continue to applaud the critical role played by
the Trust Fund for Victims by assisting victims and
survivors to return to a dignified livelihood in their
communities. In that regard, it is very pleasing to note
that over the reporting period, reparations to victims
continued to gain prominence in the Court’s work, with
the Trust Fund implementing reparation orders in four

22-662883/28

A/77/PV.23

cases, alongside projects benefitting more than 17,000
victims. We renew our call, yet again, on States and
other entities in a position to do so to contribute to the
Trust Fund.
Finally, in manifestation of our abiding faith in the
Court and in its noble mission, I am pleased to confirm
that Trinidad and Tobago has co-sponsored draft
resolution A/77/L.7, on the report of the International
Criminal Court, and that we will continue to advocate
robustly for the universalization of the Rome Statute.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland would like to
reinforce the support for the Court expressed by the
observer of the EU with remarks in our national capacity.
At the outset, we wish to express our gratitude to
President Piotr Hofmański for presenting the annual
report (see A/77/305) of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for 2021-2022 (see A/77/PV.22). The report
illustrates how active the Court has been over the past
year and demonstrates how prominently it figures in
the architecture of international criminal justice.
Poland has asked for the floor in this debate
because a war continues to rage in Ukraine, just beyond
our eastern border, with international crimes being
committed by the Russian Federation on an unimaginable
scale. Under such circumstances, we believe that the
Court’s role is of fundamental importance, as it has the
mandate and authority to bring justice to the victims
of international crimes and mete out punishment to the
perpetrators, with no right of veto.
The world is now aware that atrocities have occurred
in Ukraine on a scale not seen in Europe since the
Second World War. That realization prompted 43 States
parties, including Poland, to notify the ICC Prosecutor
under article 14 of the Statute and ask him to open an
investigation into the crimes committed in Ukraine. As
Ukraine is not a party to the Statute, that step enabled
the Prosecutor of the Court to exercise jurisdiction,
arising from the Ukrainian declaration under article
12 (3) of the Statute in a more expeditious manner.
While both actions were a very much needed
response to this unprecedented and ongoing situation, it
is worth reflecting in that context the need for universal
application of the Rome Statute. Currently, the ICC has
limited jurisdiction, applicable to crimes committed on
the territories of States parties, by nationals of States
parties or in situations referred to the ICC Prosecutor
by the Security Council. Only through universal
4/28

31/10/2022

ratification of the Rome Statute by all States will the
ICC jurisdiction — its power to investigate, prosecute
and try cases — be enlarged to encompass allegations
of international crimes committed by any person in any
place. We should strive for such an optimal solution, for
only then will the system of international justice based
on the Rome Statute become airtight and effective.
Poland therefore takes this opportunity to appeal to
all States that have not yet done so to accede to the
Rome Statute.
Poland also wishes to emphasize the vital
importance of close cooperation between States and the
Court, especially States parties to the Rome Statute.
Without such cooperation, the Court cannot function
properly. The ICC requires multidimensional support
on the part of the States parties, particularly regarding
the provision of necessary funding. Questions relating
to funding will be discussed and resolved at the
upcoming Assembly of States Parties in The Hague.
However, I would like to underline one more thing right
now — namely, the importance of timely contributions.
They are absolutely indispensable to financing ICC
activities and help determine its ability to deliver
justice for victims.
In addressing the General Assembly, I would
like to share our conviction that the underlying goals
of the Rome Statute coincide with the principles and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations. The
ICC has been granted jurisdiction over atrocity crimes
because they are understood as threats to international
peace and security. Thus, the Court deserves the full
cooperation of all United Nations Member States. We
encourage all States to consider the Court as a partner
in the joint pursuit of justice and peace. Indeed, a strong
and robust ICC constitutes a guarantee that the world
will no longer suffer the mass atrocities that occurred
in some of the darkest moments of our history.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom thanks President Hofmański for
the annual report (see A/77/305) of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and his presentation today (see
A/77/PV.22). We congratulate Nazhat Shameen Khan
and Mame Mandiaye Niang on their election as Deputy
Prosecutors of the Court.
The United Kingdom is pleased to note that the
Court has been able to effectively deliver on its mandate
in spite of the challenges posed by the pandemic. In
particular, we note the commencement of the trial of
22-66288

31/10/2022

Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman — the first trial
following a referral by the Security Council — and
the continuation of the trial of Alfred Yekatom and
Patrice-Edouard Ngaïsonna; the issuing of three arrest
warrants in the situation in Georgia; the commencement
of an investigation into the situation in Ukraine,
following a referral supported by 43 States parties;
and the conclusion of a number of preliminary
examinations, including those concerning Colombia
and Venezuela. We note the impressive numbers of
victims who participated in proceedings of the Court in
the reporting period.
Ensuring accountability for the most serious crimes
of international concern is a fundamental element of
the United Kingdom’s foreign policy. Accountability is
vital to ensuring justice for victim and an important
element in ensuring and maintaining sustainable
peace. The ICC has a crucial role to play in delivering
that accountability. Consequently, the United Kingdom
is and will remain a consistently strong supporter of
the Court, as it has been since its establishment under
the Rome Statute. The United Kingdom also wants to
see the Court strengthened so that it can best serve
international justice.
The United Kingdom encourages all States
parties to continue to support Prosecutor Khan in his
endeavours to hold to account those who commit the
most heinous crimes and to help achieve justice for the
victims of those crimes. We welcome his stated wish,
where possible, to work closely with States and to form
partnerships with national authorities in line with the
principle of complementarity. We also welcome his
prioritization of cases referred by the Security Council
and his openness to strengthening links with the
Security Council where their respective mandates can
be mutually reinforcing.
The Court has seen successes and significant
change over the past year, but it still requires the active
cooperation and support of States. The United Kingdom
continues to provide significant financial, practical and
political support to the Court and urges other States to
do so also. The United Kingdom has been a supporter of
the reforms necessary to enable the Court to address the
range of challenges it faces efficiently and effectively.
The Court has a pivotal role to play in global
efforts to end impunity for the most serious crimes
of international concern by holding perpetrators to
account and achieving justice for victims. The United

A/77/PV.23

Kingdom remains committed to continuing to support
the Court and to working together with States parties
and the Court to ensure that it is an efficient and
effective Court and that its vital mandate is fulfilled.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank the President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge
Hofmański, for presenting (see A/77/PV.22) the Court’s
annual report (see A/77/305).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States, and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
It is our consensually accepted responsibility to
protect populations from atrocity crimes, reflecting
the core values of the Charter of the United Nations.
By combating impunity for the most serious crimes
and punishing their perpetrators, the ICC also plays
a deterrent role. For the past 20 years, it has sent the
message that the perpetrators of atrocity crimes will
be held accountable. Since those crimes remain real
and present, universal ratification and the full national
implementation of the Rome Statute are required. We
call upon those Member States that have not yet ratified
the Rome Statute, including its amendments, to do so.
Croatia suffered a brutal aggression in the 1990s,
accompanied by war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We looked to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), established
by the Security Council, to shield our citizens from
grave breaches of international humanitarian law and
to punish perpetrators and their sponsors. The ICTY is
a reminder that the Security Council can and should act
to ensure accountability for atrocity crimes. Therefore,
we call on the Security Council to refrain from using
the veto in cases of mass atrocities and to use its right of
their referral to the ICC, as appropriate. Such referrals
empower the ICC to investigate all four crimes under
the Rome Statute, including the crime of aggression,
without any further conditions.
We must all work together to ensure that the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes are brought to
justice. We owe that to the victims of such horrendous
crimes. The request of 43 States, including Croatia,
that the ICC act on crimes that are being committed in
Ukraine is a clear attempt to advance the fight against
impunity and prevent such crimes from happening
again anywhere around the world.

22-662885/28

A/77/PV.23

In order to make the Court stronger and more
effective, we attach great importance to common
efforts aimed at reviewing the functioning of the
Court and commend progress in the assessment of the
Independent Expert Review recommendations. It is our
collective responsibility to ensure the Court’s ability to
carry out its mandate independently and impartially.
We also reiterate the importance of the Court
engaging and cooperating with other international
mechanisms established to ascertain facts related to
alleged violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law, in view of facilitating
their prosecution.
The ICC is a court of last resort that complements
but does not replace national courts, which have the
primary responsibility for bringing offenders to justice.
The subject of complementarity cannot be addressed
without raising the question of cooperation, and we
urge all States to ensure full cooperation with the Court.
Compliance is imperative, since failing to cooperate
with the Court undermines the effective administration
of justice and the rules-based international order. It is
of the utmost importance that the core principles of the
Rome Statute not be called into question.
Croatia welcomes the fact that draft resolution
A/77/L.7, entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”, includes updated language, and we hope that
it will be adopted by consensus, as it has been on
previous occasions.
To conclude, I would reiterate our strong
support for the International Criminal Court as a
powerful instrument to fight impunity, as well as to
promote justice, accountability and the rules-based
international order.
Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
President Piotr Hofmański for his comprehensive
presentation (see A/77/PV.22). My delegation also
welcomes the significant progress achieved in the fight
against impunity during the reporting period.
There is no doubt that the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has played a significant role over the 20
years since the entry into force of the Rome Statute
and contributed to the successful implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals. There are already
signs of a growing deterrent effect as a result of the
permanent presence of the ICC. The question is whether
the international community is prepared to sustain the
6/28

31/10/2022

Rome Statute system for the next 20 years. By adopting
the Rome Statute, States established not just a Court, but
an entire system of international justice. The architecture
of the system splits responsibilities, whereby the ICC
carries out judicial work but enforcement is devolved
to the States. Therefore, cooperation remains an area
of vital importance to the judicial efficiency of the
ICC and any lack of cooperation can seriously harm
its functions.
The success of our fight against impunity hinges not
only on adequate cooperation, but also on the universal
jurisdiction of the Rome Statute. The Republic of
Korea is currently serving as a focal point of the ICC
Assembly of States Parties to promote the universality
of the Rome Statute, together with the Netherlands. In
Brussels in May, the co-focal points, together with the
ICC and civil society organizations, hosted a high-level
seminar on the universality of the Rome Statute and the
importance of joining the International Criminal Court.
In July in Seoul, the Republic of Korea also organized
a luncheon meeting to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary. I would like to take this opportunity to
appreciate members’ active participation in these events.
We welcome the efforts of States parties and the
court to assess and implement the recommendations
of the Independent Expert Review. I believe that
our active engagement in the implementation of the
recommendations will significantly contribute to
overcoming obstacles the Court has been facing.
It is our hope that the Court will carefully consider
equitable geographical representation in implementing
related recommendations arising from the Independent
Expert Review. My delegation emphasizes that equitable
geographical distribution will benefit the Court by
ensuring a diversity of perspectives, which increases
creative approaches and remains crucial in addressing
perception challenges and advancing the universality of
the Rome Statute.
I would like to point out that the new Administration
of the Republic of Korea is striving to strengthen our
country’s role as a global pivotal State, commensurate
with its status in the international arena. In that vein, the
Republic of Korea will continue our active involvement
in and contribution to the development of the ICC.
Mr. Ramírez Baca (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Piotr Hofmański, for
presenting his report (see A/77/PV.22). The report (see
22-66288

31/10/2022

A/77/305) gives an account of the growing activity and
progress of the Court, but its challenges are also evident.
Costa Rica joins in the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
In its 20 years of activity, the International Criminal
Court has responded to the demand for justice from
the victims of those intolerable crimes, convicting in
particular those guilty of sexual violence, the illegal
recruitment of child soldiers or the destruction of
cultural heritage.
The International Criminal Court is more important
today than ever. The international community needs
to have the security and confidence that it has at its
disposal an independent and impartial judicial body so
that the worst international crimes, such as genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and the crime of
aggression do not go unpunished. International criminal
law is a necessity in the face of non-compliance with
domestic criminal law. If the latter is the last option
within the punitive system, international criminal law
is the last ratio of the last ratio, when the entire punitive
system has already failed to respond to the most serious
crimes known to the human species.
In analysing the report, Costa Rica wishes to point
out three aspects.
First of all, Costa Rica welcomes the initiation of
a trial based on a referral from the Security Council
as a positive sign that highlights the complementarity
of the Court and the Security Council in those cases
in which the Court lacks direct competence in seeking
accountability for especially serious crimes. Much
remains to be done to ensure peace and justice, but
combating the culture of impunity and preventing
future human rights violations through cooperation
between the Security Council and the ICC is one way
to do so.
Secondly, for Costa Rica it is essential that the
States parties reinforce our firm political and financial
commitment to meeting the growing volume of work,
as evidenced by the report before us, and to further
expanding the activities carried out by the Court in
compliance with its mandate. Without the endowment
of stable, predictable and sufficient resources, the
international community is undermining its main tool
to prevent and suppress atrocities.
Costa Rica sees the next Assembly of States
Parties as a golden opportunity to seriously assess

A/77/PV.23

the discrepancy between the high workload and the
resources available to the Court and to analyse the
effects of the zero-growth approach. That approach
deprives the Court of the resources it needs to fulfil
and strengthen its mandate and makes us dependent on
voluntary contributions. This year’s budget discussion
will allow us to make necessary changes around the
Court’s resources with a view to long-term planning
and sustainability, since voluntary contributions are a
complementary mechanism that does not and will never
replace obligations assumed by the States parties.
At this point, Costa Rica calls for the adoption
of a budget that is consistent with all the Court’s
dependencies, under the principle of a single Court, and
urges with the utmost respect those States parties that
are behind in their quotas to update as soon as possible. It
is impossible to carry out comprehensive investigations
without funds, without basic security or without the
cooperation — let alone the full consent — of the host
country or the Security Council, which authorizes such
investigations. Those are not incidental complaints, but
speak to the feasibility of any successful ICC effort to
end impunity and lay the foundation for sustainable
national reconciliation.
Thirdly, the next Assembly of States Parties will
also be a new opportunity to develop a strategy that
includes mechanisms to increase and improve the
architecture of cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and that, in addition, directs us
towards the universalization of the Rome Statute.
However, improving our collaborative architecture
requires courageously confronting the threats and
attacks, in different parts of the world, against civil
society organizations and human rights defenders
who cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Cooperating with the Court should not be an act of
extreme bravery that endangers the lives of people
seeking justice and respect for the fundamental rights
and freedoms of others.
If the international community aspires to
sustainable peace, justice cannot be relegated to the
background in the resolution of any conflict. Justice
has often been sacrificed to achieve peace, which is
why a culture of impunity prevails in many countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. However, we are
in a new era — a new era of accountability in which
perpetrators can no longer trust that their crimes will
go unpunished.

22-662887/28

A/77/PV.23

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank
President Hofmański (see A/77/PV.22) for presenting
the annual report (see A/77/305) of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to the Assembly. Having
discussed the work of the International Court of Justice
in the context of International Law Week, today’s debate
gives us the opportunity for an exchange on the work of
the ICC, one of the biggest achievements in the field of
international justice. The strong participation today is
testimony to the Court’s continued central and, indeed,
enhanced importance at a time when international law
has come under systematic attack.
We welcome the continued global reach of the
Court’s work, in line with its mandate and as a reflection
of events around the world. At the same time, its reach
continues to be limited by a lack of progress with respect
to the universality of the Rome Statute and the political
deadlock in the Security Council, which has failed to
refer any situation to the Court in over a decade, despite
the obvious and urgent need to do so. With respect to
the strategic decisions made by the Chief Prosecutor
of the Court, we welcome the emphasis his Office is
placing on the situations that have been referred to
the Court by the Council and look forward to concrete
outcomes in the Libya investigation, as well as greater
cooperation between the Sudan and the ICC.
We also wish to commend the attention the
Prosecutor is attaching to the investigation of the one
crime committed in Myanmar over which the ICC is
currently able to exercise jurisdiction. We hope that
the full jurisdictional reach will be possible soon,
particularly in light of the ongoing attack of Myanmar’s
military regime against its own civilian population.
We are glad to see that the Assembly has finally
updated its resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the ICC. The changes we have
agreed on together are long overdue and the result of
a dynamic and constructive negotiation. We thank
our partners from the Group of African States, in
particular, for the leadership role they have played in
that process, as well as the Netherlands for facilitating
the process inclusively and transparently. We welcome
the fact that States that have yet to join the Rome Statute
are engaging in this exercise, as the Court’s work is
indeed of direct relevance to the entire United Nations
membership. The Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, replicated in
article 6 of the Rome Statute, is among the most widely
ratified treaties elaborated in the United Nations
8/28

31/10/2022

system. The Geneva Conventions, on which article 8 is
based, enjoy near universal support.
Recent months have starkly underlined the most
immediate relevance of the Rome Statute to everyone
assembled in this Hall. Article 8 bis of the Rome
Statute contains the internationally agreed definition
of the crime of aggression, which complements the
core provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
on the use of force by creating individual criminal
responsibility for them. That definition, agreed by
consensus in a process that involved all United Nations
Member States, not just ICC States parties, is of
crucial importance.
The General Assembly has determined, both in
March and more recently earlier this month, that acts
of aggression have been committed against Ukraine, in
a manifest violation of the United Nations Charter by
their character, gravity and scale. We very much regret
that the ICC is unable to exercise its jurisdiction over
that crime in this case, due to its restricted jurisdictional
regime over the crime of aggression. Addressing that
shortcoming will be a task for ICC States parties, which
will meet about a month from now for their annual
gathering in The Hague.
In the meantime, there are other ways for us in
New York to ensure accountability for that most brazen
attack on the United Nations Charter since the creation
of the United Nations. The Security Council has the
competence to refer the crime of aggression situation
to the ICC and can thus underline the central role of
the ICC in fighting impunity for all of the most serious
crimes under international law. Absent that — or
indeed, after a predictable veto in the Council — we
recall that the Assembly can play a central role in
creating a special tribunal to that effect. We remain
committed to exploring options to do so. Our collective
decision in that respect goes far beyond the aggression
against Ukraine; it is a fork in the road on our path
to ensuring accountability for the crime of aggression
anywhere, committed by anyone and against anyone.
Next year, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Rome Statute, one of the big
achievements in the history of multilateral treatymaking. We hope that we will be joined by more
partners in the community of State parties and that
more States will ratify the Kampala amendments on the
crime of aggression, as Peru has done just recently. We
thank Peru for taking that important step. The Rome
22-66288

31/10/2022

Statute is a treaty of the highest quality that has stood
the test of time. It is also a dynamic document that
remains open to reflect the progressive development of
international law.
In standing up for its integrity, we will continue
to stand up for two key principles in particular that are
at the core of its authority. The first is the principle of
judicial and prosecutorial independence, which requires
States to defend the Court when it comes under political
attack, as has happened regularly in the past. In that
respect, we must also protect civil society organizations
cooperating with the Court from reprisals against
them. The second is the principle of complementarity,
which explicitly reaffirms the sovereign responsibility
of States to investigate and prosecute Rome Statute
crimes and stipulates that the Court becomes active
only where States are unable or unwilling to live up to
their obligations in that respect.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the statement made by the
delegation of the European Union (see A/77/PV.22). We
also thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for having
coordinated and facilitated draft resolution A/77/L.7,
on the report of the International Criminal Court. (see
A/77/305)
I thank the President of the Court, Judge Piotr
Hofmański, for his detailed presentation of the Court’s
annual report on its activities in 2021 and 2022 (see
A/77/PV.22). I take this opportunity to congratulate
Deputy Prosecutors Nazhat Shameem Khan and Mame
Mandiaye Niang, elected last December. We reiterate
our support and our confidence in them and wish them
full success in the essential missions entrusted to them
by the States parties.
France reiterates its constant and unwavering
support for the International Criminal Court. It
commends the central role of the Court in the fight
against impunity for the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes. It should be recalled, in that regard, that
the Court is the only permanent international criminal
jurisdiction with a universal vocation.
While Russia has been waging a war of aggression
against Ukraine for more than eight months, France
has mobilized from the start of the conflict to ensure
that no one responsible for atrocities enjoys impunity.
That is why, in addition to its annual contribution to the
Court’s regular budget, France has made an exceptional
voluntary contribution of €500,000 and will make staff

A/77/PV.23

from the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of the
Interior available to the Court Prosecutor’s Office to
help it cope with the increase in its activities. France
calls on all States parties to the Rome Statute to fulfil
their obligations in respect of contributions to the
regular budget of the Court without delay.
My delegation would also like to emphasize
four points.
First, the cooperation, assistance and support of
States — whether or not they are parties to the Rome
Statute — and of the United Nations continue to be
essential for the Court to be able to carry out its missions.
We urge all States to cooperate closely with the Court,
in particular by ensuring the speedy execution of arrest
warrants. Cooperation with the Court also requires that
it be provided with the financial means necessary for
the success of its mandate.
Secondly, my delegation recalls its attachment to
the independence of the Court, enshrined in articles 40
and 42 of the Statute, and undertakes to firmly combat
any attempt at interference aimed at obstructing the
proper exercise of justice.
Thirdly, a review process aimed at strengthening
the Court and making it more effective is under way.
The recommendations of the independent experts are
being considered by the Court and the States parties,
and measures have already been implemented. France
welcomes that commitment and reiterates its support
for reforms that will help make the Court’s work more
effective and strengthen its credibility.
Finally, my delegation stresses the importance of
multilingualism and the balance of legal traditions,
which constitute a guarantee of legitimacy and
efficiency. The staff of the Court and its working
methods must reflect those values and
​​
that diversity.
More than ever, France calls on the members of the
Assembly to give their full support to the International
Criminal Court. Almost 25 years after its signing, the
Rome Statute is a pillar of a law-based international
order and should be ratified by the international
community as a whole.
Mr. Smyth (Ireland): Ireland associates itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union
and its member States (see A/77/PV.22).
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for its annual report

22-662889/28

A/77/PV.23

to the United Nations (see A/77/305) and President
Hofmański for his presentation today (see A/77/PV.22),
outlining what has been an important and busy year in
the life of the Court.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Rome Statute. It is an opportune
time to reflect on what the Court and the international
community have achieved since the first ever permanent
international court with the jurisdiction to prosecute the
most serious international crimes opened its doors two
decades ago. The ICC has experienced some growing
pains since its establishment, as is to be expected in any
significant endeavour. However, the Court’s increasing
workload, outlined in the annual report, demonstrates
how the institution has matured and developed into
a sustainable and integral part of the international
criminal justice system.
This anniversary falls at a significant moment,
when the need for an international system of criminal
justice has rarely been more apparent. Ireland
steadfastly supports the work of the Court as it pursues
accountability and fights impunity in all situations
outlined in its report. All States parties must uphold
the independence of the ICC, just as they must protect
the Court, its officials and those cooperating with it
from threats, sanctions and attacks. In that regard, we
are concerned by reports of threats and intimidation
directed at some civil society organizations cooperating
with the Court. We welcome the Bureau’s adoption of a
strategy for responding to attacks on the Court and look
forward to updates from the President of the Assembly
of States Parties on its implementation.
Real justice cannot be achieved without the
meaningful participation of those most affected by
the crimes being prosecuted. Victims have always
been at the heart of the Rome Statute framework.
The Trust Fund for Victims is, for many affected
communities, the most potent presence of the Court
in their lives. Of particular note is the recent increase
in its reparations mandate, with the Trust Fund now
overseeing reparations programmes in five cases.
Those programmes are essential to promoting recovery
among those who have suffered from the most appalling
atrocities, contributing to lasting peace and stability in
the affected regions.
Ireland continues to be a staunch supporter of the
restorative vision of justice that informs the Trust Fund
under the Rome Statute framework. We are pleased
10/28

31/10/2022

that Ireland’s former Ambassador to Uganda and to the
Netherlands, Kevin Kelly, was appointed to the Trust
Fund’s Board of Directors during the reporting period,
bringing his experience in promoting the rights of
victims to the Board.
Furthermore, Ireland, in close cooperation with the
Government of Uganda, was proud to lead a visiting
delegation of representatives from 13 States and the
European Union to observe the work of the Trust Fund
in northern Uganda last month. The mission provided
participants with an important opportunity to see the
work of the Trust Fund and its implementing partners
on the ground, as well as for victims to openly share
details of their experiences and needs. It reinforced
the importance of the Trust Fund for Victims and its
essential role as the most visible aspect of the ICC in
many affected communities. We encourage all States to
support its work.
The importance of cooperation between States and
the ICC is a thread that runs through every aspect of
this year’s annual report. The ICC depends on States
parties to enforce the Rome Statute system. We join the
Court in calling on States parties and others to provide
the necessary assistance to the Court for the arrest and
surrender of individuals subject to ICC arrest warrants.
Ireland is pleased to see that the present report
outlines the strong level of cooperation ongoing between
the ICC and the United Nations. We believe that the
United Nations and the ICC have complementary
mandates and should work to reinforce each other. As
an elected member of the Security Council, Ireland is
committed to strengthening the relationship between
the Court and the Council. With the commencement of
the first judicial proceedings in the Darfur referral, we
have seen glimpses of what can be achieved through
that relationship. It is in that spirit that Ireland, together
with 11 sponsors, convened an Arria Formula meeting
to discuss the relationship between the Court and the
Council in June. Many useful suggestions on how to
strengthen the relationship were discussed and are
contained in the recently published Chair’s summary
of the meeting.
The Court has come a long way in its 20 years
of operation. However, we are well aware that it has
the potential to achieve more. States parties have a
responsibility to make this happen for the sake of
victims. That is why Ireland supports the provision
of sufficient regular budget resources to the Court
22-66288

31/10/2022

to match its increasing workload. It is also why we
support the work of the review process, aimed at
further strengthening the ICC and Rome Statute
system, particularly as we move from reviewing the
recommendations of the Independent Expert Review to
implementing them.
To conclude, in order to implement the principles
of the Rome Statute it is essential that we work
together. We are committed to the universality of the
Rome Statute. The wider support for the International
Criminal Court is, the greater the chance that the core
principles underlying the Statute will be respected. We
encourage all States that have not already done so to
become parties to the Rome Statute.
Mr. Germeaux (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (see A/77/PV.22).
Allow me to supplement it with considerations in my
national capacity.
I thank the President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Judge Piotr Hofmański, for his briefing
on the activities of the Court (see A/77/PV.22). I
also thank the Netherlands for introducing draft
resolution A/77/L.7, on the ICC report (see A/77/305).
Luxembourg is a co-sponsor and welcomes the fact that
it is a substantial update compared to previous years’
resolutions.
I would like to reaffirm Luxembourg’s unwavering
support for the international criminal justice system,
embodied in particular by the International Criminal
Court, the twentieth anniversary of which we are
celebrating this year. The ICC is an indispensable
instrument of the international community to
fight impunity and promote an international rulesbased order. As serious crimes that affect the entire
international community continue to be committed,
it is more important than ever to uphold the principles
and values of
​​ international criminal justice enshrined
in the Rome Statute.
The ICC is of paramount importance in ensuring
the accountability of perpetrators for the most serious
crimes and in bringing justice to victims, who must be
at the centre of our efforts. In all situations before the
ICC, the role of the Court is more crucial than ever.
Luxembourg therefore welcomes the growing activity
of the Court. The sharp increase in the number of
trials and investigations demonstrates that the Court is
working. It is important that the ICC have resources

A/77/PV.23

commensurate with its workload, allowing it to fully
discharge its mandate.
The promotion of criminal justice is essential to
ensuring and maintaining international peace and
security. Indeed, it cannot be stressed enough that
peace and justice go hand-in-hand and are mutually
reinforcing. That link between justice and peace
appears even more clearly in the light of developments
during the current year.
With regard to the situation in Ukraine, we
welcome the fact that, back on 2 March, the ICC
Prosecutor opened an investigation following reports
of atrocities perpetrated by Russian armed forces in the
context of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
Luxembourg fully supports the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor and the investigators on the ground, who
often work in difficult conditions.
The ICC investigation does not, however, cover the
crime of aggression, for which the Security Council has
the power to seize the Prosecutor of the Court. If the
Council is unable to exercise that power, other options
should be explored to ensure that this act of aggression
against a sovereign State does not go unaccountable.
In carrying out the mission entrusted to it, the Court
depends on cooperation to ensure that the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes are held accountable. To
date, 14 arrest warrants remain open, six of which
relate to situations referred to the Court by the Security
Council. It is essential that the Council ensure an
effective follow-up in that respect.
Like President Hofmański and other speakers
before me, I call on States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Rome Statute. The universality of the Statute
remains paramount, and each accession increases the
collective strength of the international system based
on the rule of law. The same goes for the ratification
of the amendments to the Rome Statute, including the
Kampala amendments on the crime of aggression, as
well as the recent amendment including the deliberate
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare among
war crimes, over which the Court has jurisdiction in
armed conflicts not of an international character.
It cannot be emphasized enough that the Court is
complementary to national judicial systems and does
not seek to replace them. States are called upon in
the first instance to ensure effective and fair justice,
with the Court acting only as a last resort. In order for

22-6628811/28

A/77/PV.23

the Court to be fully prepared to face the challenges
ahead, Luxembourg welcomes the progress made on
the recommendations resulting from the review by the
independent experts. Under the aegis of the Assembly
of States Parties, the review mechanism is an important
tool to further strengthen the Court’s capacity to
deliver justice.
I conclude by commending the action of civil
society, which played an important role in establishing
the Court and continues to defend the impartial and
independent mandate of the ICC.
Mrs.
Frazier
(Malta):
Malta
welcomes
the opportunity to reiterate our support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and to highlight its
importance as an integral component of the rules-based
legal order and an essential feature of the collective
pursuit of international criminal justice and the fight
against impunity.
At the outset, I wish to thank the International
Criminal Court for its annual report (see A/77/305).
We also thank President Hofmański for his informative
briefing on the important work of the Court (see
A/77/ PV.22).
Malta aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (see A/77/PV.22) and its
member States.
It is heartening to see the progress made over the
past year, with the Court’s trial activity being at an
unprecedented level. The role of the ICC in ensuring
accountability is as vital as ever because, regrettably,
the most serious international crimes continue to
occur in different parts of the world. In that regard,
we welcome the opening of new investigations by the
Prosecutor, including those concerning the situation in
Ukraine, for which referral was made by various States,
including my own. No effort should be spared to ensure
timely accountability.
Malta welcomes the cooperation of the Court
and the United Nations on various issues, and we
encourage the operational assistance given to the court
by United Nations entities in the field. Nevertheless,
as an elected member of the Security Council for the
term 2023-2024, Malta emphasizes that the relationship
between the Court and the Security Council calls for
improvement. The Rome Statute empowers the Security
Council to refer situations to the Court, but only two
situations — those in Darfur and Libya — have been
12/28

31/10/2022

referred to date. There is a need for consistency and
objectivity with respect to referrals if we truly want to
pursue international criminal justice for all. Moreover,
when a referral is made, the Security Council must
ensure follow-up and call on the relevant States to
cooperate with the Court.
The cooperation, assistance and support of
States parties and other States remain essential to the
Court’s operations. We want to reiterate the call of the
Court on all States to respect the independence and
integrity of the Court and to cooperate actively with
its investigations. Accountability cannot be achieved
without our full cooperation.
Civil society organizations are critical partners
in our joint efforts towards justice. The activities they
undertake to raise awareness of the Court and promote
the universal ratification and full implementation of
the Rome Statute are commendable. In that regard,
we welcome the practical guidelines for civil society
organizations on documenting core international
crimes, such as war crimes and crimes against humanity,
issued by the European Union Agency for Criminal
Justice Cooperation and the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court.
Before concluding, let specifically mention the
victims, who are and must remain at the centre of the
Rome Statute framework. We must welcome the fact
that reparations to victims continue to gain prominence
in the Court’s work. In that regard, the work of the
Trust Fund for Victims is indispensable. Impunity sows
the seeds of further violence. Ensuring accountability
for the victims is therefore essential if we are to ever
stop this cycle of violence. The ICC offers the hope that
accountability can prevail over power, and it is for that
reason that we support the universality of the Rome
Statue and encourage all States that have not already
done so to become parties.
For those reasons, we have co-sponsored draft
resolution A/77/L.7, on the report of the International
Criminal Court, and thank the Netherlands for its
efforts in facilitating the draft text.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone is pleased to join debate on the agenda
item “Report of the International Criminal Court”. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the African States parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court (see A/77/PV.22).
22-66288

31/10/2022

We welcome to our debate the leadership of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and commend
their dedication in carrying out its important mandate
as an independent and impartial judicial institution,
committed to upholding and defending the principles
and values enshrined in the Rome Statute, in the
universal resolve to end impunity for atrocity crimes.
That commitment to the mandate of the Court is needed
now more than ever.
We thank the President of the Court, Judge
Hofmański, for his presentation (see A/77/PV.22)
and the Secretary-General for his note and reports,
contained in documents A/77/305, A/77/306 and
A/77/307, respectively. We thank the United Nations
system for its vital cooperation with the Court and for
providing facilities and services to the ICC.
Still on the subject of the leadership of the ICC, we
note that the Assembly of State Parties and the Court
are in the process of electing the next Registrar of
the ICC. Like the African States parties, we take this
opportunity to emphasize the need for the principle of
equitable geographic representation, as well as gender
balance in the election process, to be taken into account.
That is significant if the Court is to attain and be seen
to reflect the universal character to which it aspires.
We take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
current Registrar, Mr. Peter Lewis, for leading the work
of the Registry at a critical and consequential time for
the Court. We thank him for his excellent contributions,
his dedication and for implanting the sense of stability
when it is needed the most.
In our statement on this item at the seventy-sixth
session, we noted that
“With the current spate of continuing
perpetration of atrocity crimes, the relevance of
the ICC’s mandate cannot be overstated, and the
need for continuing cooperation by and with the
United Nations to address accountability gaps in
line with the Charter of the United Nations cannot
be overemphasized.” (A/76/PV.29, p. 12)
That is as true for last year as it is true today.
We acknowledge, as indicated in the report
contained in document /77/305, that the Court, in its
twentieth anniversary year, has made significant
progress and expanded its activities despite the
challenges caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Since its establishment, the Court has opened 31 cases,

A/77/PV.23

involving 50 suspects or accused. Investigations have
also been opened with regard to 17 situations with an
almost universal regional spread.
We take note of the notable judicial developments,
including
“two trials commenced, two trials continued, and
a fifth one entered the preparation phase, bringing
the Court’s trial activity to an unprecedented level.
Three new arrest warrants were issued, and a fourth
one was unsealed; one suspect was transferred
to the Court; and three new investigations were
opened. Reparations to victims continued to gain
prominence in the Court’s work, with the Trust
Fund for Victims implementing reparation orders in
four cases, alongside assistance projects benefiting
more than 17,000 victims.” (A/77/305, summary)
On other notable developments, in addition to its
judicial and prosecutorial activities, we are pleased to
see that the Court continued to engage actively in the
review process aimed at strengthening the institution
and the wider Rome Statute system.
The delegation of Sierra Leone is pleased of its
role and active engagement in the review process, and
the work of the review mechanism. We continue to
commend the review mechanism established by and
under the auspices of the Assembly of States Parties,
the work done and the results achieved thus far. We
look forward to the conclusion of the work of the
review mechanism, as informed by the comprehensive
action plan.
Sierra Leone calls on States parties and all
stakeholders to continue their support and constructive
engagement with the Review Mechanism, and the
Assembly of States Parties mandates undertaking
the review-related work, aimed at improving the
performance, efficiency and effectiveness of the
Court’s operation. We commend the Court and its focal
points for their efforts in the review process.
On issues relating to victims, Sierra Leone
continues to reaffirm its support to the Court as a way
of reiterating its commitment to the victims. It is critical
to always remember that at the heart of the work of the
Court are the victims, on whose behalf we have this
accountability system. We therefore acknowledge and
commend the Trust Fund for Victims for the discharge
of its mandate. As the Assembly of States Parties and
the relevant Court organs and bodies will engage on

22-6628813/28

A/77/PV.23

governance of the Trust Fund for Victims and the
evolution of its reparation and assistance mandates, we
assure them of our political will and support.
Returning to the issue of cooperation between the
ICC and the United Nations, I am pleased to inform
the General Assembly of Sierra Leone’s bid for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the
term 2024-2025, with elections to the held in June
2023. With regard to the situation in Darfur, since the
trial of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, the first
trial before the Court on the basis of a referral by the
Security Council, began on 5 April, the significant role
of the Security Council within the Rome State system
has been clearly evident. The Court and the Security
Council indeed have
“different yet complementary roles in addressing
the gravest crimes of concern to the international
community, which have the potential to destabilize
international peace and security. The Council’s
prerogative to refer a situation to the Court can help
to promote accountability in situations where grave
crimes may have been committed but the Court
lacks jurisdiction” (ibid., para. 75).
Thus, in canvassing for Member States’ support,
we are further pleased to inform the Assembly that, as
part of Sierra Leone’s six priorities, we have prioritized
ensuring that the United Nations is effectively able to
maintain peace, safeguard human rights and pursue
a culture of accountability. Sierra Leone believes
that human rights protection and promotion builds
confidence in democratic governance, bridges societal
divides by strengthening a sense of common values
and shared humanity, and, at the same time, promotes
peaceful resolution of conflicts grounded in respect for
the rights and dignity of all. Our membership of the
Security Council will support the work to break the
culture of impunity through engagement and action to
foster a culture of accountability.
We therefore acknowledge the support of the
Security Council and the key role that is played in this
regard by the States parties to the Rome Statute serving
on the Council. We therefore recall the statement by
the President of the Security Council of 12 February
2013 (S/PRST/2013/2), in which the Council reiterated
its previous call regarding the importance of State
cooperation with the Court, in accordance with the
respective obligations of States, with a commitment to
14/28

31/10/2022

effective follow-up of the Security Council decisions in
that regard.
In conclusion, in recognition of the important
work of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the
ICC Assembly of States Parties, the Government of
Sierra Leone has nominated Mr. Sahr Lahai Jusu for
the one seat allocated to the African States parties,
with the election scheduled to take place during the
twenty-first session of the Assembly of States Parties
ASP, in The Hague from 5 to 10 December. We believe
that Mr. Jusu’s competence, qualifications and prior
experience, among other things, at various regional and
multilateral financial institutions, as well as his being
the Government’s principal adviser on economic and
financial matters, make him valuable in advancing the
principles, objectives and values of the Rome Statute.
He is of high moral character, impartiality, integrity
and has the requisite competence required of the
members of the Committee on Budget and Finance. The
nomination is consistent with the overall commitment
of Sierra Leone to the Court and its effective and
efficient discharge of its important mandate.
Finally, as a co-sponsor of draft resolution A/77/L.7,
we thank the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands for introducing the said draft resolution
(see A/77/PV.22) and for the work of the Mission of
the Netherlands to ensure important updates, including
recalling the activation of ICC jurisdiction over the crime
of aggression as of 17 July 2018, and the amendments to
articles 124 and 8 of the Rome Statute adopted by the
Assembly of States Parties at the fourteenth, sixteenth
and eighteenth sessions, respectively, calling upon all
States parties to consider ratifying or accepting them.
We call on States Members of the United Nations
to adopt the draft resolution without a vote, thereby
giving true meaning to the Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court, which is based on respect for each
organization’s status and mandates and aimed at
promoting the effective discharge of their respective
responsibilities in a mutually beneficial manner. If a
vote is requested, we urge member States to vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank Judge Piotr
Hofmański for introducing the report (see A/77/305) on
the activities of the International Criminal Court (see
A/77/PV.22) and express our appreciation for the joint
22-66288

31/10/2022

efforts of the presidency, the Chambers, the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Registry of the Court to continue
administering justice in a context of great challenges.
The various organs of the Court and its personnel
have continued to demonstrate the professionalism,
excellence and dedication that they have shown from
the establishment of that young institution to this day in
maintaining its efficacy and credibility in the service of
the interests of justice and due process.
The International Criminal Court, with its
outstanding activity since its establishment, shows
us in deeds that it is a fundamental tool in the fight
against impunity, the promotion of human rights and
the consolidation of the rule of law at the international
level. After nearly 20 years of Court operations,
the Rome Statute remains the cornerstone of the
international criminal justice system. The Court is the
hope of thousands of victims around the world seeking
justice. The Court is the guarantee that no one is above
the law, regardless of the official position or power held
by the perpetrator of heinous crimes.
The current times are a challenge for multilateralism
in general and for the Court in particular. In recent
years, the Court has had to face multiple internal and
external challenges. That is why the States parties
decided to initiate a review process, which is in its final
phase. We believe that this exercise has allowed the
entire Court system to carry out a complete evaluation
of its functions, identify those aspects that require
improvement and correct them.
Argentina has assigned the highest priority to the
review process, and we express our satisfaction for the
frank dialogue that has been established among the
Court, the Assembly of States Parties and civil society
on the recommendations of the group of independent
experts, which without doubt will contribute to
strengthening the system. We would like to highlight
the efforts of the review mechanism to facilitate the
implementation of the key recommendations of the
group of independent experts and extend our support
to their hard work.
The functioning of the Rome Statute system has
endured critical moments. The independence of the
Court and its ability to carry out its mandate have been
threatened by external pressure. The States parties
cannot allow such situations, and we must provide
the Court with all the support necessary to underpin
its integrity and independence. As a result of the

A/77/PV.23

ongoing review process, the Bureau of the Assembly
of States Parties recently adopted a strategy to deal
with threats and attacks seeking to undermine the
effectiveness of the Court. We welcome the adoption
of that document, in the conviction that States parties
have a shared responsibility to promote and protect the
Court’s mandate.
One important challenge for the Court relates
to universality, which is essential to overcoming
perceptions of selectivity in the application of
international criminal justice. Increasing the number
of ratifications of the Statute is crucial to closing the
impunity gap. That is why we urge the States that have
not yet done so to adhere to the Rome Statute. At the
same time, we note with pleasure that following the
activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime
of aggression, the States parties continue to ratify
the amendment.
Another key aspect for the effective functioning
of the Court is cooperation. As an international court,
the International Criminal Court cannot sustain itself
without the active cooperation of multiple stakeholders,
especially the States parties to the Rome Statute, at
each and every stage of investigation and trial. In that
respect, we are proud to have been the first State party
to conclude the four cooperation agreements suggested
by the Court.
Likewise, greater cooperation between the Court
and the Security Council is necessary. We strongly
urge all States to cooperate fully and effectively with
the Court, in accordance with the Rome Statute and all
applicable Security Council resolutions.
As we work to improve the performance of the
Court, we cannot forget that States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute the most
serious crimes of international concern, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity, which is the
backbone of the Rome Statute. We call on all States
that have not yet done so to include the crimes and
principles of the Statute in their national laws, thereby
ensuring effective complementarity.
In these 20 years of existence, the Court has come
a long way and established itself as a key institution
of the international system. Today the existence of a
general consensus that impunity for heinous crimes is
no longer acceptable is indisputable. Given our own
history and based on our experience, Argentina is
aware of the need to do justice to the victims. In that

22-6628815/28

A/77/PV.23

conviction, our country will continue to firmly support
the work of the Court and its judicial independence.
Likewise, Argentina is a co-sponsor of draft resolution
A/77/L.7 before us and firmly urges all States members
of the Assembly to support it.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we have heard many kind words with
regard to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Let
us now hear the truth.
The position of the Russian Federation regarding
the activities of the International Criminal Court is
well known and has not changed. Year after year, that
judiciary body continues its downward spiral. Nothing
remains of the lofty ideals of justice that guided States
in preparing the Rome Statute of the ICC. Over the 20
years of its existence, the Court has become notorious
for outrageous falsifications in the context of the
Libyan dossier — concerning which I will have more to
say later — and the unprecedented use of selective and
politicized approaches in other cases.
Representatives of the collective West are now
talking, unabashed, about the need to cooperate with the
ICC to punish Russia, as we have also heard from this
rostrum today. They do not even try to pretend that the
Court is independent, neutral or objective. It is obvious
that for them the ICC is just a tool for settling political
scores. After all, if the guilty party has been identified
in advance and the process paid for and coordinated by
Western countries, what justice is there to speak of?
This is all pure farce — nothing more than a cover-up
for a shameful mock trial.
As Russophobic rhetoric in the international arena
reaches new levels of absurdity, certain “fakes” evoke
a strong sense of déjà vu. Those include accusations
that Viagra is being distributed to the Russian military
in order to use sexual violence as a military strategy.
One United Nations official made mention of that only
recently. Who in their right mind would believe such
a thing? However, the Viagra-for-soldiers rumour was
already played out by the West 10 years ago. This is
one, but far from the only and or last shameful page in
the history of the ICC.
The first Prosecutor of the Court, Mr. Luis Moreno
Ocampo, in order to dehumanize the Libyan leadership
and Mr. Al-Qadhafi personally, spread identical
clumsy fakes. A video of him is still available on the
Internet, giving interviews against the backdrop of the
United Nations symbol, retailing fanciful stories that
16/28

31/10/2022

formed the basis of the indictment against the Libyan
leader concocted in just three days. There were two
main narratives.
The first concerned Mr. Al-Qadhafi allegedly
ordering his soldiers to rape hundreds of women in the
course of suppressing the rebellion and supplying them
with Viagra for that purpose. The second dealt with
the use of certain dark-skinned mercenaries to commit
atrocities that regular military units were allegedly
incapable of committing. Is it any wonder that none of
these stories was confirmed by the ICC? Even Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International refuted the
fakes spread by the ICC Prosecutor’s Office. A scandal
began to smoulder. In an attempt to quash it, the Court
hastily launched an internal investigation. However,
not a single person was subsequently found responsible
for fabricating the alleged evidence.
However, the fakes hastily cobbled together by the
ICC had already had their sinister effect. They were
used by the collective West to justify its actions in
Libya, which were nothing more than straightforward
military aggression. The ICC then actually acted as
an accomplice in a gross violation of Security Council
resolution 1973 (2011) and the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. With the blessing of the Court and
under cover of the lies disseminated by its Prosecutor,
NATO began carpet-bombing Libya, using a liberal
interpretation of the Security Council’s decision to
establish a no-fly zone. As a result, a once prosperous
country was razed to the ground and its leader brutally
murdered without trial or investigation. There followed
years of devastation and the chaos of civil war, which
claimed and ruined hundreds of thousands of lives. That
nightmare for the Libyans has not ended to this day.
Instead of the ICC report, I would recommend
reading the publication by the former head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ian
Martin, in which he describes how NATO’s actions
went beyond the Security Council mandate and the
United Kingdom blocked negotiations with the Libyan
Government. Another interesting point is that the
Council referred the situation in Libya as a whole to
the ICC. Thus, the Court had jurisdiction over acts
committed as part of the unprovoked, unjustified and
aggressive NATO war of choice against the Libyan
State. However, no one from that military alliance
has been held accountable. The relevant section in the
reports of the Court grew shorter from year to year, and
eventually disappeared altogether.
22-66288

31/10/2022

Cases involving so-called privileged Western
defendants are rare indeed. There are civilian victims
in such cases, but there are no perpetrators and never
will be. The investigations themselves tend to simply
fade away without a trace over time.
Let us recall the recent revelations of BBC journalists
about the killings of at least 54 Afghan citizens by
British soldiers in 2010 and 2011 in Helmand province,
based on interviews with a group of retired and active
British military personnel and with relatives of Afghan
victims. The media directly pointed to a cover-up
and interference in the process of investigating those
incidents by high-ranking representatives of the British
Ministry of Defence. Even Amnesty International
called for an investigation through the ICC, citing an
alarming level of impunity for the British military in
Afghanistan. The answer was silence.
Another similar episode was the ICC preliminary
investigation into the situation in Iraq. Former
prosecutor Fatou Bensouda considered that there were
good reasons to believe that British soldiers committed
crimes against civilians, including deliberate killings,
torture, abuse and sexual violence. In November 2020,
ICC experts prepared a corresponding report. We know
very well what happened then — the investigation was
“deprioritized” and then, to put it simply, terminated.
A similar fate befell the Afghan dossier of the ICC
as soon as the question of prosecuting United States
military personnel arose. That is selective justice for
the select few.
Now the ICC is so carried away by the Ukrainian
story that it has deprioritized all its other investigations.
Rumblings of discontent with this state of affairs are
increasingly heard even from Rome Statute parties that
are developing countries. That is no surprise, since
the resources of the Court are not sufficient even for
such in-demand activities as the provision of technical
assistance in strengthening national legal systems.
Everything goes to Ukraine.
The Court’s priorities are easy to understand.
Western countries generously and openly pay for this
bespoke process. Their so-called voluntary contributions
in 2022 broke all records and reached the limit set by
the internal financial rules of the Court. That was no
problem; loopholes for bypassing them were quickly
found. The United States generally had to battle its
own legislation prohibiting assistance to the ICC. After
all, that country not only is not a party to the Rome

A/77/PV.23

Statute, but even subjected the Prosecutor of the Court
to personal sanctions just because he dared to initiate
investigations against American soldiers. Of course,
after the deprioritization of criminal investigations into
their own military in Iraq and Afghanistan, the United
States and Britain have become very comfortable
supporting the ICC against Russia.
There is no hope for objectivity in the investigation
in Ukraine by a court with such a track record, and
there cannot be. It is no surprise to us that thousands of
petitions from residents of the Donbas regarding crimes
committed by the Kyiv regime over the eight years after
the coup d’état in 2014 obtained no response or reaction
from the International Criminal Court.
The United Nations should not involve itself in the
activities of bodies that do not enjoy universal support
and have a dubious reputation. We note the information
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the ICC
(A/77/307). It seems to imply that the United Nations
personnel were involved in giving interviews in
connection with situations before the Court. We would
like to know on what basis this was done and what
was discussed?
In view of all this, the Russian delegation does not
support regular consideration within the framework of
the United Nations of the reports of the International
Criminal Court. We wish to have nothing to do with
such an institution.
Mr. Odida (Uganda): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the delegation of Uganda.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf of
the African States parties to the Rome Statute (see
A/77/ PV.22).
We welcome the debate on the annual report
(see A/77/305) on the activities undertaken by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) during the
period under review. My delegation would like to
thank the President of the Court for his leadership in
conducting the work of the Court and for introducing
the annual report. We also welcome the reports of the
Secretary-General under this agenda item.
The principle of complementarity lies at the heart
of the Rome Statute. My delegation therefore welcomes
the ongoing efforts within the Assembly of States

22-6628817/28

A/77/PV.23

Parties to promote that principle, which remains the
backbone of the Rome Statute system. We also welcome
the recent announcements by the new Prosecutor,
stressing the importance of promoting accountability
with a view to determining how justice may best be
served under the shared framework of complementary
domestic and international action, working towards
enhancing complementarity by strengthening national
judicial systems to deal with the most serious crimes,
all of which are key to achieving accountability.
All victims, no matter where they come from,
deserve equal access to impartial justice. We therefore
note and appreciate the important work of the Trust
Fund for Victims. The report indicates that during the
reporting period, the Trust Fund was engaged in the
implementation of Court-ordered reparations in four
cases and assistance projects in several countries,
benefiting more than 17,000 victims. Indeed, victims
lie at the core of the Rome Statute system and the Court
must stand up for all victims. My delegation therefore
takes this opportunity to welcome the recent visit of
the Trust Fund for Victims, led by the delegations of
Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, to witness
the great work of the Trust Fund that is being done
in Uganda.
My delegation emphasizes the importance of the
New York liaison office for the International Criminal
Court and is of the view that the structure that was
adopted by the Assembly of States Parties in 2005,
based on the one court principle, should be retained.
While the office is under the Registry for administrative
purposes, its substantive functions cut across all the
organs of the Court. It is important that the New York
liaison office continue to function as one integrated
and cohesive administrative unit, under the leadership
of the head of office. That can be done provided that
there are clearly defined administrative and technical
lines of authority and reporting, depending on the
subject matter.
The review mechanism of the Court continues to
play a key role, and we welcome the review process
initiated by the Assembly of States Parties at its
eighteenth session, aimed at strengthening the Court
and the Rome Statute system of international criminal
justice, which is a priority.
We welcome the ongoing process for the election
of the Registrar of the International Criminal Court.
The role of Registrar is central to realizing efficiency
18/28

31/10/2022

and effectiveness. The presidency, Chambers and
Prosecutor rely on a range of services in the enforcement
of judicial decisions and in the administration of justice.
Non-judicial services, such as ensuring the attendance
of witnesses at court proceedings and ensuring the
security and safety of officials and staff of the Court
at the head office and in the field, all depend on the
Registrar being a strong leader, decision-maker and
developer and implementer of administrative processes
and policies. It is therefore important that the Judges
of the International Criminal Court consider the
aforementioned attributes in selecting the Registrar of
the Court.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that Uganda
supports the review of the ICC and the Rome Statute
system, as well as the work of the review mechanism,
which is aimed at strengthening the Court and the Rome
Statute system by, inter alia, enhancing its effectiveness
and legitimacy and the capacity of the Court. In that
connection, Uganda reiterates the African Union
Heads of State and Government decision on the ICC,
urging continued engagement in the review process of
the Court.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Albania welcomes with
appreciation the annual report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to the General Assembly (see
A/77/305) and the presence of the President of the ICC,
Mr. Piotr Hofmański.
The ICC continues to underdeliver due to structural
and political constraints, including limited jurisdiction,
insufficient resources and lack of State cooperation at a
time when, for the world’s most vulnerable populations,
the ICC remains their only realistic alternative for
accountability and justice. That is especially true in
the area of sexual and gender-based crimes, where
the Rome Statute has crystallized the best customary
international legal norms and become a catalyst for
the creation of new ones. The ICC also represents the
international community’s commitment to the rule of
law and to the principle of equality before the law.
The demand for justice is enormous and every
step toward justice deserves appreciation and support.
Albania welcomes the significant work done by the
Office of the Prosecutor over the course of the past
year. The expansion of the scope of the operation of
the ICC is a particularly welcome development. That
is the clearest answer to charges of selectivity and
double standards. That is crucial because, for justice
22-66288

31/10/2022

to prevail, it is not enough that justice be done; it is
equally important that the world public see that
justice is done. That is because the public function of
justice is vital for a sense of justice to mature in world
opinion, where consistent action is paramount for the
Court. Overcoming charges of selectivity and double
standards is vital to the authority of the ICC and its
rulings, especially when it comes to their full and
effective implementation.
That is why we believe that we should do everything
in our power to overcome all arbitrary obstacles to the
work of the ICC so that the Court can pursue its noble
mandate in concordance with the universal principles
that justify its existence. Action inspired by that
universal spirit will enable the Court to investigate
crimes wherever they occur and deter potential crimes
anywhere. It is the most effective way to hold to account
any and all individuals who commit gross violations of
basic universal rights. That is how we put our shared
universal norms into practice, one case at a time, one
ruling at a time. With time, this jurisprudence will
grow into a firm foundation to expand the horizon of
justice, with the aim of regulating relations amongst
States and other entities by ever more demanding
ethical standards. That is how we bend the arc of the
moral universe towards justice. That does not happen
automatically, but thanks to everyone’s active efforts.
Albania is driven by that universal spirit of justice and
urges all others to embrace it.
The valuable work delivered by the ICC reflects an
expanding consciousness of humankind that victims
of gross violations of human rights are not alone and
that impunity is no longer acceptable. With the ICC,
we have a powerful instrument in our hands to make
accountability for mass violations of human rights a
reality, not just an aspiration. That is why we support
the universal ratification of the Rome Statute and
its full implementation at the national level. We are
encouraged by the support that the Court receives from
States, where civil society has a valuable role to play
as well.
We are encouraged by the intensifying cooperation
between the Court and the United Nations in pursuit
of our common purpose for a more peaceful and
just world. Equally, we believe that there is greater
potential for such cooperation, especially with the
Security Council in referring cases where the ICC
lacks jurisdiction. We believe in stronger cooperation
to fulfil the complementary roles of the ICC and the

A/77/PV.23

Security in pursuit of peace and justice, which is also
the reason why Albania invited ICC Prosecutor Karim
Khan in April to work towards ensuring accountability
for atrocities committed in Ukraine.
Finally, by cooperating with various Governments
in domestic institutional capacity-building, the ICC
ensures that the promise of the prosecution of war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and even,
potentially, the crime of aggression is not limited to a
distant Court in The Hague but is also accessible at the
domestic level.
Mrs. Falconi (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the President of the International Criminal Court for
introducing the report on the activities of the Court
between 1 August 2021 and 31 July this year, contained
in document A/77/305 (see A/77/PV.22).
It is important to highlight the indicators that the
Court’s judicial activity has reached an unprecedented
level, despite the difficult circumstances imposed by the
pandemic in 2021 and the first quarter of 2022. During
the period covered by the report, two trials began,
two others continued, a fifth entered the preparation
phase, and approximately 200 court hearings were held.
Likewise, three new arrest warrants were issued, three
new investigations were initiated and four preliminary
reviews were completed.
My delegation stresses the importance of reparations
to victims in the framework of the work of the Court.
The Trust Fund for Victims executed reparation orders
in four cases and 17,000 victims were beneficiaries of
assistance projects. The resources of the Trust Fund
allow special attention to be paid to the protection and
safeguarding of the rights of victims. In that context,
we share the Court’s concern about the lack of funding
for the cases concerning The Prosecutor v. Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo, The Prosecutor v. Bosco Ntaganda
and The Prosecutor v. Dominic Ongwen, as well as
the continuation of the assistance programmes in the
coming period. In that respect, we encourage voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund in favour of the victims
and their families.
We have taken note of the judicial proceedings
followed by the Court in the situations referring to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, the Central
African Republic, Darfur, Kenya, Libya, Côte d’Ivoire,
Mali, Georgia, Burundi, Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Myanmar, the State of Palestine, the Philippines, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ukraine.

22-6628819/28

A/77/PV.23

With regard to the situation in Ukraine, we highlight
the active commitment of the Office of the Prosecutor,
having been actively deployed in Ukraine and in the
region, including through three missions carried out by
the Prosecutor personally.
Regarding the situation in Darfur, the first trial to
be initiated on the basis of a referral by the Security
Council, we underline the relationship of cooperation
and synergy between the Court and the Council, which
is essential to accountability for the most serious crimes.
In application of article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute, when
any of the four crimes provided for in said instrument
is committed and the national authorities are not in a
position to investigate it, we encourage the Security
Council to refer that situation to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
The delegation of Peru highlights the importance
of the memorandum of understanding signed between
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
in November 2021, as well as the official visit of the
Prosecutor to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in
March 2022, and the subsequent agreement to establish
an office in Caracas. We hope that those efforts will
strengthen the foundations of dialogue and cooperation.
My delegation agrees that, as the Court states
in its report, national authorities have the primary
responsibility for investigating and prosecuting the
crimes defined in the Rome Statute. It is therefore
essential that States undertake to include war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the principles of the
Rome Statute in their legal systems. They should
establish or enhance national processes for cooperation
with the Court and training legal professionals in the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes,
in particular as part of mandates to support judicial and
correctional institutions in post-conflict situations.
Twenty years after the entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
Peru, as a State party to that instrument, reaffirms its
commitment to international law and the promotion
and protection of human rights and humanitarian
law, which are considered basic tenets for achieving
peaceful and inclusive societies and delivering prompt,
timely justice, respectful of due process, independent
and especially capable of fighting impunity.
We firmly believe in an international rulesbased order, and we are aware that access to justice
20/28

31/10/2022

and accountability are essential to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Peru therefore
supports all initiatives aimed at guaranteeing that the
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are held accountable for
their actions.
As evidence of the unwavering commitment of the
Peruvian Government to the search for justice enshrined
in the Rome Statute, on 14 October it deposited its
instrument of ratification of the amendment to article 8
of the Rome Statute and the instrument of ratification of
the amendments to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court relating to the crime of aggression.
In a context marked by conflicts and humanitarian
emergencies, the International Criminal Court, as the
first and only permanent international criminal court in
the world, requires the firm support of the international
community and the determined cooperation of the States
parties so that it can fulfil its mandate to guarantee
justice for the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In that context, we stress that more and more
States parties continue to ratify the amendments to the
Rome Statute.
Peru supports the process of strengthening the
International Criminal Court and the international
criminal justice system of the Rome Statute. Valuing
the recommendations presented in the report of the
group of independent experts, Peru undertakes to make
the greatest efforts with a view to guaranteeing success
in each of the thematic areas mentioned in the report,
from governance and human resources to strategic
planning, the efficiency of the judicial process, the
working methods of the judiciary, the strategies of the
prosecution, investigations and prosecutions, defence
and legal assistance, and the participation of victims
and reparations.
To conclude, my delegation wishes to congratulate
the two new Deputy Prosecutors, Nazhat Shameen Khan
and Mame Mandiaye Niang, elected in March. The role
of the officials of the Court is of special importance to
preventing impunity and helping with the punishment
of those responsible for the greatest atrocities that are
committed in the world, thereby allowing to achieve
sustainable peace.
Mr. Khandamishvili (Georgia): Georgia aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union (see A/77/PV.22) and I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
22-66288

31/10/2022

We would like to thank the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Piotr
Hofmański, for introducing the annual report (see
A/77/305) and commend him for his dedicated
work. We concur with the belief that the Court has a
paramount role to play in upholding the rule of law and
addressing the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community.
As we mark 20 years since the inception of ICC, its
role is as important as ever in the fight against impunity.
With that in mind, Georgia was among the States that
referred the situation in Ukraine to the ICC Prosecutor,
and we look forward to the forthcoming progress
in that regard. Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified and
premeditated aggression against Ukraine, which has
already had the disastrous humanitarian consequences
and a total disregard for human rights, once again
proves the urgent need for accountability for violations
of international law.
In that spirit, let me reiterate that, as a strong
supporter of ICC system and the values of the Rome
Statute, Georgia contributes to strengthening the Court
with institutional and budgetary means, including
through its donations to the Trust Fund for Victims.
Georgia also attaches significant importance to
the upcoming election of the Registrar of the Court
early next year. It is pivotal for the incoming Registrar
to have all the expertise, institutional knowledge and
dedication so necessary for the stewardship of the
ICC and its system. In these tumultuous times, when
demand for a reinvigorated fight against impunity is of
critical importance, a nimble, effective and operational
structure of the Court is indispensable for its success.
In 2016, Pre-Trial Chamber I authorized the
Prosecutor to open an investigation proprio motu into
the situation in Georgia, in relation to crimes against
humanity and war crimes within the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court in the context of
an international armed conflict between 1 July and
10 October 2008. The situation in Georgia is the first
case in which the ICC entered Europe’s legal geography
and launched an investigation into the complex
international conflict between Russia and Georgia.
In that regard, let me reiterate that the Government of
Georgia is making intensive efforts on a daily basis to
match the growing needs of the investigation.
Georgia’s cooperation with the ICC has yielded
concrete and tangible results within the investigation

A/77/PV.23

on the situation in Georgia. Herewith, let me recall
that on 30 June, the International Criminal Court
issued arrest warrants for three individuals for war
crimes committed during Russia’s military aggression
against Georgia in 2008. Thus, the ICC has confirmed
Russia’s responsibility for gross violations against
ethnic Georgians, such as unlawful confinement,
torture, inhuman treatment, outrages to personal
dignity, hostage-taking and unlawful transfer. Georgia
reiterates its strong support for the Court and expresses
its readiness to further cooperate with the ongoing
investigation to ensure that the individuals responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
against the Georgian population, including during the
active hostilities in August 2008, do not go unpunished.
We hope that the landmark judgment of the European
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) of January 2021 — in
which the European Court unequivocally confirmed
the fact of Russia’s occupation and effective control
over the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia
and Russia’s responsibility for heinous crimes against
civilians and military personnel committed during
the August 2008 war and ongoing occupation — will
have a substantial impact on the ICC investigation. The
aforementioned human rights violations established by
the ECHR translate into war crimes and crimes against
humanity under the Rome Statute.
To conclude, Georgia stands ready to continue our
close cooperation with the Court in order to ensure
that justice will be served for the victims of the most
serious crimes of international concern in Georgia
and elsewhere.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): We thank President
Hofmański for the report of the International Criminal
Court (see A/77/305) and welcome the opportunity to
discuss the International Criminal Court’s contribution
to the international rule of law and its ongoing
relationship with the United Nations.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the coming into
force of the Rome Statute. The creation of the ICC was
a huge achievement, marking a crucial step forward in
the global fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole. New Zealand continues to consider the Court to
be a central pillar in the international rules-based order
and the international criminal justice system. As the
first and only permanent international criminal court,

22-6628821/28

A/77/PV.23

the Court is a key institution within a broader system of
domestic and international accountability mechanisms.
While the Court has weathered significant challenges
over the past two decades, we reiterate that an
independent Court to act as a last resort to try the most
serious crimes of concern to humanity is as necessary
as ever.
We commend the significant progress the Court
has made this year and the substantial judicial work
it has accomplished despite the challenges caused by
the coronavirus disease pandemic and the considerable
demand on the mandate of the Court. We reaffirm our
unwavering support for the Court and its mandate to
hold to account those individuals responsible for the
most serious international crimes. For that reason,
we came forward as one of the group of countries to
formally refer to the Ukrainian situation to the Court.
With the addition of four new active investigations
to the Court’s caseload this year, New Zealand’s focus
has been on ensuring the Court is sufficiently resourced
to enable it to continue undertaking its investigations
and prosecutions independently and impartially. New
Zealand was pleased this year to be able to provide
additional funding to the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Trust Fund for Victims, as well as to deploy a
specialized national expert to work with the Court.
We recognize that the Court operates as part
of a broader system of international and national
accountability mechanisms for international crimes.
We acknowledge and commend all those working
within that system, including civil society, to end
impunity for international crimes and to emphasize
accountability for atrocity crimes as part of the rule of
law. We reaffirm the invaluable assistance that has been
provided by civil society to the Court, and reiterate the
importance of protecting all of those cooperating with
the Court.
As we celebrate the Court’s twentieth anniversary
and its many successes and accomplishments over the
past two decades, we look ahead to the next chapter
of the Court’s existence. We continue to support
the ongoing review process to strengthen the Rome
Statute system and enhance the effective performance
of the Court’s mandate. We welcome consideration
of the comprehensive set of recommendations
made by the Independent Expert Review in its final
report, and encourage all States parties to ensure
22/28

31/10/2022

their ongoing support for the Court in implementing
appropriate recommendations.
New Zealand is committed to the Rome Statute
and its underpinning principles of complementarity,
cooperation and universality. The Court complements,
rather than replaces, national courts as an independent
court of last resort. The primary responsibility to take
robust and appropriate measures when faced with the
commission of international crimes lies with States.
Domestic courts and judicial processes, which
secure accountability for the perpetrators of
international crimes, are crucial to implementing the
principle of complementarity. We encourage States
parties that have not done so to consider incorporating
Rome Statute crimes and principles into their domestic
law. New Zealand calls on all countries that have not
yet done so to ratify or accede to the Rome Statute.
We strongly support universal membership of the Rome
Statute, which will help end impunity and ensure that
all victims have access to justice.
We will continue to demonstrate our support for the
Court in order to ensure that the Court delivers justice
for victims and accountability in respect of the most
serious crimes of international concern.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
aligns itself with the statement that was made on behalf
of the European Union and its member States (see A/77/
PV.22) . The annual presentation of the report of the
International Criminal Court (see A/77/305) is essential
and shows the extent to which the Court constitutes a
central pillar of the world order and of the fight against
impunity for crimes that shock the international
community as a whole.
Armed conflicts, unfortunately, continue to
strike all regions of the world today, and it is essential
to combine our forces so that civilian populations,
wherever they are, caught in a vice and suffering
atrocious violence, can continue to hope in justice. In
order to be able to carry out the fight against impunity
with effectiveness and credibility, States must play
their role, by inter alia, prosecuting crimes themselves,
the Court intervening only as a complement to
national jurisdictions; cooperating with the Court at
all stages of the proceedings in cases where the Court
prosecutes and judges; respecting and ensuring respect
for the fundamental principles of impartiality and
independence of the Court; and paying their obligatory
22-66288

31/10/2022

contribution to the annual budget of the Court on time
so that it can properly fulfil its mission.
The support provided to the Court is essential.
Obviously, it cannot be selective; victims in all situations
within the jurisdiction of the Court all have the same
rights to be recognized as such and to access justice.
Mr. Diakite (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation subscribes to the statement delivered by
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire (see A/77/PV.22)
on behalf of the Group of African States parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
and warmly thanks President Piotr Hofmański for his
leadership of the Court and for his rich and detailed
briefing on the Court’s activities from 1 August 2021 to
31 July 2022 (see A/77/PV.22).
I also commend our compatriot Mr. Mame
Mandiaye Niang, Deputy Prosecutor of the ICC, for his
outstanding election.
Senegal takes note with satisfaction of the reports
of the Secretary-General contained in documents
A/77/307 and A/77/306, on the application of article 3 of
the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court and pursuant
to paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 76/5
of 11 November 2021, respectively, which attest to a
steady improvement in the ties of cooperation between
the two institutions.
In an international context marked by the persistence
of various crises resulting in human rights violations,
the International Criminal Court remains more than
ever an essential pillar of international criminal justice
through the fight against impunity for atrocities massive.
Senegal’s attachment to the principles of international
criminal justice made it the first country to complete
the formality of ratifying the Rome Statute of the ICC,
on 2 February 1999. That belief in the fight against
impunity has justified my country’s adherence to the
initiative for a new multilateral treaty on mutual legal
assistance and extradition for the national prosecution
of the most serious international crimes, known as the
MLA Initiative, alongside Belgium, the Netherlands,
Slovenia, Argentina and Mongolia.
My delegation is of the opinion that the international
community has a moral responsibility not only to
prevent but also to suppress, where appropriate, the
most serious international crimes and to provide all
necessary assistance to victims, who are generally

A/77/PV.23

in total destitution. That is the core meaning of the
preamble to the Rome Statute, which reminds States
parties of the need to fight impunity for the perpetrators
of mass atrocities and to prevent their commission
through deterrence. Reparations are an essential
component of international criminal justice. In that
regard, we welcome the progress made by the Trust
Fund for Victims, which continues to provide support
to victims, in accordance with its mandate.
Senegal welcomes the progress made by the
International Criminal Court in its activities during
the reporting period, and reiterates its unwavering
support for the Court as an independent and impartial
judicial institution responsible for combating impunity
for perpetrators of the most serious crimes. It should
be recalled that the Court cannot carry out its mission
without the enhanced cooperation of the States parties.
Cooperation between the Court and States was once
again at the heart of the issues raised at the Dakar
regional conference, held from 23 to 25 May, which
was an opportunity for participants to discuss the
strengthening the international criminal justice system
and the fight against impunity.
As our Minister of Justice pointed out on
that occasion:
“The effectiveness or success of the Court is
dependent on compliance by the Court, as well as
by the States parties, with the statutory provisions
that govern their relations, but also and above all of
the will of each of our countries to play its part in
the distribution of criminal justice at the national
level. All in all, the ICC cannot act without the
cooperation of States, which have the monopoly of
the police, and without which the identification and
appearance of the accused, as well as of victims
and witnesses, would be unlikely.”
In the same vein, the President of the ICC, Judge
Hofmański, also stated:
“Regardless of the continent and regardless of
the nationality of the victims or the perpetrators,
the ICC’s mandate and purpose remains the same:
to fight against impunity for the most serious
atrocity crimes. We strive for accountability. We
strive to provide justice to victims. And we strive
to prevent future crimes. But the ICC cannot do any
of this alone.”

22-6628823/28

A/77/PV.23

My delegation also salutes the key role of the ICC
in the international architecture for the prevention and
punishment of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
the crime of genocide, and welcomes its cooperative
relations with the Security Council, guarantor of
international peace and security. Indeed, through the
modes of interaction provided for, in particular in
articles 13 and 17 of the 2004 Relationship Agreement
between those two bodies, international crimes must
no longer go unpunished. Therefore, it is important for
all States parties to the ICC to focus on preserving the
independence and integrity of the Court for the proper
execution of its mandate.
The universal ratification of the Rome Statute and
the incorporation of its standards into the domestic law
of States are essential conditions for enabling victims
of international crimes to obtain justice. In that regard,
we invite all States Members of the United Nations to
engage in a constructive dialogue to remove all forms
of misunderstanding in order to further strengthen the
credibility of the judicial institution.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for maintaining
our commitment to strengthening complementarity
by supporting national judicial systems so that they
are able to try the most serious crimes that offend the
conscience of the international community.
Mr. Prytula (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for his comprehensive presentation of the
Court’s annual activities (see A/77/PV.22).
Ukraine welcomes the 2021-2022 report of the
Court (see A/77/305). We highly appreciate the
prompt decision of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, in a moment of the cruellest violation
of international humanitarian law, to proceed with the
opening of investigations into the situation in Ukraine,
based on 40 referrals of States parties, the number of
which has since increased to 43.
It is important that in this extraordinary time,
the Court continue to receive cooperation from the
United Nations on a wide range of issues. However,
let me underline the direct linkage between the
cooperation, assistance and support of States parties
and the effectiveness of all Court’s activities, from
ongoing investigations to judicial activities. Providing
such cooperation is an additional contribution to
preventing and fighting against impunity for the most
serious crimes.
24/28

31/10/2022

We are grateful to all States and specialists who
contribute to this work with their financial, technical,
analytical, legal and expert support. And I firmly
believe that the International Criminal Court will be
able to create a historical precedent of an absolutely
legal response to the heinous crimes committed by the
Russian occupiers, as large-scale as the Russian war
against Ukraine itself.
For many years, the world has been looking for
ways to prevent the recurrence of a full-scale war in
Europe and to ensure the inevitability of punishment
for war criminals, wherever they are and wherever
they commit crimes against the basics of human life.
Thanks to those searches and the efforts of many
conscientious people, we now have, in particular,
the International Criminal Court — one of the most
important global legal institutions that ensures justice
and protects humankind.
Strongly believing in that court of last resort, on
17 April 2014 the Government of Ukraine lodged a
declaration under article 12 (3) of the Rome Statute,
accepting ICC jurisdiction over crimes committed on
its territory from 21 November 2013 to 22 February
2014. On 8 September 2015, the Government of
Ukraine lodged a second declaration under the same,
accepting the exercise of jurisdiction by the ICC in
relation to crimes committed on its territory starting
on 20 February 2014 — the beginning of the Russian
military aggression against Ukraine. Today eight
months after Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine,
let me once again reiterate that these declarations have
been made for an indefinite duration.
The scope of the investigation opened by the ICC
Prosecutor on 2 March encompasses any past and present
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity
or genocide committed on any part of the territory of
Ukraine by any person from 21 November 2013 onward.
Following ICC jurisdiction, which Ukraine has accepted
for crimes committed on its territory, we consider the
ICC to be a real mechanism for holding the individual
perpetrators to account. Ukraine is fully committed to
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, including interactions
with that Office’s team on the ground in Ukraine and
within the joint investigation team.
At the same time, we underline that if the original
crime of aggression is to receive a fair answer as well,
we must supplement the activities of the International
22-66288

31/10/2022

Criminal Court. A special tribunal should be
established for the crime of aggression against Ukraine
so that it can punish those who, unfortunately, cannot
be reached by the International Criminal Court or any
other available judicial institutions of the world. In that
regard, we invite every State in the world that values
international law and order to work with Ukraine on
the establishment of such a tribunal for the crime of
aggression against Ukraine.
The demand of the people of Ukraine for justice,
prosecution and holding to account all perpetrators
of grave crimes committed in Ukraine grows only
stronger, as does Ukraine’s support for the work of the
ICC. Russia’s ongoing brutal full-scale invasion and
war actions all over the territory of Ukraine challenge
the whole system of international law, and we will
pursue every possible means to ensure justice.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
disassociates itself draft resolution A/77/L.7, which
welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The report (see A/77/305) contains references
to the Philippines in the section on updates on judicial
and prosecutorial activities in relation to crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court allegedly committed in the
territory of the Philippine. The Philippines finds deeply
regrettable the actions by the Prosecutor and his zeal
in proceeding with the investigation of the situation in
the Philippines.
The Philippines underscores the establishment of
an inter-agency review panel headed by the Secretary
of Justice of the Philippines precisely to reinvestigate
cases involving fatalities in the campaign against
illegal drugs, and is steadily proceeding with its work.
In that regard, we have asked the Prosecutor to defer to
our national investigation. The Rome Statute requires
the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor to respect
and defer to the primary criminal jurisdiction of a
concerned State party while proceedings are ongoing
in the latter. The move of the Prosecutor, as indicated
in the ICC report (see A/77/305), is inconsistent with
the principle of complementarity, a core principle of the
Rome Statute.
The Philippine Government, in partnership with the
United Nations, is implementing a joint programme on
human rights, the first of its kind, which puts together
the capacities and resources of the United Nations in
support of a wide range of national institutions. All
these affirm the adherence of the Philippines to human

A/77/PV.23

rights norms and its long track record of constructive
engagement with international and regional partners in
human rights promotion and protection.
Notwithstanding our withdrawal from the Rome
Statute, which was due to a principled stand against
those who politicize human rights, the Philippines
affirms its commitment to fighting impunity for
atrocity crimes. The ICC may exercise jurisdiction only
where national legal systems fail or are unable to do so.
The ICC was never conceived or created as a substitute
for national courts.
Finally, the International Criminal Court is
a court of last resort. The State parties to the Rome
Statute envisioned a court with a complementary,
not primary jurisdiction for the prosecution of the
persons most responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern.
Mr. Nagano (Japan): This year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
In recognition of this milestone year, I would like to
reiterate that Japan, with renewed determination,
remains a staunch supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and is committed to the fight
against impunity and to promoting the rule of law in
the international community.
Japan firmly believes that strengthening the rule
of law based on respect for international law will
benefit all countries and regions, leading to sustainable
growth and the development of a healthy international
community. As such, Japan will take every action to
reinforce the rule of law in the international community.
To that end, we will work closely with the ICC, given
its central role in the prosecution and punishment of the
most serious crimes, including war crimes.
The international community’s interest in and
expectations for the ICC have steadily grown, in
particular after the referral of the situation in Ukraine.
Japan remains dedicated to helping the Court to
function effectively and sustainably. In addition to
being a Bureau member, we are the largest financial
contributor, and we provide qualified human resources,
including judges and other ICC personnel. At the
same time, Japan is counting on the leadership of the
ICC President to take proactive measures to ensure
appropriate budget and organizational management
under the one court principle.

22-6628825/28

A/77/PV.23

With the ICC’s greater relevance in light of the
current international situation, it is imperative that the
Court strive to promote universality with the wider
membership. In that regard, Japan commends President
Hofmański, who visited Japan earlier this month, for his
active outreach activities. We also applaud Prosecutor
Khan for his nuanced and practical approach to
addressing situations in which the interests of non-States
parties are at stake. Japan will work hand-in-hand with
the ICC in the promotion of universality.
In closing, let me stress once again that Japan will
spare no effort in working to enhance the functions of
the ICC and will work cooperatively to promote the rule
of law in the international community.
Mr. Weinstein (United States of America): I thank
President Hofmański for his briefing (see A/77/PV.22)
and for his leadership as President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
As noted in the Court’s report on developments
between August 2021 and August 2022 (see A/77/305),
the Court’s trial activity is now at an unprecedented level.
The ICC has significantly advanced justice for victims
around the world, including in situations in which the
ICC was invited to act by national Governments. The
United States welcomed the opening of trial in April in
the case against a former Janjaweed commander known
as Ali Kushayb. That marked the first trial against
any senior leader for crimes committed by the Omar
Al-Bashir regime and Government-supported forces
following the genocide and other atrocities in Darfur.
The ICC has also made meaningful progress
in advancing justice for atrocities committed in the
Central African Republic. The United States commends
the ICC for progress on those cases and for closely
coordinating with Central African national authorities
in the Special Criminal Court of the Central African
Republic. The ongoing trials against Alfred Yekatom,
Patrice-Edouard Ngaïssona and Mahamat Said Abdel
Kani for crimes against humanity and war crimes
represent a strong blow against impunity.
ICC activities in situations around the world
underscore its important role as a key piece of the global
architecture for accountability and a reminder of the
imperative for justice, even when it may take time to
achieve. With regard to the situation in Mali, the Court
continued the trial against the individual known as Al
Hassan on charges of crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed in Timbuktu between 2012 and 2013.
26/28

31/10/2022

Furthermore, the Prosecutor has opened investigations
into the situation in Venezuela, and the United States
welcomes his Office’s ongoing efforts.
I must also address the horrific war in Ukraine,
where civilians face brutal attacks on a daily basis,
carried out by Russian forces. The United States
supports a range of international investigations into
atrocities in Ukraine, including those conducted by
the ICC, the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We will continue
to stand with Ukraine in the face of Russia’s brutal
aggression and in seeking justice and accountability.
While commending the achievements of the ICC
over the past year, the United States is troubled by the
large number of outstanding arrest warrants, a matter
that should concern all States. Individuals subject to
warrants of arrest by the ICC must face justice before
fair, independent and credible judicial proceedings. The
United States continues to encourage the authorities
in the Sudan to transfer suspects to the Court, and we
continue to offer monetary rewards for information
leading to the arrest of Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
leader Joseph Kony, to provide justice for victims of the
LRA. We call on all States to cooperate in ensuring that
Nouradine Adam, accused of crimes against humanity
in the Central African Republic, faces justice.
The ICC plays an important role in relation to
broader efforts to seek justice for atrocity crimes.
Across the world, a range of national, hybrid and other
international tribunals are also making progress in the
fight against impunity for atrocity crimes. That includes
the commencement of the trial against Félicien Kabuga,
indicted for genocide and crimes against humanity by
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; the opening of trials in the Central African
Special Criminal Court; the war crimes convictions in
Ukrainian national courts; and the increasing number
of prosecutions by national authorities, including in
Germany, of atrocities committed in other States, such
as Syria.
Such efforts, especially where prosecutions are
not possible before international courts or courts in
the jurisdiction where the crimes were committed,
ensure that there is no safe haven for those responsible
for crimes that shock the conscience of humankind.
National systems must be the first and foremost venue
for accountability, and the United States continues to
22-66288

31/10/2022

assist countries to build their own domestic capacity in
that regard.
Turning back to the ICC, the United States is
pleased to announce that we intend to participate
in the upcoming Assembly of States Parties as an
observer delegation. As the Court reflects on its first
20 years and charts a course for its future, the United
States is committed to engaging with States parties,
the Court and others to ensure that the Court achieves
its core mission as a court of last resort in punishing
and deterring atrocity crimes. While we maintain our
concerns about the ICC in certain areas that are well
known, we believe that our concerns are best addressed
through engagement with all stakeholders.
We strongly commend all organs of the Court,
States parties, civil society and victims, who have
engaged over the past several years in considering a
broad review to address issues to help the Court better
achieve its core mandate, including those identified by
the Independent Expert Review of the ICC.
Justice is not only a moral imperative, but it is
essential to the maintenance of international peace and
security. The United States is a strong supporter of
meaningful accountability and justice for the victims of
atrocities. Those are core values, best advanced through
a shared commitment, and the ICC is an integral
component of that shared commitment to justice.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): My delegation welcomes
this opportunity to discuss the annual report (see
A/77/305) of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union (see
A/77/PV.22) and would like to contribute further to this
debate in its national capacity.
I would like to begin by congratulating the ICC
on its significant achievements and its crucial role
in the global fight against impunity over the past 20
years. This year’s report shows that the International
Criminal Court has been facing a significant increase
in its workload, in addition to the crisis in Ukraine.
We commend the Court for its remarkable response
and reaffirm our continued diplomatic and financial
support for the Court’s mandate of ending impunity and
promoting justice.
The Court must have sufficient resources available
for its operation in order to take account of the high
expectations of the States parties and other stakeholders

A/77/PV.23

for greater effectiveness and efficiency, as well as
for ensuring the integrity of its work in all situations
under investigation. It is high time to provide a longterm sustainable budget that will suffice for an everincreasing caseload and, more importantly, to urgently
address the issue of arrears in order to find an effective
solution regarding the collection of outstanding
financial contributions from the States parties.
The current crisis demonstrates the importance
of cooperation among the States parties, the Court
and all other stakeholders in order to ensure effective
accountability. In that context, Slovenia considers
that the Security Council’s referrals of situations that
would not otherwise fall under the jurisdiction of the
ICC would significantly contribute to the prevention
of atrocity crimes, as well as improve the Court’s
effectiveness and credibility.
The States parties must ensure the independence
and impartiality of the ICC in the exercise of its
jurisdiction in all situations under its mandate and
protect the Court from external political pressure.
We call on the States parties to demonstrate greater
initiative in assisting the Court. We would like to see
the States take concrete action to ensure the execution
of outstanding warrants and implement the principle of
complementarity. That could be achieved by improving
their national capacities, which would enable them
to pursue investigations and ensure fair and efficient
domestic trials.
The ICC turned 20 in one of the most challenging
years since its inception. The events of the past year
have shown that the most unimaginable crimes are
not a thing of the past and that support for the pivotal
role of the ICC in ensuring accountability and justice
is now more crucial than ever. The victims must
not be left to bear the burden of the failure of the
international community.
Never before has it been so crucial to promote
the universality of the Rome Statute system. Once all
States decide to take that step and ratify or accede to
the Rome Statute, the whole world will be a step closer
to justice and peace. As already mentioned by ICC
Prosecutor Karim Khan, the world is currently holding
its breath, questioning whether we are heading towards
peace or even more violence and suffering. The world
is reflecting on the role of international law and the
International Criminal Court amidst all this suffering
and destruction.

22-6628827/28

A/77/PV.23

Our common future depends on the willingness of
States to ensure respect for the rule of law, which is an
intrinsic part of our human coexistence.
Ms. Solano Ramirez (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Colombia pays tribute to Judge
Piotr Hofmański and hopes that he will continue to
enjoy success as President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We also thank him for the annual report of
the Court (see A/77/305) on its activities in 2021-2022,
introduced pursuant to article 6 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the ICC.
It is important to note that this year has seen
major challenges for the Court, owing to international
circumstances, including the referral of the situation in
Ukraine by a group of countries, including Colombia.
The Court has been able to meet those challenges and
its relevance and importance are now clearer than ever.
This has also been a very special year for Colombia
in its relations with the ICC. A year ago, Prosecutor
Karim Khan announced his decision to conclude the
preliminary investigation that his Office had opened 17
years earlier to consider the situation in our country.
The Prosecutor’s decision not only served to put an
end to the longest preliminary inquiry in the Court’s
history, but was also an opportunity for him to express
his support for those bodies entrusted with delivering
justice in Colombia, both in the ordinary and in the
transitional justice systems.
A few days ago, a team from the Prosecutor’s
Office concluded an official visit to Bogotá, during
which it had worked with a broad range of national
authorities, international partners and members of
civil society striving to address crimes committed in
Colombia within the jurisdiction of the Rome Statute.
That visit was undertaken by the Prosecutor’s Office in
the context of the cooperation agreement reached with
the Government of Colombia and was one of an ongoing
series of meetings and exchanges that had taken place
with the Office and the authorities of Colombia in the
previous year.
The Colombian authorities and the Prosecutor have
made significant progress over the past year, including

28/28

31/10/2022

a decision by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to
establish a fact-based framework for relevant major
cases, assigning responsibility for the perpetrators of
crimes and holding public hearings to air the truth.
Important progress was also made by Colombian
institutions in their search for justice in cooperation
with all international and national partners.
As I said earlier, the cooperation agreement
represents a new phase in relations between the
Prosecutor’s Office, the Court as a whole and Colombia.
The agreement reflects an innovative partnership
based on two sets of basic commitments. The first
includes the commitments made by the Government
of Colombia to ensuring the preservation of the
legislative, constitutional and budgetary framework to
support accountability, prevent undue interference and
ensure full cooperation between our institutions. The
Prosecutor’s Office committed in turn to continuing
to support accountability efforts in Colombia under
its mandate. That innovative system highlights the
important role of positive complementary and could
help to launch a new generation of relations between
the Court and member States. We believe that the
Colombian dossier is the best example of positive
complementarity, as the work of the ICC in our country
will contribute to developing the transitional and
traditional justice systems.
Colombia has entered a new stage in its relationship
with the ICC that could be emulated by other countries
in difficult situations requiring jurisdictions ready and
able to deliver justice for crimes of the greatest interest
to the international community. Colombia is ever
ready to share its experiences with other countries in
similar situations.
In the light of all this, Colombia welcomes its new
relationship with the ICC, which, under the leadership
of President Hofmański and Prosecutor Khan, promises
strengthened institutionality and new impetus in
identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes offending the human conscience.
To that end, Colombia will continue to be a strategic
partner and a State committed to the future of the ICC.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22-66288
