32

General Assembly-Sixtb Se11ion

4. Commends to the consideration of the specialized
agencies, so far as their constitutional processes will
permit, the adoption of similar procedures.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

C
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council reso_lution 402 B (XIII) of 17 September 1951 concerning
the concentration of effort and resources of the United
Nations in the economic and social fields,
Recognizing that the formulation of policy and the
financial and budgetary processes must be closely coordinated if effective concentration of effort and resources is to be achieved,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare as an
annex to his annual budget estimates an analysis, by
fields of activity and by budget sections, of the estimated cost during that year of the economic and social
activities of the United Nations; and to circulate this
analysis to the Economic and Social Council at the beginning of its regular session immediately preceding
the next regular session of the General Assembly;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to review its
procedures for examining the relative priorities and
financial implications of new projects under consideration, in such a way that the Council may consider such
projects not only in their substance but also in their
relationship to existing activities in the field concerned,
thereby promoting establishment of a balanced and
realistic work programme for the future and facilitating subsequent consideration by the General Assembly
of the related budgetary appropriations.;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as soon as possible after the regular session of the Economic and
Social Council immediately preceding the next regular
session of the General Assembly, to submit to that session of the General Assembly such supplementary information relating to the decisions of the Council and

to the priorities which it may have established as will
facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of
the related budgetary appropriations;
4. Recommends that the General Assembly defer
consideration of the sections of the budget estimates
relating to economic and social activities until the supplementary information concerning the decisi~ns of th_e
Economic and Social Council has been submitted to 1t
and reported upon by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

534 (VI). Co-ordination between the United Natio111 and the specialized agencies: pro•
gramme of conferences at Headquarters and
Geneva
The General Assembly,
Mindful of its co-ordinating responsibilities set forth
in Articles 58, 60 and 63 of the'Charter,
Having received with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on co-ordination of services in
Geneva, 3
Having noted in particular the importance of fixing
a basic pattern of United Nations conference activity
in Geneva which would lead to the most effective utilization of the available facilities at Geneva and Headquarters and, possibly, to saving on the total expenditure of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the executive heads of the specialized agencies and
the principal organs of the United Nations concerned,
to prepare such an annual conference pattern for submission to the next regular session of the General
Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
1
See Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/C.2&3/103-A/C.5/460.
