A /76/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

40th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 24 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Roscoe (United
Kingdom), Vice-President, took the Chair.

developed country category”. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1?

Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 9, entitled
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”, to take
action on draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1. I now give
the floor to the representative of Bhutan to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1 on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Mr. Dorji (Bhutan): On behalf of the Group of
77 (G-77) and China, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1, entitled “Graduation
of Bangladesh, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
and Nepal from the least developed country category”.
On behalf of the G-77 and China, and in submitting
the draft resolution, I would first like to congratulate
Bangladesh, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and
Nepal, and also to thank our partners for the productive
negotiations we have had. We look forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1,
entitled “Graduation of Bangladesh, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic and Nepal from the least

Draft resolution A/76/L.6/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 76/8).
The Acting President: We will now hear statements
after the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I thank all Member States,
especially our development partners, for their support
and flexibility in reaching consensus on the unanimous
adoption of resolution 76/8, entitled “Graduation of
Bangladesh, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and
Nepal from the least developed country category”.
With today’s adoption of this resolution, we have
reached yet another milestone in our graduation. We
now have a specific road map for graduating from
the least-developed-country (LDC) category by 2026.
I thank Ms. Agnes Harm of Fiji, the facilitator of the
resolution, and Mr. Namgyal Dorji of Bhutan, the
coordinator for the Group of 77 and China, for their
tireless efforts in that regard. I also thank the United
Nations Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States and the
Committee for Development Policy (CDP) for their
constant support throughout the process.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Nepal and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic on
achieving this important landmark with us. Graduation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-35401 (E)

*21XXXXX*

A/76/PV.40

has long been a cherished national aspiration for us. It
comes at an auspicious time, when we are celebrating
the fiftieth anniversary of our independence and the
centenary of the birth of the father of our nation. Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina envisioned the transformation
of Bangladesh into a middle-income country by 2021
and a developed country by 2041. She has led us
from the front on this exciting journey, despite the
unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The resolution that we have adopted today
includes some important elements. It affirms that
graduation should not result in a disruption or
reversal of development plans, programmes and
projects in our countries. It also embeds the notion of
continuous monitoring in order to ensure sustainable
and irreversible graduation. It advises the CDP to
further analyse at its 2024 triennial review whether the
preparatory phase extended to the graduating countries
will be adequate to manage the COVID-19 pandemic.
Those are welcome developments, especially now in our
efforts to build back more strongly from the pandemic
and develop further resilience against current and
future shocks, including the overarching challenges of
climate change.
We are at the final stage of our preparation for the
fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, to be held in Doha in January 2022. As
one of the co-Chairs of the Preparatory Committee
of the Conference, Bangladesh looks forward to a
transformative programme of action for LDCs in the
coming decade. The draft Doha Programme of Action
has identified sustainable graduation as an important
area of focus and has set a target of enabling 15
additional LDCs to meet the criteria for graduation
by 2031. We need enhanced support and solidarity
from our development partners to ensure appropriate,
predictable and additional incentives and supporting
measures to achieve that ambitious target.
The graduation of an LDC is not only a success
for the country itself but a testimony to the strength
of multilateral partnership led by the United Nations.
Graduation, however, comes with many challenges. The
countries on the graduation track are concerned about
the effects of the loss of LDC-specific support measures,
now exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis. They are
also suffering from many pre-existing vulnerabilities,
such as inadequate productive capacity, infrastructure
challenges and sudden economic and climatic shocks.
2/24

24/11/2021

It is therefore imperative to ensure that international
support measures to graduating and graduated LDCs
are continued and strengthened. The upcoming twelfth
World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference and
the Conference on the Least Developed Countries will
provide us with important opportunities to come up
with new and innovative support measures for them.
Let me highlight three specific thoughts in that regard.
First, we should aim to ensure an incentive-based
international support structure for graduating
and graduated LDCs. Graduation should not be a
punishment but a reward. There should be tailored and
clearly outlined support measures for addressing every
aspect of graduation, including the loss of international
support measures, access to non-LDC-specific support,
smooth transitions and financing for the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Secondly, it is
imperative to enhance the monitoring of graduations so
that it is responsive to crises, with adequate and timely
support measures. Finally, graduation is essentially a
demand-driven and politically led process. It is therefore
imperative to put it high on the United Nations agenda,
especially in order to bring transformative changes
to the lives and livelihoods of the more than 1 billion
people in the LDCs.
I thank the President for the opportunity to share
these thoughts on what is a very special occasion for us.
Ms. Seneduangdeth (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): It is my honour to speak on behalf of my
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Anouparb
Vongnorkeo, who is unable to be here owing to
unforeseen circumstances.
At the outset, we would like to express our sincere
thanks to all delegations for the constructive engagement
and support that has led to the consensus adoption
of this significant resolution, entitled “Graduation of
Bangladesh, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
and Nepal from the least developed country category”
(resolution 76/8). My delegation thanks the United
Nations Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for its
unwavering support and assistance in ensuring the
resolution’s smooth adoption.
Graduating from least-developed-country (LDC)
status has always been a major goal for the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic. To that end, all of the five-year
national socioeconomic development plans we have
21-35401

24/11/2021

A/76/PV.40

developed since early 2000 have included specific
targets for reaching that goal, taking into account the
particular development situation in each period, so as
to lay a strong foundation for a smooth graduation.
In addition, we have periodically streamlined the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
into our national planning process.

the LDC category is therefore an important milestone
in Nepal’s development trajectory. However, it presents
both challenges and opportunities. I want to extend
our warm congratulations to our fellow graduating
countries Bangladesh and the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic. We will make our graduation journey together,
benefiting and learning from one another’s experiences.

In its 2021 triennial review, the Committee for
Development Policy asserted that the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic had reached the threshold for
LDC graduation for a second time by meeting all
three criteria for graduation — gross national income,
human assets index and economic vulnerability index.
However, being recommended for graduation does not
mean that all of a country’s challenges will end. The
Lao People’s Democratic Republic will inevitably face
more and many challenges after graduation. It is crucial
to bear in mind that graduation from LDC status should
not be the final goal. A smooth, high-quality graduation
must be ensured so that a graduating country does not
slip back into LDC status, especially during the current
global health crisis. The adoption of this resolution is
therefore just the beginning.

The unfolding coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, with its far-reaching socioeconomic
implications, has further exacerbated our pre-existing
challenges and undermined our hard-earned
development gains. We are confident that the upcoming
Doha Programme of Action will include ambitious
efforts to address LDCs’ problems and enable them to
graduate at the earliest possible time. In that context, a
five-year preparatory period is crucial to enabling us to
effectively prepare for a smooth transition and resilient
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and to build back
better. Minimizing the negative effects and optimizing
the opportunities resulting from graduation are now our
top priority. Nepal is committed to making an all-out
effort to secure a smooth, sustainable and irreversible
graduation, and we look forward to receiving enhanced
international support for that during the transition
period and afterwards. In fact, enhanced international
support is crucial to all the LDCs in the aftermath of
the COVID-19 pandemic, in order to enable us to build
back better and ensure that as many LDCs as possible
can graduate as soon as possible.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic’s firm commitment
to continuing to work closely with the international
community, development partners, United Nations
agencies and all the relevant stakeholders. We look
forward to continued support and assistance in
ensuring our sustainable and irreversible graduation
from LDC status.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to
thank all delegates for our unanimous adoption of
resolution 76/8, entitled “Graduation of Bangladesh,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Nepal from
the least developed country category”. I want to take
this opportunity to thank Ms. Agnes Harm of Fiji, the
facilitator of the resolution, for her efforts in bringing
the informal consultations to a successful and speedy
conclusion. I would also like to thank Mr. Namgyal
Dorji of Bhutan for his effective coordination of the
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Nepal’s graduation is indeed unique in the sense
that it is the first country to be recommended for
graduation from the least-developed-country (LDC)
category after meeting only two of the three criteria,
the human assets and economic vulnerability indexes,
without meeting the income criteria. Graduation from

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9.
Agenda item 91 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/76/232)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.10)
Ms. Al Ali (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express the thanks
of the United Arab Emirates for the opportunity to work
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
I also want to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Director General of the IAEA, Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, for his comprehensive briefing on the report

21-354013/24

A/76/PV.40

(A/76/232) of the Agency for the year 2020 (see A/76/
PV.36).
The United Arab Emirates stresses the central role
that the IAEA plays in supporting the peaceful use of
nuclear technology and in helping Member States in
their quest to benefit from nuclear applications and
energy. My delegation commends the Agency’s efforts
and ability in responding to and addressing the emerging
challenges related to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It provides a wide range of technical assistance and
continued support for the responsible uses of nuclear
technology by establishing important forums that
support constructive international cooperation among
Member States in the areas of safety, nuclear security
and non-proliferation.
We greatly value the IAEA’s Technical
Cooperation Programme, which is a vital mechanism
for channelling support to Member States in their
pursuit of peaceful applications of nuclear technology
and thereby contributing to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. In that regard I
am grateful to the IAEA for the valuable support
it has given the United Arab Emirates in developing
its nuclear energy infrastructure and building the
necessary capacity for its nuclear energy programme.
The United Arab Emirates continues to consider it vital
to maintain the highest nuclear safety standards in all
national applications of nuclear technology, and we
are pleased with our successful hosting of ConvEx-3
exercises at the Barakah Nuclear Energy Plant under
the IAEA’s supervision, reflecting our commitment
to international transparency and to supporting and
promoting international systems for responding to
nuclear emergencies.
The United Arab Emirates has connected the first
two units at the Barakah Nuclear Energy Plant to the
main national power grid, making the Barakah Plant
the first nuclear energy project in the region to include
multiple operational units. That achievement will help
to promote sustainable growth and complement our
State’s efforts to realize its goals and address issues
of climate change. When all four units at the Barakah
Plant are completed, we expect that it will have a total
capacity of 5.6 gigawatts and provide 25 per cent of
our country’s power demands, reducing our carbon
emissions by around 21 million tonnes annually. In that
regard, I would like to focus on our national nuclear
energy programme’s commitment since its inception to
implementing the IAEA guidelines and international
4/24

24/11/2021

best practices in full compliance with the highest
standards of transparency, operational safety, security
and non-proliferation.
The United Arab Emirates underlines the
importance of the IAEA’s verification measures and
the need for full compliance with its comprehensive
safeguards system and additional protocol, which are
important tools for promoting international confidence
in the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes. The
IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme remains
an essential means of support to Member States so
that they benefit from the peaceful application of
nuclear technology. My country is continuing its close
technical cooperation with the IAEA in developing the
necessary infrastructure and building the capacities of
our nuclear energy programme in all sectors. With the
support of the IAEA, we have created programmes for
advanced degrees in medical physics and enhanced the
safety of the use of radiation in medical applications.
We have also launched initiatives to educate our youth
in nuclear science and its applications and to continue
to promote women’s participation in the nuclear field.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses its
commitment to a constructive and ongoing partnership
with the IAEA through a responsible approach to
developing a national nuclear energy programme and
using peaceful nuclear applications. We appreciate the
work of the IAEA secretariat and the achievements
reflected in its 2020 annual report.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his comprehensive
presentation of the Agency’s report (A/76/232). I would
also like to thank the delegation of the Republic of
Korea for introducing draft resolution A/76/L.10 (see
A/76/PV.36), of which Argentina is a sponsor and
through which the General Assembly has taken note of
the report. We appreciate the enormous efforts of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, outlined in its
report, to assist countries during the pandemic.
Argentina was among the first 20 countries
to receive assistance from the Agency through the
provision of personal protective equipment and
reverse-transcription
polymerase-chain-reaction
equipment for rapid real-time detection of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We want to underscore
the importance of the Agency’s programmes, which
21-35401

24/11/2021

we believe will continue to be of great benefit to the
international community in the current context. There
is the Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action initiative, the
primary goal of which is to create a global network to
assist national laboratories in the oversight, monitoring,
early detection and control of zoonotic and animal
diseases such as COVID-19, Ebola, avian influenza
and Zika. The Agency also has a project in Seibersdorf,
in Austria, aimed at completing the modernization of
eight laboratories for nuclear applications. Through its
National Atomic Energy Commission, Argentina was
one of 43 Member States that made an extrabudgetary
contribution to the first phase of that project.
We welcome the renewal of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear
Science and Technology in Latin America and the
Caribbean, which has proved to be a valuable tool for
improving the quality of life in countries in the region.
We also commend the goal outlined in the report
of achieving gender parity in all of the higher-level
professional categories by 2025. As part of a crosscutting public policy, Argentina supports increasing
women’s participation in the nuclear field and hopes
that the IAEA Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship
Programme will make a significant contribution in
that regard.
Argentina made the choice early on to back the
development of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful
purposes as an instrument for its national development.
Along the way we have developed a strong nuclear
programme for all the various stages of the nuclear
fuel cycle. We have cemented a reputation as a reliable
exporter supporting research, development and
innovation in the field of nuclear technology, thanks to
State policies that consistently champion the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy and its applications. We firmly
believe that nuclear energy is vital to a future of energy
sustainability. With that in mind, it is important to
ensure that the international community gives the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency its due
value and weight.
Our nuclear sector, which is widely recognized
internationally, gives special priority and significance
to the implementation of the international safeguards
system and close cooperation with the IAEA in that
regard. We emphasize that activities for implementing
safeguards must be efficient, effective and grounded
on a solid technical foundation in order to ensure their
non-discriminatory nature. Moreover, as the report

A/76/PV.40

underscores, it is important that the implementation of
the safeguards system has not been interrupted during
the pandemic, especially as we are approaching the
tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
which my country will preside over a few weeks from
now, in January 2022. We believe that the strengthening
of the IAEA as a forum for cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear energy and a guarantor of the global
non-proliferation system represents an important
counterpoint when it comes to the evaluation of the
implementation of the NPT, as well as an appropriate
opportunity to work for the proper implementation of
the NPT’s three pillars.
Argentina insists on the importance of ensuring that
the safeguards regime and its guarantees are strengthened
in an atmosphere of dialogue and cooperation. In that
regard, it is in the interests of all to underscore the
importance of the quadripartite agreement to which
Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the
IAEA are parties. As we commemorate its thirtieth
anniversary, Argentina once again underscores the
constructive role and relevance of the BrazilianArgentine Agency, as well as of the bilateral inspection
system, both in implementing safeguards and building
trust. We should also underscore the importance of
the First Committee’s adoption by consensus of draft
resolution A/C.1/76/L.56, on the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials, and to thank the membership of the United
Nations in that regard. The draft resolution is an
example of the international community’s recognition
of the work of the Agency in strengthening regional and
international security.
Lastly, I want to reiterate my country’s commitment
to the highest standards of nuclear safety, which remains
one of the pillars of our nuclear policy. Our nuclear
regulatory authority is an independent regulatory and
technical body designated by law to oversee nuclear
construction and safety. Argentina is set to expand its
nuclear electricity generation system in compliance with
the highest standards of safety and security, and we are
currently working to host a mission from the Integrated
Regulatory Review Service during 2022. The Argentine
nuclear sector will continue working to prepare for the
most relevant conferences in the field, which have been
rescheduled for 2022 and 2023 respectively.

21-354015/24

A/76/PV.40

We reiterate once again our total and unwavering
support for the IAEA as it seeks to strengthen nuclear
safety and security at a global level, and we underscore
the guidance provided in the ministerial declaration
of the International Conference on Nuclear Safety. We
also highlight the importance of the Nuclear Security
Plan 2022-2025 recently adopted by the Agency. We
underscore the importance of the entry into force of
the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and of the review
process under way, which will culminate in the review
conference scheduled to be held in March 2022.
Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia thanks Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his presentation of the Agency’s
2020 annual report (A/76/232) and the statement he
made last week to the Assembly (see A/76/PV.36), in
which he reported on the developments in the Agency’s
management following publication of the report.
My delegation also thanks the Republic of Korea for
introducing draft resolution A/76/L.10, which we
support and sponsor.
The Agency plays a fundamental role in promoting
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the transfer
of knowledge and nuclear technologies applicable in
areas that are important for development. Its Technical
Cooperation Programme is a vehicle for the transfer of
knowledge and technologies, both of which aid in the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Its
work is essential in matters of nuclear technological
and physical security, and in the establishment of
standards and a culture of safety. Furthermore, as the
only competent authority in the field, the Agency plays
a primary role in verifying the exclusively peaceful
nature of nuclear programmes through the application
of safeguards. It therefore plays a fundamental role as
an important component of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, thereby contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We would like to highlight the work of the Agency
in its three pillars, especially its work in 2020 and 2021,
and its ability to meet the demands and challenges
imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, adapting to the circumstances and
responding innovatively to the needs of the Member
States. We particularly want to acknowledge the
technical cooperation efforts promoted by the Agency
during 2020 and 2021 to strengthen national capacities
6/24

24/11/2021

in the fight against the pandemic. In that context,
Colombia is grateful for the technical cooperation
project on Strengthening Capabilities of Member States
in Building, Strengthening and Restoring Capacities
and Services in Case of Outbreaks, Emergencies and
Disasters, through which we received COVID-19
detection equipment. We are also grateful for the
project on Supporting National and Regional Capacity
in Integrated Action for Control of Zoonotic Diseases,
within the framework of the Zoonotic Disease Integrated
Action initiative, with the aim of strengthening the
Zoonotic Laboratory Network and the scientifictechnical approach to zoonotic agents.
The benefits of nuclear energy are becoming visible
to the public specifically through its applications in
areas that are essential to development. That is why it
is important to strengthen the Technical Cooperation
Programme and to stimulate and support initiatives and
projects aimed at providing innovative, equitable and
competitive solutions in fundamental areas, including
the prevention and mitigation of future pandemics, the
protection of the environment, the production of clean
energy, water resource management, human health and
applications for the agricultural sector. As a member
of the Board of Governors and Vice-Chair for the
period from 2021 to 2022, Colombia will support the
strengthening of the Technical Cooperation Programme
and of expanding its scope and the contribution it makes
to the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, and will also promote the greater inclusion of
women in the area of nuclear science and technology.
Colombia will also continue to support nuclear-safety
efforts, as well as strengthening the verification system,
universalizing safeguards and implementing the
additional protocol. My country will continue working
to strengthen IAEA capacities for nuclear surveillance
and verification, as well as its quest for suitable
diplomatic means and mechanisms to guarantee the
continuity of those tasks.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank Mr. Grossi
for his leadership and dedication, acknowledge the staff
of the Agency and express its gratitude to all the States
that have contributed to its work.
Ms. Wang Yingtong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presentation of
the report (A/76/232) by Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), on the work of the Agency (see A/76/
PV.36).
21-35401

24/11/2021

Over the past year the Agency, as mandated by its
Statute, has been committed to promoting the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy worldwide, safeguarding the
nuclear non-proliferation regime, enhancing nuclear
safety and actively assisting Member States using
nuclear and nuclear-derived technologies to fight the
pandemic, with positive results. China appreciates
the fact that the work of the Agency can facilitate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development
Goals and help countries achieve green recovery and
development. Nuclear energy is making steady strides
globally. Nuclear energy and the application of nuclear
technology are very important to ensuring energy
security, addressing climate change and promoting
socioeconomic development. They are also very
helpful in responding to the pandemic, enabling work
and production to resume and addressing challenges
to livelihoods.
On the other hand, we are still seeing daunting
challenges in the area of international nuclear
non-proliferation and nuclear safety. The threat of
nuclear terrorism cannot be ignored. The politicization
of the peaceful use of nuclear energy is becoming
increasingly pronounced. Next year will see the
holding of the tenth Review Conference of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
strengthening the work of the Agency in these areas
should be part and parcel of the NPT’s implementation
in service of peace and development in the modern
era. China hopes that the Agency will focus on the
following aspects.
First, the Agency should vigorously promote
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, adhering to
the principles of shared benefits and inclusiveness
in continuing its robust support and assistance to
Member States, especially developing countries, in the
development and use of nuclear energy and the wider
application of nuclear technology. It should continue
to promote global nuclear safety and security and
actively lead international cooperation in those areas.
The Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan was one
of the most serious such incidents in human history.
The disposal of nuclear-contaminated water is vital
to the global marine ecological environment and the
health of people everywhere. Japan should earnestly
heed and respond to the calls of its neighbours and
the international community. Pending consultations
and agreements with interested countries and relevant

A/76/PV.40

international organizations, it should not discharge its
nuclear wastewater into the sea. The Agency should
uphold the principle of objectivity and impartiality and
a science-based approach in carrying out its assessment,
monitoring and verification before, during and after
disposal, in order to ensure absolute safety.
Secondly, the IAEA should strengthen its
safeguards regime. While maintaining its objectivity
and impartiality, the Agency should always strive to
achieve universal application of the comprehensive
safeguards agreement and its additional protocol and the
greater effectiveness and efficiency of its safeguards.
Meanwhile, in strict accordance with its mandate, it
should handle safeguards-related issues appropriately.
The planned nuclear-submarine deal between the United
States, the United Kingdom and Australia violates the
purposes and objectives of the NPT and poses a serious
risk of nuclear proliferation. The Agency’s existing
safeguards regime cannot exercise effective safeguards
regarding the naval nuclear-propulsion reactor and
related nuclear material that the United States and the
United Kingdom intend to transfer to Australia. Since
this issue bears on the integrity and validity of the Treaty
and concerns the interests of all the Agency’s member
States, it calls for a membership-wide discussion. To
that end, China has proposed that the Agency establish
a special committee, open to the participation of all
member States, to discuss the political, legal and
technical issues pertaining to the safeguards for the
naval nuclear-propulsion reactor and to related nuclear
materials of non-nuclear-weapon States, and to submit
a report with recommendations to the Agency’s Board
of Governors and the General Conference. Until such
a report is issued, the Agency’s secretariat should not
negotiate with the three countries on the safeguards
arrangement for their nuclear-submarine deal.
Thirdly, the IAEA should promote the political
and diplomatic settlement of nuclear hotspot issues. It
should stay committed to objectivity and impartiality
in performing its monitoring and verification functions
in accordance with its mandate and play its due role
in seeking political and diplomatic solutions to such
regional hotspot problems as the nuclear issue on the
Korean peninsula and the Iranian nuclear issue. China
appreciates the Agency’s monitoring and verification
of Iran’s implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, in line with Security Council resolution
2231 (2015). We support the Agency in engaging Iran in
dialogue to address the relevant differences.

21-354017/24

A/76/PV.40

China greatly values and actively supports the vital
role of the Agency and the Director General in promoting
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We steadfastly
support the inalienable right of all countries, especially
developing countries, to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. China submitted draft resolution A/C.1/76/L.55,
entitled “Promoting international cooperation on
peaceful uses in the context of international security”,
to the First Committee, reaffirming the international
consensus on non-proliferation and underlining the
importance of the right of all countries, especially
developing countries, to nuclear energy’s peaceful uses.
China has always followed a rational, coordinated
and balanced nuclear safety strategy and actively
promoted the safe and efficient development of nuclear
energy. We firmly support the Agency in exercising its
safeguards functions and have engaged constructively
in the political and diplomatic settlement of nuclear
hotspot issues and in the maintenance of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. China stands ready
to continue to deepen its cooperation with the Agency
and to make new contributions to the development and
peaceful uses of nuclear energy across the world.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation has a generally
positive view of the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) during the reporting period
and has supported and sponsored draft resolution
A/76/L.10, on the report of the IAEA (A/76/232),
to be adopted today. We are unfailingly committed
to supporting the Agency’s efforts. It is a unique
instrument for international cooperation in the area
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as a
reliable mechanism for monitoring States’ fulfilment
of their nuclear non-proliferation obligations. We
wholeheartedly support its programmatic activities
in the areas of nuclear and physical security, the safe
transportation of nuclear and radioactive materials,
safe radioactive waste management and emergency
preparedness and response. The Russian Federation is
ready to continue providing the IAEA with appropriate
support, including through voluntary contributions.
We note the IAEA’s work in promoting nuclear
energy, including in the context of combating climate
change, as well as the importance of peaceful atomic
technology in ensuring the stability of energy systems,
particularly when they increasingly rely on renewable
energy sources with variable electricity generation.
We support the activities of the IAEA in promoting
8/24

24/11/2021

nuclear technology applications in a number of areas of
human activity.
We greatly value the steps that the Agency has taken
to ensure the implementation of safeguards, especially
in the difficult context of the pandemic. We believe
that the IAEA’s monitoring mechanism should remain
objective, unpoliticized, technically sound and based
on safeguards agreements concluded between States
and the Agency. The IAEA’s verification measures
and activities in Iran are important, including in the
interests of restoring the full implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We hope that the
Agency will continue to adhere to a proven technical
approach on Iran within its existing mandate.
With regard to various comments by representatives
of Ukraine regarding IAEA safeguards on its territory
(see A/76/PV.36), it is up to Kyiv to resolve issues
regarding the access of IAEA inspectors to certain areas
of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions in direct dialogue
with the leadership of those regions. We firmly believe
that the IAEA should remain a technical organization.
It is important not to allow matters that fall outside its
Statute to be artificially introduced into the agenda of
the Agency’s governing bodies.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): We have all heard the
famous words of Albert Einstein, who said,
“The release of atomic energy has not created a
new problem. It has merely made more urgent the
necessity of solving an existing one.”
Having considered the rationale of that message rather
seriously, we have taken preventive measures to put in
place supervisory oversight before the existing issues
become real concerns.
Sri Lanka’s involvement with nuclear science and
technology began in 1957 when it became a member
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
That was followed in 1962 by the establishment of
the Radioisotope Centre of the University of Colombo
and in 1969 by the enactment of a law establishing
the Atomic Energy Authority. The law delegated
two main responsibilities to the Atomic Energy
Authority — the promotion of the utilization of nuclear
technology for the benefit of the people of Sri Lanka,
and the protection of the public and of workers engaged
in using radiation and radioisotopes from the harmful
effects of ionizing radiation.
21-35401

24/11/2021

Until 2014 the Atomic Energy Authority functioned
as the national regulatory authority on the use of
radiation and radioisotopes, the organization responsible
for facilitating the use of nuclear technology in the
medical, industrial and agricultural sectors and the
focal point of the IAEA in Sri Lanka. As a result of the
expansion of activities involving nuclear technologies,
following Sri Lanka’s construction of a new building
for the IAEA with laboratory facilities, we realized the
need for an independent regulatory authority. In 2014
we passed an act creating two new organizations, the
Sri Lanka Atomic Energy Regulatory Council and the
Sri Lanka Atomic Energy Board. The law delegates
to the Council the responsibility of developing and
implementing a regulatory regime to ensure the
protection of personnel and the environment in the use
of nuclear technology for beneficial use and ensuring
the security of radioactive resources, and to the Atomic
Energy Board the responsibility of facilitating the
use of nuclear technology. With the formation of the
Council and the Board, the Atomic Energy Authority
ceased to exist. The current state of affairs is that the
Council, the regulatory body, came into existence on
1 January 2015. It has the responsibility of establishing
and implementing a regulatory regime in order to
ensure the protection of personnel and the environment
from potential harm and the full effects of radiation and
to ensure the security of radioactive resources.
Where our national policy on nuclear activity is
concerned, we will conduct it with regard to a number of
policy principles. All nuclear activities in Sri Lanka are
to be conducted exclusively for peaceful purposes and in
compliance with the relevant obligations. The Council
is an independent regulatory authority that carries out
its mandate without fear or favour. It should use its
powers judiciously without unnecessarily burdening its
customers, and among other things it should optimize
the utilization of financial and other resources. Sri
Lanka does not operate nuclear power plants, or any
activity related to the production of nuclear material.
Nor has the Government of Sri Lanka taken any policy
decisions on establishing nuclear power plants. The
uses of nuclear technology in Sri Lanka are limited to
the fields of medicine, industry, agriculture, research
and teaching.
It is noteworthy that the IAEA hosted a virtual
national seminar on topical issues of nuclear law for Sri
Lanka in January. The topics presented and discussed
ranged from transparency in nuclear law and the legal

A/76/PV.40

provisions for the safety and security of radioactive
sources for the benefit of the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment
and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste
Management. We are grateful to the IAEA for the
fact that over the years Sri Lanka has benefited from
its legislative assistance through various regional
and national activities. The January seminar was the
first major step Sri Lanka has taken to engage all
stakeholders at the national level in starting the process
of the implementation of legal instruments, an area
of special interest and importance to us. The virtual
seminar gave the participants an opportunity to discuss
civil liability for nuclear damage and the benefits of
modernized nuclear liability instruments such as the
1997 Convention on Supplementary Compensation
for Nuclear Damage, which provides a framework for
countries in South Asia, including those in the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
In his concluding remarks at the seminar, Anthony
Wetherall of the IAEA Office of Legal Affairs noted
the importance of adhering to and implementing the
relevant international legal instruments and reiterated
the IAEA’s readiness to continue to assist us in that
regard and in developing and strengthening our national
legal framework. We greatly appreciate the IAEA’s
support in that area. The seminar, implemented within
the framework of the IAEA legislative assistance
programme, is one of the many activities under the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme designed
to support Member States in establishing and enhancing
their legal frameworks. We would like to congratulate
the IAEA and its Director General, Mr. Rafael Mariano
Grossi, and his team of officials for maintaining the
highest standards of supervisory oversight in this
extraordinary year for the world, in which the IAEA
has served its member States with resilience and
commitment. Sri Lanka assures the IAEA of its full
cooperation in our endeavour to ensure the safe and
useful appropriation of nuclear material for the benefit
of all humankind and world peace.
Mr. Jardali (Lebanon): My delegation would like to
thank Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
for the presentation of the Agency’s annual report
(A/76/232) last week (see A/76/PV.36). We commend
the Agency for continuing its work while contributing
to the global efforts to fight the coronavirus disease

21-354019/24

A/76/PV.40

pandemic. We also commend its activities in various
areas highlighted in the report, notably its continued
commitment to strengthening IAEA safety standards
and assistance to States in their efforts to establish
comprehensive national nuclear-security regimes
through capacity-building and human resource
development, despite the challenging circumstances
resulting from the pandemic. The Agency plays an
essential role in facilitating States’ access to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy and technology, while ensuring
that the highest levels of nuclear safety, security and
safeguards are maintained.
Lebanon looks forward to the Assembly’s adoption
by consensus of draft resolution A/76/L.10, on the
IAEA’s annual report. We also affirm the importance
of achieving the universality of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
the comprehensive safeguards agreement in order
to ensure the credibility of the international nucleardisarmament regime. As we prepare to hold the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in January,
we stress the IAEA’s important role in maintaining a
balance between the three pillars of the Treaty — nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of
nuclear technology. In that respect, Lebanon would like
to emphasize Member States’ inalienable right to those
peaceful uses, as laid down in article IV of the NPT.
In accordance with General Assembly decision
73/546, the first session of the Conference on the
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction was
held in 2019 and presided over by Jordan. The second
session of the Conference will be held next week under
the presidency of Kuwait. In our view, the establishment
of such a zone in the Middle East is urgently needed
for fostering security and stability in our region of the
world. We look forward to the day when it becomes a
reality, like other, similar zones around the world.
In conclusion, Lebanon reiterates its continued
support for the Agency’s role in promoting the safe,
secure and peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Kuwait is keen to participate in this annual debate on
the agenda item regarding the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (A/76/232), based on
our belief in the important, pioneering and pivotal role
10/24

24/11/2021

played by the IAEA in promoting and harnessing the
peaceful uses of atomic energy.
The State of Kuwait joined the IAEA 57 years ago
and since then has strengthened its cooperation, through
many of its national institutions and bodies, with the
Agency’s various departments, in order to benefit
from its programmes and build Kuwait’s institutions
and capacities with a view to implementing vital
socioeconomic development projects. We look forward
to further strengthening that cooperation in reaching
our desired goals. The work of the sixty-fifth session
of the General Conference of the IAEA concluded in
September, as did our 2019-2021 membership of the
Board of Governors. Thanks to cooperation with our
sister countries and other friendly nations, during those
two years we were able to contribute to strengthening
the work of the Agency. We pledge to continue our active
participation in the Board’s activities and promote the
technical and operational work of the Agency so that
Member States can achieve their aspirations, including
those relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy for
peace, health and prosperity for the whole world.
My delegation has taken note of the Agency’s
annual report and emphasizes that the Agency’s
mandate requires cooperation from all of us. We once
again underscore the need to strengthen cooperation
with all parties in order to ensure the use of nuclear
technology for peace and development. We are ready
to support all initiatives and programmes that help
to improve living standards and health, including the
Zoonotic Disease Integrated Action initiative, to which
we have contributed $300,000 because we believe in its
importance, particularly when it comes to strengthening
the global preparedness system for confronting
pandemics that may emerge in the future. We have also
contributed $100,000 to the Marie Skłodowska-Curie
Fellowship Programme, which seeks to empower women
and increase their participation in the nuclear field. That
will undoubtedly contribute to the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals and is in line with
Kuwait’s Vision 2035, which is particularly focused
on women, who represent half of society. In the past
few years Kuwait has also contributed $500,000 to the
modernization of the IAEA laboratories in Seibersdorf
and $1.5 million to the ReNuAL initiative.
Our participation as a member of the Agency is not
limited to technical cooperation. We also attach great
importance to the other pillars of the Agency’s role and
mandate. In emphasizing the right of all countries to
21-35401

24/11/2021

produce, develop and use atomic energy for peaceful
purposes within the framework of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), we
also warn against the risk of proliferation of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
which constitute a challenge to international peace
and security.
My delegation has been following the Director
General’s periodic reports regarding the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), on Iran’s
nuclear programme. In that connection, Kuwait calls on
the Islamic Republic of Iran to recommit fully to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted pursuant
to resolution 2231 (2015). We also look forward to
its ratification and implementation of its Additional
Protocol so that the Agency can provide credible
assurances regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear
material or activities in Iran and confirm its status as a
non-nuclear-weapon State.
Finally, we stress the importance of establishing a
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, which will contribute
to the stability of the region and the maintenance of
international peace and security. We also stress that
Israel must accede to the NPT, especially as it is the
only country in the region not party to the Treaty. We
also insist that it subject all its facilities to the IAEA’s
comprehensive safeguards system. We welcomed the
convening of the first session of the Conference on the
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction,
presided over by Jordan in November 2019. We look
forward to presiding over the second session of the
Conference when it starts, in just a few days. We are
fully dedicated to achieving its goals and look forward
to the participation of all States concerned.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/76/L.10, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.10: Albania, Algeria, Argentina,

A/76/PV.40

Australia, Chile, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, France, Guatemala,
Iceland, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Malawi,
Malaysia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Turkey,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.10?
Draft resolution A/76/L.10 was adopted (resolution
76/9).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in the exercise of right of reply, I would like
to remind members that statements are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and five minutes for
the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats. I now give the floor to the representative
of Japan.
Mr. Shibuya (Japan): On behalf of the Government
of Japan, I wish to respond to the statement that the
representative of China made earlier. With respect to
the treated water at Tokyo Electric Power Company
Holdings Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station,
the Government of Japan will continue to take measures
based on international standards and international
practice. It should be noted that as mentioned at the
beginning of last week’s meeting (see A/76/PV.36) by
Mr. Grossi, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the safety of the
handling of the treated water will be reviewed by the
IAEA, which has expertise and knowledge in the field of
nuclear safety. I should also emphasize that the treated
water mentioned is not contaminated; it is water that
meets regulatory safety standards. The Government
of Japan has been transparent in explaining the status
of its efforts to the international community, based on
scientific evidence. We want to assure the Assembly
that we will continue to do so in close cooperation with
the IAEA.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.

21-3540111/24

A/76/PV.40

Agenda item 123 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country, Syria, was among the first to call
for and encourage a process of reform of the Security
Council, 29 years ago. We participated actively in
the first meeting of the Open-ended Working Group
on the Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council
and Other Matters related to the Security Council in
order to create a Council that would reflect the current
status of international relations and keep up with the
developments that our Organization has witnessed since
it was established. My delegation affirms its continued
support to the Working Group, and we appreciate
the progress made within the intergovernmental
negotiations on reaching an equitable and balanced
representation within the Security Council and
supporting it in its maintenance of international peace
and security.
Today we live in a world dominated by new
patterns of wars and conflicts, a world dominated by
an increasing tendency to use force and in which some
countries use their political and economic influence to
try to make this Organization a tool for implementing
their own agendas. We therefore believe that it is
important to exclude any factors that increase the
deep divisions among Member States regarding the
principles of reform. The core issue of reforming the
Security Council should start with ensuring equitable
representation for developing countries, making their
voices heard and enabling them to exercise their
sovereign rights on an equal footing with others. We
also underscore the need to refrain from imposing any
non-consensus-based texts on Member States as a basis
for any negotiation process. No artificial and unrealistic
timelines should be imposed, since such actions fall
outside the scope of the co-Chairs.
The Syrian Arab Republic underscores the need
for the negotiations on all five reform pillars to take
place simultaneously and in a balanced manner,
without giving one pillar more attention than another
or discussing one of them while ignoring the others.
We still continue to see divergent opinions among
Member States regarding the reform process. Some
say that the Security Council must not infringe on the
12/24

24/11/2021

prerogatives of the General Assembly, while others call
for respect for the mandate of the Security Council and
try to prevent the General Assembly from interfering
in issues on the Council’s agenda. We must therefore
focus on the extremely important matter of ensuring
the separation of the Security Council and the General
Assembly’s respective mandates and prerogatives while
ensuring continued cooperation between all United
Nations organs.
My country continues to believe that the
intergovernmental negotiations should be the only
platform for discussing the process of reforming the
Council. We call for continuing deepened, democratic
and comprehensive consultations without prejudice to
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations — non-interference in the internal affairs
of Member States and ensuring that the Security
Council is not used as a cover or a tool to justify
military aggression against any Member State. We also
encourage sufficient and thorough discussions on all
five main points in order to reach the widest possible
consensus without delay.
Genuine reform of the Security Council requires
transparency, integrity, effectiveness and balance. It
must be based on a genuine and honest application of
multilateral and preventive diplomacy underpinned by
the principles of justice, equality and the right of Member
States to set their own national policy without external
interference, in a manner that will guarantee security,
prosperity and growth to all peoples of the world,
without exception, discrimination or double standards.
We also need to increase countries’ representation on the
Council, based on the intergovernmental negotiations
process established pursuant to decision 62/557, which
is considered the main reference document and the
cornerstone of these negotiations.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank the President for
convening us to discuss reform of the Security Council.
I would like to take this opportunity to join others in
congratulating Ambassadors Alya Al-Thani and Martin
Hermann on their appointment as the co-Chairs of the
intergovernmental negotiations. I also commend the
valuable work done by Ms. Al-Thani and Ms. Joanna
Wronecka during the previous session. My delegation
assures the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations process of its full cooperation and its
support for their work.
21-35401

24/11/2021

As we debate the issue of reform of the Council,
we do so in a world that is worlds apart from the one
that existed when the Council was established. The
Council’s role has expanded and diversified, as has the
membership of the United Nations, both in numbers and
in geopolitical dynamics. We all agree that the Council’s
membership and structure is not in tune with the current
realities on the ground and in the United Nations. The
last time the Council underwent reform was 56 years
ago. In order for it to be fully representative, relevant,
effective and fit for purpose, it must be reformed. In
fact, as the coronavirus disease pandemic revealed,
and given the undeniable link between peace and
development, it is truly a matter of urgency.
As we believe in comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, let me reiterate our basic positions
at the outset. On the question of representation, we
agree with many other Member States that certain
underrepresented regions, such as Africa, ought to have
due representation in an enlarged Council. The AsiaPacific and Latin American regions deserve the same.
The representation of small and developing countries
also warrants due consideration. With respect to
categories of membership, we are of the view that while
both the permanent and non-permanent membership of
the Council should be enlarged, the expansion should
not be such as to affect the Council’s efficiency. With
respect to the size of the Council and its working
methods, any number in the mid-twenties range would
perhaps do justice to the larger membership. As for the
working methods, we want to see a more accessible,
transparent, accountable, democratic and effective
Security Council.
On the question of the veto, we will join the
consensus that emerges. However, we would stress
measures that ensure the judicious application of the veto
by limiting its application only for certain compelling
situations. Regarding the Council’s relations with the
General Assembly, the relationship between the two
organs should be mutually reinforcing, with more scope
for consultations drawing on their respective expertise
and mandates.
Back in 1979, Bangladesh was one of the 10
countries that proposed that the Assembly include
an agenda item entitled “The question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council”. Since then, many processes,
initiatives, models and so forth for reform of the
Council have been proposed, including through the

A/76/PV.40

intergovernmental negotiations process. However, we
see no progress. If that continues, the legitimacy of this
entire exercise and our own relevance will be put into
serious question. It is imperative that we show results,
and I would like to share two points in that regard.
First, we feel that building on the important work
done in the past sessions of the intergovernmental
negotiations is essential if we are to work towards the
objective of achieving genuine reform. In view of the
call from a large number of Member States, we see merit
in having text-based negotiations. At the same time, we
also underscore the imperative of an inclusive approach
that faithfully reflects all the positions expressed and
that all Member States subscribe to, if we are to ensure
its legitimacy and acceptance.
Secondly, on the modalities, we feel that it is
imperative to step up cooperation among the key groups
and members in order to move the process forward. We
could exhaustively map the areas of convergence and
agreed language — in other words, we can start with
the low-hanging fruit and progressively move to the
next steps. To start with, could we consider a decision
on the various proposals through the exclusion method
as well? There must be some order and method brought
into this exercise, and not this ritual of repeating our
positions year after year. Again, we want to underline
the imperative for an inclusive and participatory process
so that we can move forward.
We stand ready to contribute to the process of
building consensus through a realistic and constructive
approach, not to mention a fully participatory and
inclusive process. The co-Chairs will have our
full cooperation.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): Let me begin by once
again congratulating the President on his election to
lead the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session
and assuring him of Kenya’s support. I would like
to express my delegation’s appreciation to Ms. Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of
the State of Qatar, and Ms. Joanna Wronecka, former
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Poland, for
their leadership of the intergovernmental negotiations
process during the seventy-fifth session. I also
congratulate Mr. Martin Bille Herman of Denmark and
Ms. Al-Thani on their appointment and reappointment,
respectively, as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations process during the seventy-sixth session. I
want to assure them of Kenya’s cooperation and support.

21-3540113/24

A/76/PV.40

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sierra Leone on
behalf of the Group of African States (see A/76/PV.33).
We also support our colleagues speaking in support
of the African Common Position on Security Council
reform, as espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus and
Sirte Declaration. I would now like to emphasize a few
points in my national capacity.
Africa’s goal in this area continues to be full
representation in all the decision-making organs of
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council.
Kenya’s current membership on the Council has shown
us how truly important it is to have the continent
represented in the decisions made on the issues that
have to do with us. The growing support for the African
Common Position makes it clear that a majority agrees
on the need for Africa, as the largest region in terms
of United Nations membership and as the focus of
the bulk of the United Nations agenda in the Security
Council, to be adequately represented. As we note the
overwhelming and increasing support that the African
Common Position enjoys in this intergovernmental
plenary, we reiterate the need for that support to be
properly reflected in all intergovernmental negotiation
documents. We also reiterate the call for referencing the
2015 framework document, which provides a rich, solid
foundation for our current work.
We believe that the intergovernmental negotiation
deliberations should produce a broad consensus that
will enable the process to move forward and achieve
the desired reforms so as to ensure a fit-for-purpose and
responsive Security Council. To that end, Kenya urges
all delegations to continue to muster the necessary
political will and commitment to do so. Finally, my
delegation will continue to constructively engage in
the process.
Mrs. Pejic-glymph (Serbia): I am grateful to the
President for the opportunity to deliver a statement on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.
Last year we marked the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations in the unprecedented circumstances
imposed by the pandemic. The catastrophe on a global
scale that hit the world almost two years ago is still far
from over. The health crisis that we have experienced
has been like no other since the Second World War.
It has exposed and exacerbated inequalities between
countries and within societies and created political,
economic and social instability in many regions. It
14/24

24/11/2021

has also demonstrated how interconnected the world
is, thereby putting more emphasis on the need for
greater international cooperation and the importance of
multilateralism and organizations like ours. We should
take it as an opportunity to reflect on the results achieved
so far within the United Nations, its achievements with
respect to its goals, and also on its shortcomings and
limitations. We should further discuss and examine
how to improve our Organization so that it becomes
more democratic and efficient.
Against that backdrop, today we are having
our annual debate on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council, and very soon we will engage in
the next cycle of the intergovernmental negotiations.
This is the right time to ask ourselves what we need
in a Security Council. I think no one would dispute
that we need a democratic, transparent and efficient
body that is ready to act quickly in the face of threats
to international peace and security, and able to rise to
its responsibilities decisively and in a united manner.
The question is, and this is where divergences come in,
how do we achieve that goal? How do we reform the
Council and make it better suited and equipped to face
the challenges of our times, which have evolved over
the decades and now span issues from armed conflicts
to cybersecurity to climate change? Such reform takes
time, patience, commitment to negotiations and the
political will essential to compromise.
To repeat what many have said before me, we see
that despite the drastic geopolitical changes in the
past 75 years, the Security Council has changed very
little. It needs to be more representative and equitable,
and we all agree on that. The question is how far we
should go with the increase, and in which categories of
membership. We certainly do not want to jeopardize the
Council’s efficiency, but at the same time we want to
right the historical wrongs and allow underrepresented
continents and regions their rightful place at the table.
That is why for many years we have been engaged
in debates, sometimes heated, on the reform. Some
delegations point to the lack of progress in the process,
given the amount of time that has passed since our
discussions began. However, the issues related to
Security Council reform are not easy to address. There
are still great divergences between Member States on
some of the key issues. The increase in membership,
which I just mentioned, is one of them. Others are just
as important — the power of veto, methods of work,
21-35401

24/11/2021

the relationship between the Council and the General
Assembly, and so forth. On some of them, we have
made progress in bridging gaps in our discussions,
while on others our views are still very far apart. We all
want successful and meaningful reform. My delegation
is of the view that setting deadlines while consensus
is still pending on many issues would be harmful to
the process.
We believe that reform should make the Security
Council more democratic and representative. Bearing
in mind that today the majority of United Nations
members are small and medium-sized countries
like mine, my delegation believes that reform should
increase the opportunities for those countries to serve on
the Council and contribute to its work. Serbia will also
continue to advocate for an additional non-permanent
seat for the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Negotiations on such important issues need to
be transparent, inclusive and membership-driven.
They should allow for the equal participation of every
Member State, regardless of its size, wealth or military
might. With that in mind, my delegation reiterates that
the intergovernmental negotiations, as established by
decision 62/557, should remain the sole legitimate and
appropriate setting for negotiations. Our discussions
within that framework should be frank and open, with
the aim of closing the gaps between different positions.
It is Serbia’s long-standing position that Security
Council reform should be based on the broadest
possible consensus of Member States on all five
reform clusters. As for the character and the content
of the co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences and
divergences, it is a summary of our deliberations that
should be comprehensive and reflective of the positions
of all Member States. We call on all delegations to
continue engaging in open, democratic and transparent
discussions and to demonstrate the will to compromise
and negotiate.
Ms. Seneduangdeth (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its sincere thanks to the President for convening
this important meeting on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council. We would also like to congratulate
Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Bille

A/76/PV.40

Hermann, the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and
Denmark, on their reappointment and appointment,
respectively, as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations on reform of the Security Council.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic reiterates
that the United Nations needs to use the reform
process to enable it to be more responsive and
effective in addressing the emerging challenges that
threaten international peace, security and sustainable
development. We reaffirm our support for reform of
the Security Council through the intergovernmental
negotiations process, which we believe should remain
the main mechanism for the discussions aimed at
achieving our common objective. As we are all aware,
Security Council reform is particularly important
and should therefore be pursued in a comprehensive,
balanced, inclusive, transparent manner based on
consensus, in order to maintain unity and solidarity
among its membership and serve the interest of all
Member States.
My delegation is of the view that taking account of
the interests of both developing and developed Member
States, with equitable geographical representation, is
a crucial foundation for finding a common formula
for all groups of countries and Member States. We
therefore reiterate our support for expanding the
representation of both types of seats on the Security
Council, permanent and non-permanent, with equitable
and balanced representation of every region. I would
like to conclude by affirming our full support for the
intergovernmental negotiations process in our efforts
to reform the Security Council.
Mr. Gueye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation’s
thanks for this opportunity to begin the new session
of intergovernmental negotiations on the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council, despite the difficult
circumstances surrounding the coronavirus disease
pandemic. In that regard, Senegal would like to thank
Ms. Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar, and
Ms. Wronecka, the former Permanent Representative
of Poland, for co-chairing the process during the
Assembly’s seventy-fifth session. In addition, we wish
every success to Ms. Al-Thani and Mr. Hermann, the
Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Denmark,
for their leadership of the process during the seventysixth session.

21-3540115/24

A/76/PV.40

My delegation is pleased to have another opportunity
to discuss a long-standing and persistent desire of the
Group of African States, which continue to believe that
this debate will enable us both to examine the substance
of the process itself and to affirm the urgent need to
remedy the historical injustice done to Africa. In that
regard, Senegal aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the African Group by Mr. Alhaji Fanday
Turay, Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone and
Coordinator of the African Union Committee of Ten
Heads of State and Government (see A/76/PV.33).
It is extremely regrettable that the Security
Council has not adapted to the changing geopolitical
realities of the world since the United Nations was first
established. On several occasions, even in some of the
most urgent humanitarian crises the world has seen,
the Council has failed in its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, mainly owing to the
competing interests of its members and the frequent
use of the veto. That state of affairs is demonstration
enough of the need to reform the Security Council in
order to make it more democratic, efficient and prompt
in dealing with global crises. That essential imperative
requires a convergence of views on the principles and
criteria for negotiations on the key questions of reform.
My delegation calls on Member States to reach a
preliminary agreement on the scope of the reforms to
be put in place as well as on the way forward, in order to
move beyond the game of strategies and interests led by
the various negotiating groups. It is therefore essential
to act in accordance with the principles and objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations while keeping in
mind the basic precepts set out in the outcome document
of the 2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1) — equity,
transparency, accountability, democracy, efficiency
and legitimacy. It will also be important to work
together fairly and appropriately to achieve equitable
geographical distribution and balanced regional
representation in the future Security Council. In that
regard, I want to stress that for Africa, equity and
balance mean no more and no less than the granting
of new seats in both categories, in accordance with
the African Common Position on Security Council
reform espoused in the 1999 Ezulwini Consensus and
reinforced by the 2005 Sirte Declaration.
While bearing in mind that the Security Council
was designed to ensure the speedy and effective
maintenance of international peace and security,
and was not created based on the principle of
16/24

24/11/2021

representativeness, we believe that it is undeniable
that its current composition no longer reflects the
international order and the requirements of our modern
world. We should also recall that when the United
Nations was created, the African States were still under
colonial domination, and their rights and interests were
therefore not taken into appropriate consideration.
Today the situation is quite different. With 54 Member
States, Africa constitutes the largest membership group
in the United Nations. That change in the international
landscape has rendered the composition of the Council
obsolete, and the fact that an entire continent lacks
adequate representation remains a gap that as long as
it exists will only compromise the legitimacy of the
Council’s decisions.
My delegation would like to point out that
enlarging the Security Council would not undermine its
effectiveness, which is a question of its methods of work.
And where the African Common Position is concerned,
regional representation is linked to the question of the
veto. For Africa, any reform creating an intermediate
category of members is neither viable nor acceptable.
It is clear that any future changes in the Council must
begin by addressing its present shortcomings. It is
therefore our responsibility to design and put in place a
dynamic institution that accurately reflects the realities
of today’s world, fully assuming its responsibilities and
asserting its authority.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank the President for
convening this meeting. The challenges that every
country has been facing during the pandemic, and
the multiplying impact of the pandemic on the risks
of conflict and instability, leave no doubt that a
more representative and effective Security Council
is essential to the quest for coherent and sustainable
multilateral solutions and for their implementation.
The discussions at the heart of the intergovernmental
negotiations on more equitable representation in the
Security Council have lost none of their urgency — on
the contrary. At the opening of the General Assembly’s
seventy-sixth session, Switzerland presented the
United Nations with an environmentally friendly fresco
symbolizing our desire to strengthen international
solidarity and serving as a reminder of the importance
of ensuring the continued renewal of the multilateral
system and the creation of structures adapted to
meet our current challenges. Switzerland will engage
constructively with all Member States during this
21-35401

24/11/2021

session. We fully support the co-Chairs, Ms. Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Bille Hermann,
the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Denmark,
and congratulate them warmly on their appointment.
Switzerland is generally in favour of enlarging the
Security Council in a way that reflects the reality of the
world we live in. It should give better representation
to various groups of countries, especially the Group
of African States. In view of the stalemate resulting
from the evident differences within the context of
the intergovernmental negotiations, Switzerland has
argued in favour of a third, very limited category of
non-permanent but renewable seats, which would
enable the main regional actors to hold longer-term
positions on the Council. Each term should be long
enough to enable them to strengthen their institutional
knowledge and avoid having to permanently campaign
for re-election, meaning a minimum of five and a
maximum of 10 years.
In line with our commitment to promoting,
expanding and implementing the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group’s code
of conduct regarding Security Council action on
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
Switzerland is against granting additional veto rights
and advocates voluntary constraints on the existing
right of veto, specifically in situations of genocide
and other violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Switzerland will continue to work for the greater
effectiveness of all United Nations bodies. We will
support any progress in the discussions on reform of
the Security Council, including in the framework
of the intergovernmental negotiations. The role and
authority of this process depends on the willingness of
Member States to move forward and the determination
they bring to finding common ground. As a candidate
for a seat on the Security Council, Switzerland will
remain committed to a strong and effective multilateral
system. Together with our partners in the ACT group,
we will continue our determined efforts to strengthen
the Council’s working methods in order to improve its
transparency and accountability to all States Members
of the United Nations.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is grateful for the convening of
this general debate and for the opportunity to ensure
that States can once again provide their points of view

A/76/PV.40

on one of the issues that is most crucial and relevant
to the Organization. The process of Security Council
reform, as has frequently been reaffirmed, must be
based on the premise that today’s world is very different
from that of 76 years ago, when the United Nations was
created. The Organization has achieved a great deal,
but the challenges that we are facing today are greater
and more complex than ever.
From El Salvador’s perspective, a multilateral
system that is in sync with the circumstances and
challenges facing us today will be impossible without
a more transparent, representative and democratic
Security Council. We therefore believe that we need
a reform process that is founded on Member States’
efforts to strengthen multilateralism, and that requires
increasing the regional representation on the Security
Council so that it reflects current geopolitical realities.
Accordingly, we support expanding the non-permanent
category by two years as one path — though to be
clear, not the only one — to making the Council
more democratic and more open to the equitable
participation of all Member States and to recognizing
the contributions that States make to international
peace and security.
El Salvador firmly supports strengthening the
Council’s methods of work, just as we do a strengthened
relationship between the Council and the General
Assembly, in line with what is enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. On that point, I would like to emphasize
that one of the most important elements of the process
of revitalizing the General Assembly, and one that is of
particular relevance to El Salvador, is acknowledging
the provisions of resolution 75/325 regarding the timely
presentation of the Security Council’s annual report
and reiterating the importance of presenting the report
in line with resolutions 51/193 and 58/126.
Regarding the issue of the veto, my country
supported France and Mexico’s initiative proposing a
political declaration regarding the suspension of the
veto in the case of mass atrocities. We also support
the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action on genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes proposed by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group. Both are in line with El Salvador’s
position on human rights.
We are pleased by the high level of participation
of delegations in this debate, which reflects Member

21-3540117/24

A/76/PV.40

States’ interest in this important issue. We have every
faith that this level of involvement can be translated into
a genuine commitment to dialogue and constructive
participation in the intergovernmental negotiations
process. In that regard, my delegation congratulates
Ms. Alya Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Hermann, the
Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Denmark,
on their appointment as co-Chairs of this process. We
hope that progress will be made under their leadership
in overcoming the divisions over this question. We
also hope that we will make tangible progress in
terms of upholding the commitment made during the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
this Organization to instilling new life into the debates
on Security Council reform. The co-Chairs have El
Salvador’s full support in achieving that goal.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): At the outset, I would
like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude
for the convening of this meeting and to congratulate
Mr. Martin Hermann of Denmark and Ms. Alya
Al-Thani of Qatar, the newly appointed co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations during the seventysixth session of the General Assembly. We hope that we
can move forward with this long-overdue process. We
are committed to working with them and will support
their efforts to the best of our ability.
Over the years during the intergovernmental
negotiations, Member States have clarified and repeated
their positions regarding the various aspects of reform.
Where the reform itself is concerned, we have not made
significant progress, but we have that chance now.
It must be accomplished through carefully tailored
consensus and comprehensive political approval. Our
main task is to find political will among ourselves and
to do our best to explore ways to bridge the gaps and
narrow our differences.
The urgency of reforming the Security Council is
gradually becoming more rather than less important,
especially considering the growing gap between the
Council’s demanding agenda and its output. Now we are
under even tighter time constraints due to the changing
landscape of our new challenges. That said, we strongly
believe that building on former discussions and the
work already done in previous intergovernmental
negotiations sessions is the way to go. As with all
United Nations intergovernmental conferences, we
should start text-based negotiations, focused on a single
consolidated document reflecting everyone’s positions,
without further delay. We concur with those who have
18/24

24/11/2021

said that there are plenty of things that we agree on. It is
time for us to take a small but meaningful step, build on
those agreements and instil new life into the process.
With regard to the issue of membership categories,
Latvia reiterates that all regions should be adequately
represented on the Council to ensure its legitimacy.
Reform should ensure the equitable geographic
distribution of both permanent and non-permanent
seats on the Council. We strongly support increasing
the representation of African and Latin American
countries on the Council and allocating at least one
additional non-permanent seat to the Group of Eastern
European States. We also believe that due consideration
should be given to the adequate representation on the
Council of small and medium-sized Member States
when non-permanent members are being nominated
and elected.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, we stand by our position
that enlargement of any sort must be supplemented
by improving the working methods of the Security
Council, examples of which would be that permanent
members of the Council should refrain from using the
veto in situations of mass atrocity crimes and work to
increase transparency in the Council’s work generally.
In conclusion, it is urgent that we move beyond
merely reiterating positions and finally achieve some
tangible results. Latvia will continue to work diligently
to reach that goal.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
and Mr. Martin Bille Hermann, the Permanent
Representatives of Qatar and Denmark, on their
appointment as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. They have
my delegation’s full support. Viet Nam also greatly
appreciates the efforts of the co-Chairs to move the
intergovernmental negotiation process forward during
the General Assembly’s seventy-fifth session, despite
the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Their effort to enhance the intergovernmental
negotiations with a fourth meeting on the status
of intergovernmental negotiation documents is
particularly notable. We look forward to further work
in that regard during this session.
Viet Nam reaffirms its strong support for all efforts
to reform the Security Council with a view to making it
more representative, democratic, transparent, effective
21-35401

24/11/2021

and efficient. Our position, as we have stated in previous
sessions, remains unchanged. It includes support for
enlarging both the permanent and non-permanent
membership categories, with improved and equitable
geographical representation for underrepresented and
developing countries. The Council should use the veto
only in discharging its duties under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, with a view to eventually
eliminating that power altogether. The relationship
between the Council and the General Assembly should
be further enhanced in order to strengthen the work and
delivery of both organs, with the Assembly as the most
broadly representative body.
The next session will see the intergovernmental
negotiations enter their fifteenth year, and Security
Council reform is long overdue. The commitment
by our Heads of State and Government during the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations to instilling new life into the discussions
of reform of the Security Council is still unfulfilled.
For this session of the intergovernmental negotiations,
my delegation would like to stress the following points.
First, the discussions should be efficient, focused
and result-oriented. Secondly, the process should
continue to address all five clusters of Security
Council reform, with their interlinkages. Member
States’ positions and contributions should continue to
be updated and reflected in the two basic documents,
the 2015 framework document and the paper on
revised elements of commonality and issues for further
consideration. Thirdly, we welcome all efforts to
explore the best ways to promote the intergovernmental
negotiations process, including through text-based
negotiations. It is important to conduct exchanges in
good faith, with mutual respect and in an open, inclusive
and transparent manner, if we are to bridge differences
and achieve tangible progress.
In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
support the co-Chairs in their efforts to engage
with Member States to find ways to move the
intergovernmental negotiations forward. We stand
ready to work with other delegations to contribute to
the process of Security Council reform.
Mr. Sarufa (Papua New Guinea): My delegation
welcomes this plenary dialogue on reforming the
Security Council and is grateful to the President
for facilitating it. In that spirit, Papua New Guinea
subscribes fully to the statement made last week

A/76/PV.40

on behalf of the L.69 group by its Chair (see A/76/
PV.33), Ms. Inga Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. I would also like to contribute our
national perspective.
I would like to cite my Prime Minister, Mr. James
Marape, in his call to the General Assembly (see A/76/
PV.13), speaking on Security Council reform, like many
other world leaders in September’s general debate.
“I would like to reiterate our call on the General
Assembly to do better in delivering on the reforms
of the Security Council. That important organ,
entrusted with the international community’s
peace and security, with its archaic representation
and working methods, is in dire need of an
overhaul to ensure that it meets with today’s
reality. We are concerned that it has been nearly
12 long years now since the first round of the
intergovernmental negotiations for the reforms
of the Security Council, and the costs keep
escalating for countries such as ours. Despite all
the extensive efforts on the five agreed elements
of the intergovernmental negotiations package, it
still does not have any formal status to date. For my
delegation, a single consolidated document now,
and not in the indeterminate future, is needed for
real negotiations to pave the way for the reforms
of the Security Council. The importance of that
cannot be overstated, and we reiterate our call on
this fundamental point.”
The list of speakers and the deliberations over
several days on this very topical agenda item attest
yet again to the importance we all attach to the
overwhelming aspiration of “we the peoples of the
United Nations” to reform the Security Council in
a constructive spirit and timely manner in order to
ensure just and fairer representation. We want to
ensure that the Council is not left behind because of
the fact that it is dealing with today’s realities using
modalities of work that are based on a bygone era. We
the peoples of the United Nations deserve better. It is
from that standpoint that we are encouraged by the
welcome dialogue that the President of the Assembly
has promoted and urge him to better leverage it to kickstart the intergovernmental negotiations process at this
seventy-sixth session early and allow adequate time for
us to engage meaningfully on Security Council reform.
At this meeting, therefore, rather than addressing the
substantive issues relating to the five agreed elements
of the intergovernmental negotiations package, we will

21-3540119/24

A/76/PV.40

reserve that for the intergovernmental negotiations
process itself and instead offer brief comments of a
general nature and on procedural matters.
It is in that spirit that my delegation welcomes
and congratulates the new co-Chairs of the
intergovernmental negotiations process, Ms. Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, the Permanent Representative
of Qatar, who is resuming the co-Chairship, and
Mr. Martin Bille Hermann, Permanent Representative of
Denmark. We also commend them for their willingness
and dedicated commitment to helping guide and steer
our collective work on this important agenda. We offer
them our constructive support and pledge to work
with all other delegations. In doing so, we encourage
the co-Chairs to use their prerogative to make better
use of this session and encourage Member States to be
more bold, pragmatic, transparent and results-driven
within their mandate to ensure that we not only build
on the last session’s elements paper on convergences
and divergences but work in a spirit of compromise for
the greater good of us all while avoiding the risk of
jeopardizing this process by not delivering on decision
62/557.
We are interested in how the co-Chairs intend
to arrange and facilitate our dialogue in the
intergovernmental negotiations process and in that
connection would welcome a programme of work as
soon as possible. That should draw on the important
lessons from the past sessions of intergovernmental
negotiations and this round of dialogue. For us, the
importance of transparency, inclusivity and a fair and
balanced consultative process cannot be overstated.
My delegation would also like to pick up on the
important points raised by a number of delegations,
particularly that of the Permanent Representative of
Singapore 10 days ago (see A/76/PV.33) on whether the
current framework within which we are conducting our
work on the intergovernmental negotiations process is a
reason for the protracted delivery of the results we seek
and how we might improve on it, perhaps by including a
review. We have also heard other delegations advocating
for maintaining the existing intergovernmental
negotiations process as their preferred forum. Those
are not mere rhetorical questions but critical issues
that we need to collectively consider with the ultimate
aim of helping us deliver on decision 62/557. We must
better understand the root causes of the chasm that
exists among Member States on reform of the Security
20/24

24/11/2021

Council and address them in an objective, inclusive and
timely way so that we can collectively move forward.
In conclusion, I join other delegations in paying
tribute to Ambassador Al-Thani of Qatar and the
former Ambassador of Poland, Ms. Joanna Wronecka,
and their delegations for their leadership and important
contributions as co-Chairs of the previous session of
intergovernmental negotiations.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. I would first like to congratulate
Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Bille
Hermann, the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and
Denmark, on their appointment as co-Chairs of the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. We hope that their activity will be based on
the principles of impartiality and the broadest possible
consideration of the views of all States participating in
the process. We also thank Ms. Al-Thani and the former
Permanent Representative of Poland, Ms. Joanna
Wronecka, for their skilful leadership of the negotiation
process during the General Assembly’s seventyfifth session.
The issue of Security Council reform is not only
one of the most important issues on the agenda of our
global organization but one of the most challenging.
That is because pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council bears the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
There is no question that reform of the Council is long
overdue. The ongoing negotiations demonstrate the
sincere desire of an overwhelming majority of Member
States to find an optimal model for such reform. At the
same time, it is obvious that a universal solution that
could satisfy everyone, or at least almost everyone, is
not yet in sight. The approaches of the main actors on
the reform playing field still differ substantially and are
sometimes diametrically opposed. In that context, we see
no alternative during the current session of the General
Assembly to continuing the patient, incremental work
of bringing the negotiating approaches closer together.
Our position is well known. As a permanent
member of the Security Council, Russia believes it is
essential to improve the Council’s representation of
developing States in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
In that regard, we support rectifying the historical
injustice done to Africa, whose current representation
on the Council corresponds neither to the total number
21-35401

24/11/2021

A/76/PV.40

of States on the continent nor to its current role in
international affairs.

to solve a complex problem by pressuring members or
imposing approaches that suit some on the rest of us.

However, the efforts to expand the Council should
not affect its ability to effectively and promptly respond
to emerging challenges. In that context, we are in favour
of maintaining a compact Security Council that is fit for
purpose. Its optimal membership should not exceed the
low twenties. We consider any ideas that could result
in the infringement of the prerogatives of the current
permanent members of the Council, including the
institution of the veto, to be unacceptable. We should
remember that this instrument is an important factor
in encouraging Council members to seek balanced
solutions. The use or the threat of use of the veto
has saved the United Nations from being drawn into
dubious ventures more than once.

Our commitment to achieving results within the
existing format of discussions remains unchanged.
The platform of the intergovernmental negotiations
possesses a legitimacy that is both unique and universal
regarding the entire range of issues pertaining to
reform. Deviating from it could lead to the collapse
of the entire negotiating architecture, setting the
process back many years. Moreover, given the current
difficult circumstances, we certainly do not want the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform to create new divisions or worsen the existing
ones among Member States. We hope we can avoid
that and that the new round of discussions will make
it possible to take full account of the views of all
Member States.

We would like to remind the Assembly that the
process of reforming the Security Council belongs to all
Member States, without exception, and its final formula
should enjoy the broadest possible support. We firmly
believe that the issue of Security Council reform cannot
be resolved through mere arithmetic by putting one or
another model to a vote in order to obtain the minimum
votes required under the Charter of the United Nations.
Any outcome achieved that way will hardly add to the
Security Council’s credibility and will certainly not
improve our Organization’s effectiveness and authority.
At the same time, we are prepared to consider any
reasonable option for expanding the composition of the
Security Council, including the compromise-based socalled interim solution, if it is based on the broadest
possible consensus within the United Nations.
We hope that the efforts of the President of the General
Assembly and the co-Chairs of the negotiations will be
focused specifically on facilitating the negotiations as
much as possible, with the understanding that the final
word on the process remains with Member States. We
cannot make progress on Security Council reform by
imposing negotiating documents or other initiatives on
Member States that have not been agreed on by all the
participants in the process. Previous General Assembly
sessions have shown the futility and danger of attempts
to force a solution to the reform issue without due
care for the broad support of Member States. The
negotiations should be conducted calmly, transparently
and inclusively, without arbitrary timelines. It is
important that we all bear in mind that there can be no
place in this matter for artificial deadlines or attempts

Ms. Minale (Ethiopia): I would like to congratulate
the President on his commendable leadership of
this meeting. I also thank the delegations that have
spoken before me for their insightful contributions and
statements of position.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the long-held position of
the Group of African States on the question of equitable
representation on and increasing the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Council. I would like to add some brief remarks in my
national capacity.
We believe that making the Security Council more
democratic, representative and transparent is long
overdue. Based on General Assembly decision 62/557,
on Security Council reform on all five clusters, we
need to chart a way for the comprehensive and fully
owned reform of the Council. From the point of view
of regional arrangements and the security architecture,
the African Union region remains the only one not
represented in the permanent membership of the
Security Council, a fact that is beyond regrettable.
We believe that rectifying that historical mistake and
ensuring Africa’s equal representation on the Council
is a matter of necessity and justice that should concern
us all. The importance of equal representation is not
a matter of rhetoric, and the fact that Africa has been
deprived of a seat at the table is a serious disservice that
still continues. In the years of discussion we have had
on this agenda item, the clearest common denominator
in the positions we hear from the various groups and
States is the need to step up and give Africa agency

21-3540121/24

A/76/PV.40

on the Security Council. We believe that this area of
overlap should not be taken for granted and get lost
amid the other areas of controversy.
The African Common Position, as laid out in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, restates
the best option for redressing Africa’s alienation from
our global security body. Taking into account the
specific size of an enlarged Security Council, Africa
must be fully represented on it, with no fewer than two
permanent seats, with all the prerogatives and privileges
of permanent membership, and five non-permanent
seats. Ethiopia supports that position fully. In addition,
Africa must have the prerogative to decide the modality
of its representation.
Where the Council’s working methods are
concerned, we believe that they should be governed
by clear rules that ensure transparency and the full
participation of every State affected by the Council’s
deliberations. The Security Council ought not to be a
guardianship mechanism under which the main subject
leaves its fate up to the decisions of others.
With regard to the veto, as long as our international
system cannot eliminate the veto, all permanent
members of the Security Council should have that
right. In that regard, we do not support the creation of
a third category of permanent members with no right
of veto, at least as far as Africa’s representation in the
permanent category is concerned.
As many delegations have said before me, the
discussions and negotiations on Security Council reform
have indeed taken a long time. There is also a risk of
fatigue and complacency in the discussions. We are
fully aware that we are dealing with an untenable status
quo. Nevertheless, the work we do to rationalize the
Council’s composition should be impeccable and should
not require us to rescind our decisions or make frequent
reviews. In that regard, it is clearly very important to
take our time and muster the appropriate consensus.

24/11/2021

the complex challenges that we face regarding peace
and security in the world today. For that to happen,
we have to finally get the negotiations process going
and turn the intergovernmental conference on Security
Council reform into a body that truly deserves its name.
That cannot simply mean that we continue to repeat our
well-known positions. We believe that three points are
vital if we are to truly instil new life.
First, we will need one consolidated document
on which we work together, as we do on many other
issues in the United Nations. Secondly, we should
then proceed with text-based negotiations. Thirdly,
that should happen according to General Assembly
rules of procedure. It is simply unacceptable that after
more than 10 years we have, frankly, not even inched
towards the starting point of what will certainly be
a negotiation marathon. We should be aware that the
intergovernmental negotiations may be reaching the
end of their credibility, which would be to the detriment
of the United Nations as a whole. It would risk turning
the process into a symbol of what is not working at
the United Nations. We therefore ask everyone here to
make a united push. We may need to reach out across
the lines, and that is a good thing. We may also need to
adopt positions that we have maintained in the past. The
Group of Four has already done so. I am thinking about
support for the African position. Ensuring that Africa’s
representation in the Security Council is adequate is
simply crucial if we are to see justice done to the people
of Africa. It is also a question of dignity.
Yes, compromise will be necessary. I think that
goes for all of us. Our point is that we will be able to find
compromise only if we embark on true and meaningful
negotiations. We are fully confident that our highly
capable and experienced co-facilitators, Ms. Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Bille Hermann,
the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Denmark,
will do their utmost to ensure progress, and we stand
ready to support them in that important endeavour.

Mr. Sautter (Germany): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Japan on behalf of the Group of Four (see A/76/
PV.33), and I would like to add a few words in my
national capacity.

Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the President for convening
this relevant debate, which is taking on even greater
significance during this seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly.

The Group of Four statement and many other
speakers here have already made this point, but it cannot
be stressed enough. We need a representative Security
Council that is credibly and effectively able to deal with

With decision 74/569 of 31 August 2020, the
General Assembly reaffirmed its central role in the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and other

22/24

21-35401

24/11/2021

matters related to the Security Council. Guatemala
would like to congratulate Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani and Mr. Martin Bille Hermann, the Permanent
Representatives of Qatar and Denmark, on their
appointment as co-Chairs of the negotiations of this
important intergovernmental process.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States confer on the Security Council
the primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security, recognizing that the Council acts on
behalf of the membership as a whole and that its conduct
is in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. In fact, under Article 25 of the Charter,
we have agreed to accept and carry out the decisions
of the Security Council. The decisions and resolutions
adopted by the Council, as well as its representation
and actions, therefore confer a great responsibility on
Member States.
In this regard, Guatemala has highlighted during
previous intergovernmental sessions the need to
strengthen and improve the work of the Security Council
based on a number of guidelines. They are, first, making
the Security Council a more representative body;
secondly, reconciling the criterion of representativeness
with that of efficiency, which implies a modest increase
in the number of its members; thirdly, seeking a greater
rapprochement between the work of the Security
Council and that of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission; and fourthly, making the
work of the Security Council more transparent through
its working methods.
Additionally, we support expanding the numbers of
members in both categories by up to five permanent
members and five additional elected members, which
would result in a Council with 10 permanent and
15 elected members. We do not insist that the new
permanent members should have all the prerogatives
of the current permanent five, in particular the right
to veto. Neither do we insist that the current five
permanent members renounce their prerogatives under
the Charter. We believe in the importance of Africa
and Latin America having permanent representation on
the Security Council, so as to reflect the times we live
in today.
Guatemala was a non-permanent member of the
Security Council during the 2012-2013 biennium.
Our experience enabled us to contribute to one of the

A/76/PV.40

noblest tasks of this Organization, the maintenance of
peace. Since then, taking into account our experience,
as well as the delicate responsibility that comes with
being a member of the Security Council, permanent
or non-permanent, we have tried to strengthen
other General Assembly bodies, such as the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, with greater
triangular interaction and cooperation among the
members of the Security Council and the Special
Committee and troop-contributing countries.
It is particularly important to maintain
transparency in peacekeeping processes and in the
working methods of the Security Council, with a
view to making the Council more effective in hostile
environments and ensuring that peacekeeping is
effective and that peace can be consolidated in a
sustainable manner. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the importance of complying with the three
main principles of peacekeeping operations — the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force, except in legitimate self-defence and in defence
of the mandate — in situations where the political peace
processes established by the Organization are respected
and the creation of peaceful societies is sought,
encouraging the development of our populations and
thereby increasing the effectiveness of the noble work
of peacekeeping, which would be strengthened by the
addition of new permanent and non-permanent members
to the Security Council, speeding up decision-making
in cases of international emergency.
With respect to the right of veto, we must reiterate
the call for the Security Council to be consistent in its
functions, including through the responsible use of the
right to veto, in order to avoid worsening international
crises. In that regard, Guatemala reiterates its support
for the Franco-Mexican initiative on limiting the use
of the veto in the case of mass atrocities, based on
the normative policy premise of the responsibility to
protect. It is therefore extremely important that we
continue our efforts to reform the Security Council and
its referral of cases to the International Criminal Court.
Whatever the result of the current intergovernmental
negotiations on this matter, it should be the sole
responsibility of the Member States of the General
Assembly. In that regard, we have no objection to the
co-Chairs proposing a text that makes it possible to
start direct negotiations based on shared elements that
we have negotiated in previous years. We reiterate our
appreciation to the co-Chairs, who can count on our

21-3540123/24

A/76/PV.40

support during this exercise in advancing a process of
singular relevance not only for our Organization, but
also for the States that are represented here.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the President
for convening today’s debate. At the outset, I would
like to express our sincere gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of Poland and Qatar for leading
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform during the previous session of the
General Assembly. We congratulate the Permanent
Representatives of Qatar and Denmark on their
appointment as co-Chairs of the current session of
intergovernmental negotiations.
Estonia continues to deplore the lack of meaningful
substantive progress on reform of the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are still advocating for a meaningful, results-oriented
process for reforming the Security Council. The main
goal of the reform efforts should be a strengthened
United Nations, greater ownership of the Security
Council’s work and accountability of the Council to
the United Nations membership. There is a clear need
for increasing the membership of the Security Council
based on equitable representation. Estonia is grateful
for being entrusted with serving as an elected member
in the Council for the first time from 2020 until the
end of this year. We continue to advocate for all States,
particularly small States, to have an opportunity to
serve on the Council.
We also continue to point out that with regard to
enlarging the Council, the question of the veto must be
carefully considered. The use or threat of use of the
veto by some members of the Security Council has at
times rendered it unable to react to situations where
action is most needed. The failure of the Council to
protect civilians from mass atrocity crimes severely
damages its credibility. The permanent members of the
Security Council should refrain from using the veto
to block Council action aimed at preventing or ending
situations that involve mass atrocity crimes. That vital
commitment on the part of all the permanent members
is already achievable on a voluntary basis, with no

24/24

24/11/2021

amendments needed to the Charter of the United
Nations. There are no excuses for not following through
on that commitment to bolstering the protection
of civilians and the moral standing of the Council.
Furthermore, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, Estonia
actively supports the 2015 code of conduct regarding
Security Council action on genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes. Those two initiatives share a
common goal and are complementary. We call on more
States to join the ACT group’s code of conduct and the
political declaration on suspension of veto powers in
cases of mass atrocity launched by France and Mexico,
also in 2015.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the call for concrete
and meaningful steps by the United Nations membership
to advance our common goal of making the Security
Council more representative, effective, transparent and
accountable, and therefore more legitimate.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
Before giving the floor to speakers in exercise
of the right of reply, I would like to remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and five minutes for the second, and should be made
by delegations from their seats. I give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Shibuya (Japan): On behalf of the Government
of Japan, I would like to respond to an earlier statement
in which, regrettably, a delegation made a groundless
statement about Japan. Japan has consistently followed
the path of a peace-loving nation since the end of the
Second World War, has made innumerable contributions
to the peace and prosperity of the world and will
continue to make such contributions as a responsible
member of the international community.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 123.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

21-35401
