S/PV.8459

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8459

th meeting
Thursday, 7 February 2019, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba/Mr. Esono Mbengono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2019/102)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-03158 (E)
*1903158*

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2019/102)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Tanin will be participating in the meeting via
video-teleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/102, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/102), this past period was characterized
by action and rhetoric that did not improve the overall
atmosphere or the potential for a swift resumption of
the political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Antagonistic gestures and accusations continue to
be far more evident than efforts to return to the new
phase of dialogue that has been widely discussed for
many months now. While there is no question that the
leaders on both sides are facing serious challenges, the
minimum requirement for a continued dialogue is to find
2/23

07/02/2019

the means to steady rather than agitate the atmosphere.
Instead, there has been a tendency to disrupt rather
than de-escalate the situation. The absence of a unified
stance in Pristina on the conditions for the resumption
of the dialogue with Belgrade has reached a critical
point in the days since the close of the reporting period,
raising concerns about the continued viability of the
current Government coalition in Kosovo.
Where does this leave the prospects for constructive
political engagement? Much attention has been focused
on the 100 per cent tariff introduced by the Pristina
authorities on goods originating from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, beginning in November
last year. This measure has been challenged in many
quarters and Belgrade has made a resumption of the
dialogue contingent on Pristina’s revocation of the
tariff. Pristina has linked the lifting of the tariff to a
number of conditions. This is not the only example of
positions taken by the parties that complicate efforts
to return to the negotiating table. A responsible and
forward-looking approach is essential if we are to
remove obstacles to restarting the political negotiations.
An expanded negotiating team for the dialogue,
which includes members of the Assembly of Kosovo,
was established in Pristina in December. However,
internal discussions on the key principles that should
guide Pristina’s position in future negotiations are still
ongoing. At the same time, more must be done on both
sides to prepare the ground for whatever agreement
may be reached between the parties. It will require
more active engagement with and support from a
wide range of stakeholders, including by pursuing the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
the dialogue-related processes and by taking gender
perspectives into account.
In December, the Kosovo Assembly enacted three
laws that relate to the comportment and activities of the
Kosovo Security Force. They were not supported by the
Serb caucus and were heavily criticized in Belgrade.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) provides the
sole legal framework for the international security
presence, the Kosovo Force (KFOR), entrusted with the
responsibility of ensuring a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo. KFOR has reiterated that stance, stressing
that any adjustments must be transparent and inclusive,
and that all previous commitments by Pristina
regarding the Kosovo Security Force must continue to
be honoured.
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

Recent developments in the relations between
Pristina and Belgrade have complicated the efforts
to create an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
good-faith compromise. This is a reminder that
while commitment at the top levels remains central,
dedication to building mutual confidence and trust
across the communities on the ground is just as crucial.
In order to contribute effectively to this important
aspect of normalization and reconciliation, the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has focused on facilitating
people-to-people engagement in Kosovo. Together with
the United Nations Kosovo team and other international
partners, UNMIK is advancing the implementation
of the joint recommendations of the United Nations
Kosovo Trust-Building Forum held in May 2018 in
Ljubljana, focusing on supporting activities across
various sectors and layers of society. They include
cross-community dialogue, the promotion of language
rights and equality under the law, youth empowerment
and gender equality. In collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team, the Mission has also engaged
Kosovo civil society to help reduce gender- and ethnicbased discrimination. UNMIK has leveraged its limited
resources by combining its efforts with those of our
international partners.
UNMIK also continued to support the implementation
of human rights-related initiatives and legislation,
which are often made harder by inadequate financial
and other resource commitments. Important progress
has been made in the work of the Working Group on
persons who are unaccounted for in connection with
events in Kosovo. No obstacles in the form of political
influence should be placed in the way of this work if
we are to maintain momentum on the issue, which is
vital to long-term reconciliation. More needs to be
done to effectively guarantee the rights of non-majority
communities, including Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma,
as well as returnees and internally displaced persons.
Promoting genuine gender equality in Kosovo is
another area that deserves particular attention. I have
already mentioned the need for gender perspectives in
the dialogue. For its part, UNMIK supports initiatives
that build women’s entrepreneurial skills and their
ability to start new businesses. I have been engaged
directly with women leaders at the central and local
levels to promote such initiatives, and I believe that
there is a growing sense of empowerment.

S/PV. 8459

UNMIK, in partnership with other United Nations
actors, supports local-level Kosovo institutions in the
rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of domestic
violence. The Mission has contributed to a series of
advocacy initiatives aimed at preventing violence
against women and girls, within the framework of the
16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence.
During the campaign, a UNMIK-produced documentary
called Not Your Property was launched in Pristina,
followed by screenings in 10 municipalities of Kosovo,
organized in collaboration with UN-Women and led
by local authorities and civil society partners. The
documentary features stories of survivors from across
Kosovo’s communities and interviews with experts
on how the exceptionally low property ownership by
women, owing to customary norms, leaves women
vulnerable to domestic violence.
In supporting intercommunity trust-building,
UNMIK has placed a special focus on youth
empowerment. In recent months, UNMIK has partnered
with two youth-led non-governmental organizations
to implement projects aimed at fostering sustainable
reconciliation through human rights education.
UNMIK continues to support multi-ethnic teams of
young leaders in organizing various activities that
bring positive change to their communities. UNMIK
also supports youth advisory boards in enhancing their
capacity to engage in cross-community dialogue. In
January, the United Nations Kosovo team, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund, launched a project, in
coordination with UNMIK, to empower youth for a
peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future in Kosovo.
The European perspective remains an important
incentive to achieve peace and stability in the region.
It is important for Kosovo’s leaders to maintain focus
on advancing initiatives that are essential to the people
of Kosovo, particularly in the areas of rule of law
and anti-corruption, human rights, strengthening the
independence of the judiciary and bringing legislation
in line with the European Union acquis and other
international standards.
In conclusion, let me underline the importance
of the support of all members of the Council for the
engagement between Belgrade and Pristina. Reducing
tensions, enhancing mutual trust and removing
obstacles to the dialogue are crucial to stability in
the region. I have committed UNMIK’s resources to
promoting trust-building at all levels of Kosovo society,
and we will continue to focus on that process in close

19-031583/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

07/02/2019

coordination with all our partner organizations on the
ground. I thank the Security Council for its support to
our Mission.

and Metohija. We all want it to no longer be a topic on
the Security Council’s agenda. We all want UNMIK to
complete its mission, and successfully so.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.

That moment is not yet near, however. I have often
pointed out that we are at a very delicate juncture and
called on all to proceed to create conditions for us to
sit and talk constructively, without preconditions or the
imposition of solutions. Let me recall that talks between
Belgrade and Pristina have entered their seventh year
and that progress has been made — sometimes more,
sometimes less — in this time. Yet, we have talked. As
Prime Minister during those years, I signed the Brussels
Agreement. Regrettably, the agreement has not been
fully implemented to date, while at this moment in
time there are no talks in Brussels, and everyone here
knows why.

I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): At the outset, I should like
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and his
Special Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin for their report
(S/2019/102). The presence and activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) are of crucial importance. I therefore extend
to the Special Representative my special gratitude for
his hard work and dedication to fulfilling the mandate
of the Mission under resolution 1244 (1999) .
I also want to thank Equatorial Guinea for
including this meeting on the Security Council’s
programme of work. Serbia believes that it is necessary
for the Security Council to be open and ready to
consider all questions relevant to international peace
and security, and consistently to pay special attention
to its prevention role and to respond to situations that,
in addition to being clear violations of the resolutions
of this organ, lead to increased tensions and threaten
stability and security.
We ask for these meetings not for the purpose of
one-upmanship, but to contribute to the stabilization of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija and to peace in the
region. Serbia is a constructive, credible and predictable
partner. That is why we initiated the agreement on
the dynamic of the Security Council’s meetings on
UNMIK, which remain necessary, and I am pleased to
express my gratitude to the members of the Security
Council that have agreed on this important question
in order to avoid needless debates in this organ with
respect to these meetings. The most important thing is
that the Security Council will continue to consider the
Secretary-General’s reports on UNMIK on a continued
basis. I recall that the Security Council continues to
discuss Bosnia and Herzegovina twice a year, as well
as the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and no one has asked that these topics be
removed from the Council’s agenda.
I continue to believe that we should and can find
a common denominator of our interests and strive to
achieve it. We all want to resolve the question of Kosovo
4/23

I know that many Council members will call on
both sides to refrain from unilateral acts and commit
themselves to dialogue and the quest for a lasting
solution. I can only tell them that Serbia has refrained
from unilateral acts. We have not engaged in such acts,
despite the fact that the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities, as the most important part
of the Brussels Agreement, has yet to be established
over the past five years, or to prevent such unilateral
decisions as the confiscation of the Trepča mines
property that Pristina undertook several days ago.
The dialogue has been forestalled for one
reason — the unilateral decision of the so-called Kosovo
to impose taxes on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina at a rate of 100 per cent. This act, let me
recall, has been condemned by the entire international
community, Pristina’s staunchest allies included, which
have called on Pristina to suspend the decision.
We have entered 2019 facing major challenges
and problems, the solutions for which are barely
apparent nowadays. I recall that, in addition to the
decision to establish the so-called Kosovo armed forces
shortly following the Security Council meeting in
November 2018 (see S/PV.8399), instead of de-escalating
tensions and making maximal efforts to promote
dialogue, Pristina rushed to adopt misguided and
senseless decisions relative to the imposition of taxes
on Serbian goods. They were followed by numerous
pronouncements relative to “Greater Albania”, which
were hardly a call to compromise, but rather intended
to gin up instability in the region. The one-sided
decision of Pristina to increase taxes on Serbian goods
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

by as much as 100 per cent, in contravention of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement, is primarily a
politically motivated decision that wreaked irreversible
damage and forestalled the continuation of the dialogue
on the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. For its part, Serbia continues to firmly believe
that talks are the only way for achieving a solution to
outstanding issues, and refrained — even following the
imposition of the taxes — from retaliatory measures or
any other act that would have aggravated the situation.
We demonstrated once again responsibility, common
sense and credibility.
The taxes are intended to make the situation of the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija even more
difficult. Despite the condemnation and the intense
pressure of numerous international institutions, Pristina
soldiers on and continues to levy the taxes it imposed
more than two months ago. Owing to the fact that it
can take and implement unilateral and destabilizing
decisions and measures without consequences and that
it can breach agreements and raid a Serbian-majority
territory, Pristina is continuing in those practices
unabated. We are therefore faced today not only by the
absence of the community of Serbian municipalities,
but also by continued attempts to take over northern
Kosovo and Metohija, as evidenced by the raid carried
out by the special Regional Operations Support Unit
of that part of the province in November 2018, the
imposition of draconian taxes on Serbian goods, the
arrest of four Serbs in Kosovska Mitrovica in a brutal
action carried out by the special Regional Operations
Support Unit and the call for the unification of the
northern and southern parts of the town. Tantamount
to a drive to intimidate the Serbs living in the northern
part of the town, it also serves as a screen for the
intended takeover of northern Kosovska Mitrovica and
the expulsion of Serbs there in the same way that they
were expelled from its southern part.
Pristina continues to undo everything in which the
European Union and other international actors invested
considerable efforts through dialogue and regional ties.
Should we then expect that any given agreement will
be respected when the basic principles underpinning
modern-day Europe are being ignored? The decision
to ban the free flow of goods, capital and people as a
result of displeasure with a political decision is — let
me point out once again — inconceivable in the twentyfirst century. Pristina’s contention that the act was
taken as a countermeasure to Serbia’s policy, which it

S/PV. 8459

characterizes as aggressive, is entirely false. Rather, it
was taken as a consequence of the withdrawal of the
recognition of the unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo by 13 countries and its failed attempt to become
a member of INTERPOL. The explanation that has been
provided is that it is detrimental to the dialogue. Ever
since it unilaterally declared its independence in 2008,
so-called Kosovo has lobbied for recognition, aided and
abetted by certain States.
After all, some members of this body called on other
States in our previous meetings to recognize Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence. Serbia has taken
no unilateral measures as a result of those actions. On
the contrary, we entered the dialogue and engaged in
discussions notwithstanding the recognition that had
taken place. For those who are unaware, we began the
dialogue in 2012, and 19 countries have recognized
Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence since
then. No one said that those countries’ recognition
impeded the dialogue. I would cite the example of
Madagascar. Nothing was said in November 2017
indicating that its recognition would be harmful to the
dialogue but, when Madagascar decided to withdraw its
recognition in December 2018, some Council members
viewed the withdrawal as extremely harmful. I truly
need help understanding such reasoning.
Pristina bears a grudge over the failure of its bid
to join INTERPOL and UNESCO, as well. However,
in 2015, prior to Pristina’s request for admission to
UNESCO, Serbia, and myself personally, proposed
that the protection of cultural heritage be included in
the agenda of the dialogue and that an agreement be
reached on that issue. The proposal fell on deaf ears
without an understanding, just like the one concerning
INTERPOL. Pristina said that it was not obliged
to discuss that with us, that it had the support of the
majority of members of those organizations and that
it would try to become members. We tried to explain
that the INTERPOL candidature, which would entail
the inevitable lobbying for and against it by the
various sides — were an application for admission
to be submitted — would not create an atmosphere
conducive to dialogue. As it was irate following its
failed bid, Pristina raised the import tax to 100 per
cent. Let me recall that so-called Kosovo continues to
falsely bandy the statistic that it has been recognized
by 116 countries. Seventy-four States Members of the
United Nations voted in favour of Pristina’s admission
to INTERPOL. It required and lacked an additional

19-031585/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

36 votes. It now blames little Serbia for those results.
We take this opportunity to call for solving all issues
through dialogue, and we are ready to make every best
effort to find a lasting solution.
Some Security Council members maintain that the
situation in Kosovo is significantly different from that
of 1999 or 2009, and are calling for revising UNMIK’s
mandate. Let me remind them that the Mission is
already significantly different than it was in 1999. At
the time, it numbered 4,718 civilian police officers
and 1,269 international and 3,566 local personnel. Its
budget then totalled $427 million. Today it has been
decreased by almost by 90 per cent, and the members
of its personnel number about 500 men and women. Its
budget is $40 million. The Mission’s scope was reduced
too much and too soon. Many errors have been made
over the past 20 years, and, for that reason, I call on
members not to make the same mistake of making hasty
decisions. Assertions that the Mission is unnecessary
and has completed its mandate do not reflect reality.
Ramush Haradinaj’s accusation that UNMIK and
the Secretary-General issue fake reports warrants
our collective condemnation, as does the decision
to discontinue cooperation with the international
Organization’s Mission. Let me recall that Haradinaj
accused the European Union of killing the dialogue in a
meeting with the highest-ranking officials of the Union.
We welcome the fact that the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers and Office of the Specialist Prosecutor
began hearings concerning certain individuals from
Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, we hope
that the initial indictments will soon be issued, while
especially bearing in mind the importance of that step
for revealing the perpetrators of the crimes committed
against Serbs and other non-Albanians. Those who
were served hearing summons included several highranking officials, former members of the command
structure of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army.
That is of paramount importance, as ample evidence
has been collected linking those individuals to crimes
committed in Kosovo and Metohija. Given the evidence,
it is now important to issue arrest warrants and try
alleged offenders in a judicial institution, which, to
date, has never been done. A large number of Serbs
and non-Albanians imprisoned by the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army were killed, while others escaped
or were released. The Commission of the Republic of
Serbia on Missing Persons continues to collect evidence
in its archives with regard to more than 580 Serbs and
6/23

07/02/2019

non-Albanians incarcerated in approximately 140
illegal prisons. The investigation must continue, as
information and evidence abound. The “yellow house”
and the crimes relating to illegally trafficking in human
organs committed therein must be investigated, as well.
We hope that Pristina will cooperate with the competent
institutions so that those crimes will be punished. Yet
war criminal Sylejman Selimi has been appointed as an
adviser to the Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo, a
fact that has been condemned, including by the United
States Ambassador in Pristina. There is not much room
for optimism, is there?
I would also like to remind the Council that
Mr. Selimi has been on a conditional release since
he was convicted of war crimes against Serbia. That
is the person who was appointed as an adviser to
the Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo. That is of
crucial importance for the stabilization of the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija and the efforts to achieve
historical reconciliation.
It is also important, however, to push back the
unscrupulous lies and montage of information brought
forth incessantly by the highest-ranking Kosovo
Albanian officials to cover up their own crimes, who
continue to posture as victims of the conflict. They
misuse and viciously manipulate the data with the
aim of incriminating Serbs alone for all the atrocities
committed in Kosovo and Metohija, as if only their
victims — their expellees, killed, missing and
tortured — mattered. What happened, however, was an
armed conflict between two warring parties: between
regular armed forces and police and the insurgent and
terrorist Kosovo Liberation Army.
Albanians do not mention that the victims included
2,197 Serbs, 159 Roma, 95 Bosniaks, 78 Ashkalis, 75
Montenegrins, 38 Egyptians and 46 members of other
communities, who had lived in peace and harmony in
the province. Speaking of the numbers, let it be known
that 2,725 Serbs and other non-Albanians were reported
as killed or missing.
Special fervour is displayed in hiding the truth that
most crimes were committed after the withdrawal of
the regular armed forces of Serbia from the province
in June 1999. One of the reasons is attempts to conceal
the settling of accounts by the Kosovo Liberation Army
with their disloyal fellow Albanians: 377 of them killed
at the hands of their co-nationals.
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

We should also mention that 1,250 Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians were killed by members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army in 1998 and at the beginning
of 1999, prior to the NATO aggression, to which
testimonies of members of many families have been
made and are in our possession. Pristina is less than
eager to unveil the number of killed or missing members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army, which, according to
international sources, reaches 2,132.
Pristina continues to contend that the missing
persons number is 1,647, but fails to point out that
the number includes 570 Serbs and non-Albanians.
It does not indicate that a large number of missing
Albanians was kidnapped and certainly killed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army. Following 10 June 1999, they
totalled 55. So far, none of Pristina’s representatives
have said if a joint consolidated list of missing persons
has been established, or that the tracking of missing
persons continues in agreement and cooperation of the
competent bodies of the commissions under the auspices
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
At the same time, Pristina refuses to make public
that the human remains of 900 Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were exhumed at locations in central Serbia
from 2001 to 2017 and released to their families, and
that each and every request it submitted to check for
potential mass or individual graves has received a
response. On the other hand, no location in Kosovo and
Metohija that is suspected of containing mass graves
of killed Serbs, Roma or disloyal Albanians has been
checked to date, 20 years after the confrontation,
despite many requests made by our side.
According to the recent report of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in
Kosovo, the number of incidents directed at the Serbs
of Kosovo and Metohija last year increased by as much
as 30 per cent, compared to 2017. How are we to expect
then that any progress will be made in the return of the
internally displaced persons, let alone in the building
of a multi-ethnic democratic society, if no basic human
rights, including the right to a safe and secure life for
all in Kosovo and Metohija, are not respected?
It is self-defeating to speak of those numbers today,
20 years after the establishment of the international
civil presence, that is, the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999), which entrusted the international civil presence
with a clear responsibility of

S/PV. 8459

“assuring the safe and unimpeded return of all
refugees and displaced persons to their homes in
Kosovo.” (resolution 1244 (1999), para. 11 (k))
Do the constant attacks on returnees and their property,
pressure and low-intensity violence, discrimination
and intolerance tell the Council anything as to whether
the goal that was proclaimed 20 years ago has really
been achieved? And are we ready for political goals
and strategic considerations to close our eyes to what
is happening and say that the situation is peaceful and
stable? We must not, and we do not want to, allow that to
happen. We must speak, today and tomorrow, about the
200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija,
just as we would for any other such person in Europe or
elsewhere in the world, for each and every one of them
has the right to return home.
A conclusion in the dialogue was that the question
of property would also be a topic of discussion. Heedless
of that conclusion, Pristina took a one-sided decision
to confiscate the property of the Trepča mines. Let me
recall that, so far, Serbia has paid $750 million, with
$200 million remaining, on the loan taken out on behalf
of the Kosovo and Metohija borrowers, even though socalled Kosovo is a member of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. With Serbia paying the
debt, why is Kosovo not a part of Serbia? If it is an
independent country, why does it not pay off its loans
itself? If the situation is as it says, then how can it
proclaim to own those companies?
Serbia is fully committed to dialogue and stands
ready to move forward with it, but it will happen only
once Pristina revokes its decision on taxes. I thank the
members of the international community that have
condemned the decision of Pristina and called on it
to revoke it. I plead with them, at the same time, to
persevere and continue to bring pressure to bear on
the representatives of Pristina so that the decision can
finally be revoked and we can continue with the talks,
despite some serious and significant consequences that
have already taken place. It is my hope that Pristina will
revoke the taxes; it would be reasonable and open the
door to the talks. If it does not do so, however, it will
be clear that it is not after agreements and compromise,
but rather it is after blackmail.
It is my earnest hope that this year will not be beset
by the challenges we faced in the past period, the like
of which we have not yet managed to overcome. Let me
reiterate once again that Serbia continues to maintain

19-031587/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

that problems should be solved through dialogue and
with respect for the principles of international law. We
trust and believe that appropriate conditions will be
created in that regard. For our part, we shall continue
to conduct a policy of peace, but we expect that the
other side will fulfil its obligations and refrain from
unilateral acts and provocation. Twenty long years
after the conflict, it is high time we turned a page in the
history of Serbian-Albanian relations and proceeded to
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: As always, I am honoured to be here
with members of the Security Council today, and it is
precisely because I truly respect and value the Council
that I cannot quite comprehend why it is that we are
actually here today. Kosovo is certainly not a novel topic
for the Council. For many people around the world, it
was the war of the late 1990s that put Kosovo on the
map. However, the war itself was not just an isolated
formative experience for my people; it was predicated
on years of oppression, segregation and exploitation,
years when we were denied our most fundamental
rights. We did not have the right to read or write in our
own language in schools, or to sing songs out on our
streets. We experienced years of being silenced by the
deafening noise of Serbian guns, years of tremendous
suffering that came to an end only when Council
members’ predecessors, sitting around this very table
two decades ago, gave a voice to me and my people.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
liberation of Kosovo, we also celebrate the role of the
United Nations in Kosovo. When 1 million refugees
were returning back to their homes, United Nations
agencies were there, in Kosovo, waiting for them,
readily offering their support. Our country has risen
from the ashes of war, and it was the United Nations
Administration that lifted us up.
Throughout the many years of the United Nations
Administration in Kosovo, the Council has provided
guidance and facilitated a healthy debate about
Kosovo and its future. It was precisely United Nations
Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari who recommended
independence as the ultimate solution for Kosovo. And
it was upon Serbia’s request that the International Court
of Justice ruled clearly and without any ambiguity
that Kosovo was within its rights when it declared
independence and that it did not break or violate any
8/23

07/02/2019

international law. I do not have to remind the Council
that the ruling of the court was accepted by the
General Assembly, which recommended the launch of
a dialogue for the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia.
With those facts in mind, I address the Council with
the absolute candour and correctness that this forum
implies and say that I can seriously not understand why
on Earth we are here today talking about Kosovo for
the third time in four months. It is unbelievable that
the Council has convened more meetings to talk about
Kosovo than it has for Syria, Yemen or Venezuela.
There are real problems out there, real challenges that
require the Council’s valuable time and attention. There
are real people who need the Council’s help, as we in
Kosovo once did. It is unacceptable that this Chamber is
being turned into a theatre by our northern neighbour,
that this esteemed forum has become a stage for Serbia
to tell its fairy tales to the world, fictional stories that
they do not even believe themselves. It is shameful, yet
again, that this Chamber is being misused purely for
domestic consumption. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has no role and has
no mandate to exercise. These meetings have lost their
purpose. In fact, the charade that is being put on in this
Chamber is yet more proof that Serbia is not genuine
in its articulated intent to engage in dialogue with
Kosovo about the normalization of relations between
our two countries.
The dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia was not,
is not and will never be about Kosovo’s right to exist
as a free nation under the sun. Let us not distort the
facts. A new and young republic was born in Europe
11 years ago this month And Kosovo will not ever
negotiate its statehood or its independence — not today,
not tomorrow, never. We want, and are prepared, to talk
about building constructive relations as neighbours, as
equals. However, that is exactly where the problem lies.
Serbia is inherently opposed to the idea that Kosovo
is its equal. That is why it creates unnecessary drama
everywhere it can about anything that makes it view us
as its equal. It is pervasive. We see it everywhere. We
see it in sports and arts and politics. There is a stubborn
refusal to accept us as peers. But, frankly speaking,
that is Serbia’s problem. What I cannot understand is
why we have to meet here so often and entertain its
ideas about a parallel universe that it chooses to live in.
It is up to the members of this important Council to stop
enabling this parody.
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

Always, every single day, Serbia continues to create
artificial drama in order to avoid accepting reality. We
have gotten rather used to it. It is hard for Serbia to
surprise us with its absurdity anymore. However, if it
thinks that it can make giving up our right to exist as a
sovereign State a condition for dialogue with us, it is in
for a fast-approaching awakening. Kosovo is not going
to freeze its existence until Serbia has an epiphany and
decides it is time to accept Kosovo as an equal.
First, less than two months ago, we were summoned
to the Chamber for an extraordinary meeting to
urgently address the most natural and ordinary decision
that our institutions undertook when we established
our army (see S/PV.8427). The decision to establish an
army was a legal, constitutional and prudent obligation
to create the requisite security mechanisms that will
enable Kosovo to contribute and be part of regional and
Euro-Atlantic security alliances. Furthermore, it was a
decision that demonstrated the maturity of Kosovo as
a State. It is a paradigm shift of no small proportion
for us to transform from consumers of to contributors
to security.
Serbia is now imposing conditions on the
continuation of the dialogue with the removal of tariffs.
The decision of our Government to impose tariffs
on Serbian goods was not a decision we took lightly.
However, the question at hand should be why that
decision was made in the first place. The tariffs were a
direct response to the aggressive and brutal campaign
of the Serbian Government against Kosovo. One cannot
use one’s hand to fight for its existence, with everything
they have at their disposal, and extend the other one
with the pretence of being earnest about normalizing
relations with Kosovo. In addition, political arguments
aside, that decision was also based on economic factors.
No product whatsoever that is labelled made in Kosovo
can pass the Serbian border. Why should Kosovo extend
Serbia a courtesy that it does not reciprocate?
The tariffs are not the issue. They are merely an
excuse to refuse to come and sit with us at the table
in Brussels. At the end of the day, the real economic
effect of the tariffs on Serbia is minimal. Serbia exports
weapons all around the world, even to countries that are
under a European Union or a United States embargo, and
it sells biscuits to Kosovo. Only 3 per cent of Serbia’s
exports are to Kosovo. There is no humanitarian
crisis of any kind in Kosovo. I ask Council members
to come and visit Kosovo, and they will witness the
unquestionable reality with their own eyes.

S/PV. 8459

The bottom line is that Serbia will use any excuse
that it can find, and it will invent more if there are
no excuses, only to delay the inevitable, namely, the
recognition of Kosovo as a free and independent State.
All the excuses and delays do not alter the fact that
Kosovo is a free nation. Dialogue should therefore not
be conditional on excuses because, at the end of the day,
Kosovo has real and painful reasons to place conditions
on the process. We have 20,000 reasons, for each of the
women that were raped by the Serbian military forces.
We have 1,370 more, for each child who was killed
in Kosovo by the Serbian military forces. We have
1,600 reasons, for each and every one of the people
who are still missing today. Yet Kosovo has never
placed conditions on the dialogue process because,
for us, building a prosperous Kosovo, at peace with its
neighbours, is the best way to honour the sacrifice that
was made. Although our scars may never fully heal, we
will not be hostage to our own pain.
Even today, we heard attempts to rewrite history. We
heard no remorse for the crimes that were committed,
from Srebrenica to Račak and Izbica. The war in former
Yugoslavia happened before the eyes of the world. We
all know who the victims are and who the perpetrators
are. There is one address and that is in Belgrade. The
Kosovo Liberation Army was not a criminal or terrorist
organization. It comprised young women and men who
had the courage to stand up and fight Milošević. We are
very proud of that.
Instead of seizing this opportunity for redemption
and peace, Serbia chooses obstruction. I urge the
Council to remember that even if the Government
of Kosovo were to suspend the tariffs today, Serbia
would find some other excuse to inhibit the process.
What is its excuse for the lack of implementation of
almost everything that we have agreed to in Brussels?
What is its excuse for the lack of implementation of the
energy agreement or the agreement on the recognition
of diplomas? What is its excuse? It has none. The truth
is that until Serbia recognizes Kosovo as its equal, our
part of the world will sadly keep producing endless and
pointless drama and conflict.
The most recent iteration was Belgrade’s reaction to
the legitimate and constitutional decision on the Trepça
mines. Belgrade’s reaction to that decision revealed in
the most blatant and brutal way the true neocolonial
attitude that Serbia harbours towards Kosovo. Kosovo
will not negotiate with Belgrade about Trepça or any
other of our resources. They are in Kosovo and they

19-031589/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

belong to the people of Kosovo. The time when decisions
regarding our resources were made in Belgrade ended
a long time ago.
Serbia needs to want peace. It needs to want an
agreement. If it truly does, it needs to act on it. Our
Serbian citizens in Kosovo are the ones that suffer the
most in this situation. Let there be no mistake — there
is only one Government that exercises pressure on
them. That is the one that sits in Belgrade, not the
one that sits in Pristina. Any member of the Kosovo
Serbian community who dares to think differently to or
independently of the Government in Belgrade is subject
to systematic intimidation. From hand grenades thrown
at the homes of the Serbian members of the Kosovo
security forces to the detention of Serbian Members
of Parliament who dared to challenge the Government
in Belgrade, Serbia has left no stone unturned in its
attempts to obstruct the integration of the Serbian
community in Kosovo. Belgrade does not view them as
people who need its support. Belgrade views and uses
Serbs in Kosovo as an instrument for its destabilizing
foreign policy. We have seen similar scenarios in
Bosnia, as well.
Only recently when we gathered here, we all
demanded progress on the investigation into the
assassination of Oliver Ivanović (see S/PV.8399). The
Kosovo police and other law enforcement mechanisms
worked hard to bring the perpetrators of that crime
to justice. Let me mention the attack on the Kosovo
Special Police Unit to which my colleague from Serbia
referred. Arrests were made, but look at the irony — the
main suspect is in hiding in Serbia and Serbia refuses to
hand him over to the Kosovar authorities. I will refrain
from commenting any further on this matter and allow
Council members to make up their own minds as to
what that means.
As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the liberation of Kosovo, I cannot help
but reflect on the future. Regardless of the roadblocks
and despite all the obstacles that we face, we remain
determined to do all that is in our power to achieve and
cherish a stable and lasting peace for the sake of our
children, our athletes, our artists and our scientists,
who are undaunted by the temporary constraints of our
current circumstance. They transcend the borders of
prejudice and they scale the walls of politics to raise
our flag all around the world. For the sake of our brave
women who challenge the status quo to transform social
norms and break glass ceilings and for the sake of the
10/23

07/02/2019

fallen, who made the ultimate sacrifice, we continue to
strive for a better tomorrow. Even though we still have
a long way to go, I am just as hopeful for our young
republic today as I was on 12 June 1999, when Kosovo
was liberated from Serbia.
It is time for Serbia to liberate itself from Kosovo
now, for the sake of peace and stability in the region.
We all must show courage and end this conflict. Kosovo
is ready.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Security Council who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative for his briefing, and
his team for their continuing dedication to this issue.
I also extend a welcome to His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Serbia and Her Excellency the Ambassador
of Kosovo.
I have spent a lot of my career dealing with the
Balkans. I have spent some time in Kosovo and in
Mitrovica, which is in northern Kosovo and a Kosovo
Serb-majority community. It is fair to say that there are
still tensions in the communities, and it is also fair to
say that the communities have not always treated each
other with kindness, respect and friendliness. But I was
sorry to not hear any recognition today, from one of the
speakers, of the events that led us to 1999, to the NATO
intervention and to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
presence of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) , which we are dealing
with today. I heard no contrition or acceptance of the
enormity of the war crimes that were committed on the
ground. Those war crimes have been established by the
international tribunal that the Council set up for that
purpose. I heard no recognition of the events that led
up to the Ahtisaari process on the status of Kosovo and
the events that then followed, or of the attempts by the
Council, as a whole, and by individual members of the
Council, notably the United States and Russia, acting
with the European Union (EU), to try to resolve the
status issue. All of those efforts came to nothing and
remain in abeyance. That is not at all to take away from
the fact that each of the communities in Kosovo could
do more to build a tolerant, inclusive society where
rights are respected across the board. But there is a very
big difference between that point and the description of
how we got where we are.
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

The situation in Kosovo in 2019 has changed
dramatically since UNMIK entered in 1999. UNMIK
has played an important role, with the help of the
European Union and NATO, in promoting security,
stability and human rights in Kosovo and the
region. Kosovo is no longer a country in conflict,
and it is becoming increasingly integrated into the
international community.
The Council deals with very many important
issues related to international peace and security.
With the agreement we have been able to reach today
on reducing the frequency of UNMIK meetings going
forward, followed by the endorsement of the President
of the Council — and I thank you, Mr. President, for
your role in that — we have taken a step commensurate
with the nature of the issue regarding Kosovo, thereby
enabling the Council to focus its efforts on much more
fierce, intractable and live conflicts. At the same time,
we support a strategic review of the Mission to ensure
that UNMIK’s efforts are fully tailored to the situation
on the ground.
As the UNMIK report (S/2019/102) makes clear,
and notwithstanding overall developments in Kosovo,
tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, sadly, rose
over the reporting period. I think it is incumbent
upon all of us to look forward to potential solutions,
and for political leaders in the region, but particularly
in Kosovo and Serbia, to refrain from exacerbating
tensions and divisions.
I mentioned a few minutes ago that Kosovo is not
an acute crisis situation of the sort that the Council,
sadly, has to deal with all too often. Rather, it and
Serbia are fortunate in that the European Union has
offered a dialogue within which they can normalize
their relations and make progress towards integration
into the European Union as equals and as sovereign
nations that respect one another. There are other
conflicts where we have no such prospect of reaching
any sort of agreement along those lines. I would really
like to use this meeting to appeal to the political leaders
in Belgrade and Pristina to recognize the opportunity
that the EU-facilitated dialogue offers them to be able
to resolve their differences and move forward for the
sake of their peoples, their history and their relations
as equal and sovereign neighbours working together for
the prosperity and democracy of Europe. In addition
to that, I look to both parties to cease all provocations,
which increase tensions, and call on them to show the
good faith that the dialogue expects. Progress on the

S/PV. 8459

dialogue is not only vital for the prosperity, stability
and security of both Kosovo and Serbia and the wider
region, it would also be an important example of how, at
a very unpredictable time in world affairs, two former
adversaries could come together and show that a way
forward can be found to mutual benefit.
I want to say that we also welcome the law
mandating the Kosovo State delegation, which passed
its first reading on 2 February. The State delegation,
in the context of the dialogue, will help ensure that a
plurality of voices from across the political spectrum
is able to deliver a deal that the Kosovo Parliament and
the country can accept. And of course, any deal should
be comprehensive, inclusive and contribute to regional
stability and security.
If I may, I would also like to highlight one aspect of
the Special Representative’s report to which the Kosovo
Ambassador alluded, that is, the transition of the
Kosovo Security Force, which the Council discussed
in December (see S/PV.8427). I would like to reiterate
what I said at that time, that the United Kingdom
believes that it is Kosovo’s right as an independent,
self-governing State to develop its own armed forces.
Our legal interpretation of resolution 1244 (1999)
is that it does not contain anything that precludes
the future transition of the mandate of the Kosovo
Security Force. I also repeat something else I said in
December, that we look to Kosovo to act responsibly,
transparently and in consultation with NATO allies to
uphold existing commitments to arrangements with the
NATO Kosovo Force.
In closing, I would like to again pay tribute to
Council colleagues who have helped us reach a sensible
and proportionate way forward on the frequency with
which the Council discusses Kosovo, and I would like
to reiterate our thanks to the Special Representative
and his team for their efforts on behalf of the Council.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): As we sat around the
table to discuss the programme of work on Monday,
I wondered why you, Sir, were so insistent about
convening today’s debate on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We have
already heard 46 minutes worth of statements. It has
been very repetitious; much of it we have heard before.
I think we have found a very good solution for reducing
the amount of discussion we have around the table on
the issue.

19-0315811/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

07/02/2019

I would subscribe to everything that my colleague
of the United Kingdom, Ms. Pierce, has said with regard
to developments in the country and only reiterate that
Kosovo has made considerable progress since 2008.
With respect to dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
we have the Brussels dialogue, facilitated by the
European Union, although it is not making the kind of
progress we want. Nonetheless, we have it. Therefore,
I do not see the importance of having such discussions,
in particular on UNMIK, here in the Council.

First of all, with regard to the Kosovo Government,
we look forward to Kosovo becoming a member of
the European Union and to the removal of tariffs and
trade barriers. Tariffs on products from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are at odds with the European
perspective and I would urge that they be removed. At
the same time, with regard to Serbia, the President of
Serbia has launched a very good initiative to create a
free-trade zone in the Balkans. Not allowing Kosovar
products into Serbia is at variance with that initiative.

I would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his team
for their work and for the briefing. I listened very
carefully to what he said. Unfortunately, he also stated
that there are many antagonistic gestures and many
things that can and should be improved. He pointed
to the work being done and we very much support the
person-to-person contacts, youth exchanges and the
participation of women and empowerment of women
leaders. That is all very important. We believe that it
can all be taken over either by the Kosovar institutions
themselves or by other international organizations.
Therefore, in our opinion, it is time for a strategic
assessment of UNMIK and we should align the Mission
to the situation on the ground. As I said, many or all of
the tasks can be taken over by other institutions.

With regard to the Serbian initiative, in his
intervention Mr. Dačić mentioned that there have been
13 withdrawals of recognition. From reports, I also know
that Ivica Dačić has travelled to some of those countries.
He has made some beautiful trips to the Caribbean and
the Pacific islands, but I do not understand the logic
behind that. The Kosovo declaration of independence
was recognized by the International Court of Justice
as being in conformity with international law. There
is an independent Kosovo. The only way that Serbia
will enter the European Union is if the normalization
dialogue is successful and by recognizing Kosovo. By
travelling to various countries to encourage them to
withdraw their recognition of Kosovo, he is shooting
himself in the foot. I still do not understand the logic of
it because I have always believed that Serbia wanted to
join the European Union.

I would like to highlight one point in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/102) that we find
very important. It is that Kosovo has made significant
progress in recognizing the survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence. We welcome that survivorcentred approach as a positive example for others in
the region and beyond to follow. We believe that it is
very important that we look at the victims of violence,
in particular women, in the various conflicts on the
Council’s agenda, from South Sudan to Myanmar to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We always see
that women are the victims and we must take care of
them. Tomorrow, Germany will host an Arria Formula
meeting on that issue and on the very important question
of accountability.
Let me briefly turn to the normalization dialogue.
We think — and both briefers have stated — that
the European perspective is very important. Special
Representative Tanin also said that the European
perspective is very important for Kosovo. I do not
understand how the issues that have been discussed are
in conformity with the European perspective.
12/23

Lastly, with regard to the Brussels dialogue and
the Brussels Agreement, nothing in the Agreement
mentions border adjustments, border changes or
territory swaps. Germany does not think that such ideas
contribute to a solution. We believe that such efforts are
risky and could destabilize the entire region.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku back to the
Security Council.
We appreciate the understanding reached by the
Council to end the practice of quarterly briefings on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and that next year there will be two
meetings “on the issue”, not necessarily on UNMIK.
There are much better uses for the Council’s limited
time and resources than to maintain the past frequency
of UNMIK briefings.
It is disappointing that, at a moment when the
atmosphere begs for improvement, these Council
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

meetings continue to be used to deploy antagonistic
language. I agree with much of what my colleagues
of Germany and the United Kingdom have said. It is
unfortunate and one reason that many Council members
are reluctant to continue those meetings, wondering
whether they actually contribute to or detract from
the prospects for international peace and security.
We underscore that UNMIK has achieved its original
mandate and its drawdown is long overdue. The United
Nations continues to have an important and useful
role to play in Kosovo, but through the United Nations
country team and the United Nations Development
Programme, not through UNMIK, and that should be
reflected in the Council’s approach to meetings “on
the issue”.
As the United States has requested previously, we
would like the Secretariat to initiate a strategic review
of UNMIK to develop an exit strategy. Taking that
step will empower the Security Council with critical
resource management and oversight information to
better evaluate the United Nations presence in Kosovo.
Such a step would also advance the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
We continue to support the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.
As our President has made clear, we believe that this
is a unique moment for both Serbia and Kosovo to
reach a comprehensive normalization agreement. We
believe that is achievable in 2019. Failure to seize this
opportunity would be a setback. The dialogue should be
both countries’ overarching priority. Both Kosovo and
Serbia should take immediate steps to lower tensions,
remove barriers and create the conditions necessary
for rapid progress on the dialogue. For Kosovo, that
means immediately suspending tariffs on Serbian and
Bosnian imports. Reaching a deal will take courageous
leadership and flexibility on both sides. Normalizing
relations must be a priority for both countries. Now is
the time to work for forward momentum and pave the
way for their respective EU paths. We believe that is
the best way to ensure a stable, secure and prosperous
future for the Western Balkans.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I join
others in thanking Special Representative Zahir Tanin
for his clear and precise briefing, and I also thank
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Çitaku, the
Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, for their
statements. I would like to respectfully point out

S/PV. 8459

that, in accordance with the working methods of the
Security Council, as stipulated in paragraph 22 of note
507 (S/2017/507), those statements should not exceed
five minutes.
As the representative of the United Kingdom has
eloquently made clear, while the issue under discussion
is rooted in a past marked by traumatic violence, over
the past decade Kosovo has made remarkable gains that
must be consolidated. We must redouble our efforts
today to leave behind the wounds of the past and the
remaining problems. Given the situation described
in the Special Representative’s briefing and the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/102), as well as the
visible tensions in the statements by the representatives
of Serbia and Kosovo, I want to briefly emphasize the
following three points.
The first concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), whose
consistent efforts to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region must be
acknowledged. France especially welcomes UNMIK’s
activities in bringing communities closer together and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda in
cooperation with UN-Women. Women’s presence and
participation in the political arena and its institutions
should receive greater attention in that regard, and the
efforts to combat violence against women mentioned
by the Special Representative should also be continued
and encouraged.
Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), we must continue to devote attention
to the issue of refocusing UNMIK’s actions while
considering the situation on the ground, the Mission’s
performance and the initiatives of other regional and
international actors, particularly the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The note by
the President of the Security Council on the frequency
of our meetings also supports this view.
My second point concerns the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, which
depends on the dialogue conducted between the two
parties under the auspices of the European Union.
In that regard, we support the mediation efforts of
Ms. Frederica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. I expressed our positions on the dialogue and
the difficulties it has encountered at our meeting
on 17 December (see S/PV.8427). They remain

19-0315813/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

fully valid, and I want to reiterate today that France
deplores the fact that several incidents and unilateral
decisions mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
have obstructed the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina in recent months, particularly the Government
of Kosovo’s decision to impose a 100 per cent tax on
goods coming from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
comes to mind. We once again ask that it be repealed, if
possible, or at the very least suspended. It is important
to encourage two-way communication. We hope that
the dialogue, which is currently at an impasse, will be
resumed as soon as possible. We also want to ensure
that security commitments are respected.
France calls on both parties to show a spirit of
compromise and political will. We urge the political
leaders of both States to create the conditions conducive
to a comprehensive and final agreement, which would
be a major step towards achieving lasting stability
in the Western Balkans and making progress on the
path to a European future. It is crucial to ensure that
both parties refrain from any actions, statements or
measures that could undermine normalization. For its
part, France intends to continue providing support for
regional cooperation efforts, particularly the FrenchGerman initiative on the control of small arms and
light weapons.
My third and last point concerns the European future
of Kosovo and Serbia. Given the values that are central
to the European project, we underline the importance
of the reforms needed to consolidate and strengthen
the rule of law. In Kosovo, EULEX is contributing to
that goal by focusing on the effectiveness, ethics and
multi-community nature of the Kosovo judicial system.
In conclusion, I want to remind the Council that
the primary responsibility for Serbia and Kosovo’s
European visions lies first and foremost with their
political leaders. Only the full normalization of
relations between Pristina and Belgrade will make it
possible to achieve that shared European future.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank our
colleagues from Equatorial Guinea for their principled
position and for including this meeting on Kosovo
in the Security Council’s February programme of
work to enable us to discuss the situation there and
the Secretary-General’s periodic report (S/2019/102),
issued on 31 January, on the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We welcome the participation
14/23

07/02/2019

of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in this meeting,
and we share his serious concerns about the situation
in Kosovo. We also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative briefing on the
situation in the region. We value the Mission’s work
and support Mr. Tanin and his efforts. We also listened
attentively to the statement by Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku said that she simply could not
understand why we were here today. I will now explain
why. Furthermore, having read out to us yet another
tract, in which I heard not one substantive response to
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić’s fair and serious claims
regarding Kosovo, she called this Security Council
meeting a charade. I am much obliged to her for her
opinion of our Council meeting. And as long as she
considers them a charade, she is completely free to
choose not to participate in these meetings, to which
she is invited, by the way.
We cannot accept Pristina’s Western sponsors’
position on removing the subject of Kosovo from the
Council’s agenda. Behind phrases such as “we recently
discussed”, “there is nothing to discuss”, “the situation
is calm” and “why so often?” we see a desire to hide
the truth from the international community about the
real situation on the ground and the games being played
with Kosovo behind the scenes. The same applies to the
calls for a strategic assessment.
We want to remind everyone that the Security
Council has been and continues to be the main platform
for international dialogue on Kosovo, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Considering that the
problem is getting worse, it should remain firmly
under the Council’s control and be considered based
on the established practice of holding open briefings.
The situation in Kosovo is extremely unstable and
could spiral out of control at any time. Incidentally,
the semi-annual report of the Head of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Mission in
Kosovo has a similar assessment, expressed recently at
a meeting of the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Kosovo
remains the main hotbed of instability and a source
of potential conflict in the Balkans. The authorities in
Pristina have taken a path exacerbating the crisis that
poses a threat of renewed violence and war. Twenty
years after NATO’s barbaric bombing of the allied
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

Republic of Yugoslavia, and after 10 years of unilateral
independence, we are seeing an increasing number of
signs that the Kosovo-Albanian leadership is emerging
out of the control of the Western countries that designed
this so-called independence. To put the question another
way, could the so-called Pristina leadership behave this
way without outside collusion? The answer is obvious.
During the reporting period, Pristina initiated
a whole series of provocative acts directed at Serbia
and Serbs in the autonomous region. In violation of
its obligations under the Central European Free Trade
Agreement, Kosovo’s so-called Government announced
its introduction of a 100 per cent tariff on goods from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The measures
are still in force, despite President Vučić’s urging,
including here in this Chamber. The United States and
the European Union have made unconvincing demands,
unsupported by any concrete measures, that the tariffs
be lifted, and Pristina has simply ignored them.
On top of that, on 14 December, in a serious
violation of resolution 1244 (1999), the so-called
Parliament decided to transform the Kosovo Security
Force into a fully fledged Kosovo army. As the
Secretary-General emphasized once again, the
resolution remains the fundamental international
legal basis for a Kosovo settlement. It includes a
completely definitive requirement for demilitarizing
any armed Kosovo-Albanian groups, and the sole
presence permitted on Kosovo’s territory is that of
multinational contingents under international control.
Based on that, if Pristina establishes any armed forces,
the Kosovo Force must disarm them. On the contrary,
however, those who should be preventing the creation
of an army are doing everything they can to facilitate
and encourage it. Pristina’s Western patrons have been
trying to whitewash the decision, arguing that it does
not really change the nature of the Kosovo Security
Force. But the fact is that its numbers are being doubled
and reserves created, and above all its purpose — which
until recently was civil defence — has changed. With
the assistance of the United States and several NATO
countries, the Kosovo-Albanian military is undergoing
intensive training and being supplied with increasing
amounts of weapons and technology. There can be no
guarantees that these so-called Kosovo armed forces,
consisting in large part of terrorists from the Kosovo
Liberation Army, will not be used in future against the
Serbian population in the north.

S/PV. 8459

The calls from Kosovo-Albanian parties for the socalled unification of North and South Mitrovica are also
a serious cause for alarm. In the current tense situation,
any movement in that direction could become, as we
say, the spark that starts the fire. It is quite clear that
the decisions made in Kosovo are all links in a chain.
The goal is to intimidate the Serbian population in the
region and deprive them of possibilities, and all of that
is happening against a backdrop of loud propaganda
about the creation of a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.
In the light of our partners’ biased approaches, the
impotence of the European Union’s mediation efforts,
which our partners refer to as if to a guiding star, in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina makes perfect
sense. A case in point is that for more than five years now
there has been no progress in reaching a key agreement
on the formation of an association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo. Brussels is not in
a position to get Pristina to do it. Nothing has been
heard in response to the Kosovo Albanians’ outright
flouting of their obligations. Instead of that we hear
vague urgings, for some reason addressed to both sides,
to normalize relations, which only reinforces one side’s
feeling that it can get away with anything, inciting
it to take maximalist approaches that do not allow
for compromise.
Russia’s position on Kosovo is consistent. We
support a viable, mutually acceptable and sustainable
settlement for Belgrade and Pristina on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). It should be fair, it should
comply with international law and it should have the
Security Council’s approval. In our view, forcing a
so-called final normalization between Belgrade and
Pristina and tying it to any artificial deadlines would
be destructive. If we want to achieve stability in the
Balkans, we must be able to find compromises, and
when solutions are found in the framework of those
efforts, they must be implemented, not sabotaged. That
particularly applies to the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.
We are seriously alarmed about the series of
flagrantly irresponsible statements by Pristina
about UNMIK. The statement by the Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, that his so-called
Government is going to stop cooperating with the
Mission is a blatant violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
I had a question at this point in my statement — that I
would be interested to hear what our Western partners
thought of that situation, or whether they would prefer

19-0315815/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

to ignore it and once again pretend that nothing has
happened. I have listened intently to our colleagues’
statements, but frankly I knew the answer already.
None of them even mentioned it.
There have been no results in the work of
the Specialist Chambers investigating the crimes
committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army, including
the kidnapping and murder of people in order to harvest
their organs. There was a noteworthy interview in the
Serbian newspaper Večernje novosti with the Swiss
former member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe Dick Marty, the author of the report
on “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo”. The interview contains
some interesting facts. For example, in July 2014 Clint
Williamson, the former United States Prosecutor in
the Specialist Chambers in The Hague, stated that
the results of the investigation were consistent with
the fundamental conclusions of the report, and yet,
strangely enough, for some reason resigned immediately
after that. A third Prosecutor was then appointed, but
nothing has happened.
In Mr. Marty’s words, it is inconceivable, absurd
and dubious from an ethical point of view that Geoffrey
Nice, a former prosecutor of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, should now be employed
in defending Kosovars in the Specialist Chambers.
Mr. Marty’s most striking point is that it is entirely
possible that the Kosovo-Albanian leaders involved in
those crimes will not be held accountable. In our opinion,
that sums up both the real situation of the Chambers
and its prospects and the tendencies we see in its work.
In that regard, we emphasize that the unambiguous
message that Mr. Marty is sending requires an adequate
response on the part of the international community.
What is at stake is the reputation of international justice
and the European Union as a guarantor of the Specialist
Chambers’ implementation of its functions. Those who
were involved in the most serious crimes, including
the illegal trade in human organs, must be severely
punished, regardless of the offices they currently hold
in Pristina. We will not allow the issue to be swept
under the rug, and we will continue to shine a light on
it in future. We should note in passing that our Western
partners’ position on the Specialist Chambers only
confirms the multiple levels of standards that they
apply to international justice.
Kosovo has continued to be a haven for recruiting
radicals, and terrorists returning from Syria and Iraq
16/23

07/02/2019

have been flocking there. Unfortunately, every year
fewer and fewer refugees and internally displaced
persons return. Crimes against Serbs and their property
are a daily occurrence, but the perpetrators frequently
escape punishment. We continue to see takeovers
of Serbian Orthodox Church property by Kosovo
Albanians. We want to point out once again that the
Church of Saint John the Baptist and the Saint Paraskeva
Pyatnitsa Chapel in the town of Peć are no longer
listed in the local land register as Serbian Orthodox
Church property. There have been attempts to carry out
illegal construction in UNESCO-protected areas near
churches and monasteries. Let me remind the Council
that Kosovo has tried to join UNESCO. We should
also view in that context the so-called Parliament’s
recent adoption of a new charter for the Trepča mining
complex, in Serb-populated northern Kosovo, which
constitutes an unlawful expropriation of a Serbian State
enterprise on whose functioning thousands of families
in the area depend.
We continue to see determined attempts by the
Kosovo authorities, with the support of a number of
States, to join various international organizations.
We reaffirm our unwavering position, which is that
Pristina can participate in multilateral structures only
through UNMIK. Anything else would be a serious
contravention of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
We would like to focus the Secretariat’s attention on
the importance of thoroughly monitoring developments
in this situation, which, as the facts I have stated show,
requires close attention at the international level, which
should be conducted by the Security Council.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing. We welcome the presence here today
of Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we also listened
carefully to Ms. Çitaku’s statement.
The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but is still confronting complex dynamics. China
notes that the Kosovo authorities have recently imposed
tariffs on imported goods from Serbia and decided to
transform their security forces, measures that in our
view are not conducive to enhancing mutual trust and
dialogue. We call on the parties concerned to abide by
resolution 1244 (1999), refrain from any rhetoric or
action that could complicate or escalate the situation
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

and work to create conditions conducive to a proper
settlement of the Kosovo issue.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important
legal basis for resolving the Kosovo issue. All
parties should, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, reach
a mutually acceptable solution through dialogue and
negotiation, within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands its legitimate concerns
with regard to the Kosovo issue and commends Serbia’s
efforts to find a political solution to the Kosovo issue.
China hopes that Belgrade and Pristina will stay
committed to promoting the normalization of bilateral
relations through dialogue and consultations, make
constructive efforts to implement existing agreements,
gradually enhance mutual trust and create the conditions
conducive to a comprehensive and lasting solution.
Achieving reconciliation and common development
is in the fundamental interest of all peoples in Kosovo.
It also contributes to peace, stability and prosperity in
the Balkans region. We hope that all parties concerned
will put the well-being of their people first, protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities,
and promote the economic and social development of
all ethnic groups. We believe that the Security Council
should remain seized of the Kosovo issue and that the
international community should play a constructive
role in promoting a proper solution to the Kosovo issue.

S/PV. 8459

of relations between the two parties. We have taken
note of the adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of
laws strengthening the mandate and capacity of the
Kosovo Security Force. While we recognize Kosovo’s
sovereign right to legislate in this area, Belgium regrets
the timing of this initiative and the lack of national
and international consultations. We also regret the
imposition of an import tax on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we call on the Kosovar
authorities to lift it immediately.
It should be noted that the two measures that I
have just mentioned are part of a broader context of
conflicting relations between the two parties. We
therefore call on Serbia and Kosovo to refrain from any
action or statement that may stoke tensions.
The conclusion of a comprehensive legally binding
agreement on the normalization of relations is the only
way to achieve regional stability. We call on the Serbian
and Kosovar Presidents to fully engage in the dialogue
conducted under the auspices of the European Union.
Both parties must uphold their commitments to creating
an environment conducive to dialogue. We stress
the importance of including civil society, including
women and young people, in this process. Belgium
fully supports the efforts of the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, to that end.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, for his briefing.
I also welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dačić, and the Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, Ms. Vlora Çitaku, for their statements.

We welcome the compromise reached in the Council
on reducing the cycle of meetings and reporting on this
subject. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations
have undoubtedly contributed to an improvement of the
situation in comparison with the situation 20 years ago.
The challenges currently facing Kosovo are, however,
primarily addressed in the context of European
integration, in cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Furthermore, as I
have already recalled, the dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo is conducted under the auspices of the European
Union. Therefore, we join our European colleagues in
their call for the efforts of UNMIK to be refocused and
fully adapted to this development. Ultimately, we are
convinced that Serbia and Kosovo have a European
future, but achieving it remains to a large extent in
their hands.

At the outset, I would like to turn to recent
developments, which I regret to say have not been
conducive to creating a climate for the normalization

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and Mr. Tanin for his important briefing. We also

China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
implementing its mandate. We hope that UNMIK will
maintain coordination with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force to jointly
improve the situation on the ground and promote a
proper settlement of the Kosovo issue.

19-0315817/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

welcome the presence of Mr. Dačić and Ms. Çitaku. We
have taken due note of their statements.
We acknowledge that the situation in Kosovo has
improved since the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in 1999. However, we are also aware that major
challenges remain to be overcome in order to achieve
sustainable peace and reconciliation in the region. For
that reason, we are pleased that an agreement has been
reached on the frequency of Security Council meetings
on this issue.
Peru reiterates the importance for all parties to
remain committed to the fulfilment and implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement,
and for the Council to remain united and attentive
to fulfilling its role as guarantor. We have already
expressed our concern about the repercussions that
the adoption, by the Kosovar Parliament, of three laws
establishing the creation of an army and the decision
to raise the import tax on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina to 100 per cent may have on
stability in the Balkan subregion. Trade contributes to
peace and understanding, so it should be encouraged,
not restrained.
We also call on the parties to avoid actions that
exacerbate mistrust and tensions and to take the
necessary measures to allow this dialogue process
to resume in a constructive and pragmatic manner.
We believe that the dialogue process facilitated by
the European Union continues to play a key role,
both in contributing to the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and in promoting their
compliance with the commitments related to their
respective European integration processes.
In that connection, we wish to stress the
importance of involving the citizens of both countries,
and in particular women and young people, in building
this vision of the future. We welcome the initiatives
promoted by the Mission in the area of women and
peace and security and we hope that priority will be
given to the implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda. We also underscore the importance
of respecting and strengthening the rule of law and
the trust of all citizens in institutions, especially in
the promotion and protection of human rights. That
requires the recognition of the ethnic, religious and
cultural diversity of the population and of its heritage.
In that regard, we underscore the work being carried
18/23

07/02/2019

out by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, as well as the process of the transfer of
powers to the Kosovar authorities and the role of the
Specialist Chambers.
My delegation would like to conclude by expressing
our appreciation for the work of UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the other
international organizations involved, and for their
ongoing contribution to building a sustainable peace
in Kosovo.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir
Tanin for his briefing on the recent situation in Kosovo.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, to New York
and to thank him for sharing his views on the recent
development in the field.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral provided us with a picture of the situation on
the ground. We have noted with concern the continuing
rising tension in the region. It is now important to ensure
that that rising tension does not escalate and deepen
the conflict. That therefore needs the commitment
of all parties to exercise restraint and not to further
exacerbate the situation. I believe that that is the main
purpose and the sole reason for us to gather here today.
We will continue to gather if there is no long-standing
resolution that leads to peace in the region. In brief, I
would also like to bring the following three points to
the attention of the Council.
First, the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
is and remains the basic framework to resolve the
conflict in the region. Each party is of course expected
to honour its part of the bargain in line with the
resolution, without exception. It would be unfortunate
to throw away two decades of progress due to violations
of the resolution, which would almost certainly have
the potential to threaten peace and security in the
region. Allegations and rhetoric do not help anyone
but, in particular, make the path to reconciliation
more difficult.
Secondly, Indonesia consistently upholds the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States Members
of the United Nations, including Serbia, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We will not condone any act that violates the
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

sovereignty or territorial integrity of any State. Should
any differences occur, dialogue is always the best and
the only way to address the issue; hence the need to
create a conducive environment for talks to resume.
That leads me to my third point. Indonesia strongly
believes that, in resolving the issue, all parties need to
use peaceful means through dialogue and negotiation
in the spirit of constructive engagement and mutual
accommodation. There are legitimate concerns that
have been raised today by the parties, as well as by
many Security Council members. We believe that the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into an
armed force and the imposition of a 100-per-cent tariff
on targeted countries are not in line with constructive
engagement and can quickly diminish confidence
between the sides. Tariff conditionalities by Pristina
hamper progress on negotiations and are ill-intentioned,
as they do not help anyone but hurt the common
consumers. Indonesia believes that, with a spirit of
constructive engagement and mutual accommodation,
even if it is not easy, there is hope for peace and a
solution through dialogue. We, of course, welcome the
efforts of the European Union in that regard.
We would like to express our appreciation for
the work undertaken by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) thus far.
We support the continuous engagement of UNMIK and
encourage the Mission to continue to create a conducive
environment for the resumption of political negotiation.
Innovative approaches to building confidence and
trust through inter-community trust-building, youth
engagement and the participation of women in the
dialogue are most welcome. People-to-people contact is
important in order to build tolerance.
My childhood was spent in Yugoslavia in the early
1960s. I saw people from different communities and
ethnic backgrounds living together in harmony and
happiness. I, for one, would like to see that happen
again. Pending that becoming a reality, the Security
Council needs to remain seized of the matter and to
push for all parties to come to the negotiating table and
find a mutually acceptable and beneficial solution for
the sake of all peoples in the region.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his detailed briefing to the

S/PV. 8459

Council on the report of the Secretary General on
the Mission’s activities in Kosovo (S/2019/102). We
also pay tribute to the vital role of the United Nations
during this past period to assist Kosovo in building its
institutions pursuant to relevant Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999). I also welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and the Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, and thank them for their statements.
I would like at the outset to reaffirm that the highlevel European Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels
between Belgrade and Pristina remains the most
appropriate framework for settling all outstanding
issues between the two parties. It is the right means
for reaching lasting, just and consensual solutions.
We call on both parties to practice self-restraint, take
all measures necessary to diffuse tensions, strive to
overcome obstacles, demonstrate the necessary political
will, commit themselves to reaching a comprehensive
agreement, and create the appropriate conditions for
a return to dialogue and the full normalization of
relations between them.
While we are aware of the sensitivity of the step
approved by the Kosovo Parliament to turn the Kosovo
Security Force into an armed force, given that it is the
sovereign and genuine right of any State to form its
national institutions, we urge both parties to continue to
address the issues of concern through dialogue. In that
regard, we share the concern of the Secretary-General
pertaining to the tension between Belgrade and Pristina
and the resulting danger to stability, particularly in
northern Kosovo. Both parties should therefore refrain
from taking any unilateral measure that would trigger
further tensions.
We welcome the progress made by the Working
Group on Missing Persons following the events in
Kosovo and we call on both parties to take advantage of
that momentum and make further progress on the issue
of disappeared persons in order to establish lasting
reconciliation and create an environment conducive to
good-neighbourliness. We also welcome the ongoing
work of UNMIK, in cooperation with the United
Nations country team in Kosovo and in partnership
with local and international stakeholders, to implement
the recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo
Trust-Building Forum, held in May 2018, in support of
building confidence among the communities.

19-0315819/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

In conclusion, the international community should
continue to strive to encourage Pristina and Belgrade to
overcome their differences and reach consensual, just
and lasting solutions accepted by both parties, which
will help to establish a basis for peace, security and
stability in the region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and congratulates Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNMIK, on his comprehensive briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the encouraging political,
economic and security trends seen in Kosovo in
recent years. That progress is also due to the backing
of the international community through UNMIK,
whose support of the Government’s efforts has allowed
significant advances in the process of reconciliation
among the various communities, as well as the
restoration of peace and stability.
On the security front, the efforts made since 1999
by the Kosovo Force have contributed substantially
to maintaining a safe and secure environment and to
ensuring the free movement of people and goods.
Despite those encouraging signs, my country remains
concerned about the growing tensions and the persistent
challenges to the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. That situation could undermine the
efforts of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, which is to be commended for its contribution to
Kosovo’s return to normalcy and institutional stability.
Côte d’Ivoire calls on the Kosovo and Serb
communities to redouble their efforts to prevent the
re-escalation of tensions through constructive dialogue
and reciprocal confidence-building measures. It also
believes that the revision of the customs duties, set
at 100 per cent, on products imported from Serbia
and Bosnia, would contribute to the resumption
of negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia with a
view to reaching a free trade agreement with the
European Union.
My country also urges Kosovo authorities to take
the necessary measures to eliminate all obstacles to the
creation of an association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, which would undoubtedly help to ease
and palliate the sociopolitical climate.
20/23

07/02/2019

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to promote the rule of law and to fight
impunity. In that regard, it welcomes the arrest of three
individuals implicated in the murder, on 16 January
2018, of Oliver Ivanović, leader of the Civic Initiative
“Freedom, Democracy, Justice”. In the same vein, my
country welcomes the creation of an inter-institutional
committee tasked with monitoring and reporting on
issues related to violent extremism, as well as the
indictment by the Office of the Specialist Prosecutor,
on 20 December, of an individual for links to a
terrorist group.
The precariousness of the current situation calls
for the immediate resumption of the negotiations led
by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
That mediation would contribute to breathing new life
into the reconciliation process, promoting human rights
and permanently settling the Kosovo issue.
In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to make a significant contribution to the
trust fund to support the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities in Kosovo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his informative
briefing. I would also like to thank the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku
for their statements before the Council. We are pleased
that the Council was able to reach a broad agreement
on the frequency of future Council’s meetings on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
Ten years have passed since the last strategic review
of UNMIK. We believe that the time is ripe for a new
review that leads to a gradual reduction of the forces
and possible resource savings. There is most certainly
no need to maintain the current level of United Nations
involvement. We are encouraged by the fact that there
is a growing number of Council members who share
that view.
We support and attentively monitor the ongoing
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. The normalization of
relations between the capitals is of crucial importance
to the European Union integration process of Serbia and
Kosovo. We expect both sides to be equally engaged in
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement.
19-03158

07/02/2019

Kosovo

There are domestic tensions and the political
situation remains fragile in Kosovo. It is important for
political forces in Kosovo to focus on the implementation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
the European reform agenda, as well as dialogue with
Serbia. Progress has been made, but it needs to be
further accelerated. Commitment to the rule of law
and the fight against corruption and organized crime
must continue.
Poland is committed to the process of stability and
security in Europe, including the Western Balkans
region. We are the biggest national contributor — with
approximately 115 people — to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, supporting relevant
rule-of-law institutions in Kosovo on their path towards
increased effectiveness, sustainability, multi-ethnicity
and accountability. Moreover, we contribute
approximately 250 soldiers and civil employees to the
Kosovo Force.
Poland supports the European Union’s open
door policy, because European integration is the
only guarantee of long-term stability, economic
development, security and good-neighbourly relations
in the Western Balkans. Furthermore, we underscore
the importance of the Specialist Chambers and the
Office of the Specialist Prosecutor for the country’s
international and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Turning to the issue of the transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force, we are convinced that its
transformation into an army should not contradict
resolution 1244 (1999) and should be pursued through
an inclusive, gradual and transparent process, in
accordance with the Kosovo Constitution. The
transformed Kosovo Security Force should serve
the security interests of all communities, including
Kosovo Serbs.
Additionally, we encourage Kosovo to reconsider
its decision to apply customs tariffs on imports from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. There are forums
for addressing such issues and grievances, and the
parties should make good use of them.
Let me conclude in the same manner we have
concluded on several occasions in the Chamber. Poland
regards Kosovo as being fully capable of managing
its own future and realizing its potential within the
shared framework of European values. We are ready to
contribute with necessary assistance, as well.

S/PV. 8459

Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican
Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
holding of this informative meeting. We thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the
situation in Kosovo from 16 October to 15 January. We
would also like to thank the representatives of Serbia
and Kosovo, who are with us today.
We welcome Mr. Tanin’s introduction of the
Secretary-General’s detailed report (S/2019/102). The
Dominican Republic believes that much progress has
been made on the ground, despite the many setbacks
since the deployment of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999). We note that Belgrade and
Pristina are on the right track to a lasting normalization
of their relations, through the facilitation of the European
Union. However, it is fitting to urge the parties at this
time to adopt more flexible positions and to commit
themselves to supporting the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the 2013 Brussels Agreement.
We recommend that the necessary initiatives be taken
to reduce tensions and that communication between
Pristina and Belgrade be reopened in order to give
way to a constructive exchange that will allow them to
continue to make progress in the negotiations to reach
a solution.
Our delegation believes that it is necessary to
redirect our efforts towards the common good, to foster
intercommunal trust and to seek a viable agreement
for all exclusively through political dialogue. In that
regard, we support opening new spaces to strengthen
the leadership of women and young people so that
they can begin to play a more influential role in the
dynamics of the normalization process.
The Dominican Republic supports UNMIK and
therefore recognizes the impact of the situation on peace
and security throughout the Balkan subregion. In that
regard, we reaffirm our belief that the parties will reach
an agreement based on the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, multilateralism, the Charter of
the United Nations and the provisions of international
law. We believe that now is the time to conclude the
long chapter of fruitless confrontations and to allow for
the possibility of a future where respect for peaceful
coexistence is the lasting bridge to the sustainable
development of their communities and the solution of
present and future problems.

19-0315821/23

S/PV.8459

Kosovo

Lastly, we thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for their work in Kosovo in the
quest for peace, under the auspices of the Council.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
placing this matter on the agenda today. After following
the due process provided for in the working methods of
the Security Council, you have my support.
May I also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We also welcome
His Excellency Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and thank him for his briefing. We also take
note of the statement delivered by Ms. Çitaku.
South Africa welcomes the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
with the support of the United Nations country
team, whose efforts have contributed significantly to
creating an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/102). South
Africa also commends the efforts of Belgrade and
Pristina in the European Union-facilitated dialogue
towards normalizing relations, despite challenges faced
by both leaders in finding a sustainable and peaceful
political solution.
Surely the imposition of 100 per cent tariffs on
Serbian goods and the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force into regular armed forces do not
contribute to creating an environment that is conducive
to finding a durable solution in Kosovo. Perhaps the
Kosovo Administration may want to reflect on those
decisions, with the possibility of suspending or
totally revising them as a contribution to establishing
an environment of peace in which negotiations can
take place.
South Africa also wishes to recognize the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and their support for the peace process
in Kosovo. It is not easy. It is a very difficult process.
We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo is critical to reaching a solution
and encouraging cooperation among all parties, as per
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). However, we
remain concerned about the renewed tensions in Kosovo
with regard to the special protective zones where
22/23

07/02/2019

construction activities persist. All relevant parties
should commit to upholding and protecting religious
integrity and heritage and to respecting the rule of
law, as well as the decisions of the Implementation and
Monitoring Council.
South Africa wishes to reiterate the sentiments
of the Secretary-General in his report regarding
continued engagement with the authorities, civil
society and bilateral and international partners.
That will play an important role in ensuring active
support for peacebuilding and intercommunity trustbuilding efforts in Kosovo. We hope that the spirit of
dialogue will build the foundation for negotiations
on an inclusive, fair political settlement that will be
acceptable to both sides.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing on
developments in Kosovo over the past few months.
Similarly, I thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Her Excellency
Ms. Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United
States, for their briefings.
Our delegation welcomes the decision to convene
today’s meeting to address the situation in Kosovo. We
believe that today’s meeting has afforded the members
of the Security Council the opportunity to play a
constructive role in improving the situation on the
ground, and that it will serve to encourage both parties
to demonstrate their full commitment to reaching an
agreement on the Kosovo issue.
In line with that position, we take note of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2019/102) and
are particularly concerned about the tensions that arose
between Belgrade and Pristina in the reporting period.
Actions, such as the decision taken by the Kosovo
Government to raise the import tax on goods from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to 100 per cent;
the decision of the mayors of the four Kosovo Serbmajority municipalities to resign and cease official
communication with the authorities in Pristina; and
a series of intercommunity incidents clearly require
the Security Council’s attention and commitment to
19-03158

07/02/2019

S/PV. 8459

Kosovo

working with Belgrade and Pristina in the process to
normalize relations.
We therefore welcome the fact that the members
of the Security Council are ready to address the latest
developments outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report. In the same vein, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s remarks that, now more than ever, the leaders
of Belgrade and Pristina should avoid any action that
could further increase tensions and seek to re-engage
and work to advance the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union. In that regard, we encourage them to
step up their efforts in the quest for a political, inclusive
and peaceful solution to the Kosovo issue.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia. We therefore urge the parties
to pursue the dialogue to promote the normalization
of relations, since ensuring security and stability in

Kosovo requires the commitment of both parties to
continuing political dialogue in the quest for a lasting
solution that is acceptable to all parties.
Lastly, we commend UNMIK’s excellent work
on the ground and the support it provides to all
communities in Kosovo, as well as to regional and
international actors, in fulfilling the mandates set out
in resolution 1244 (1999), which is the legal basis for a
just solution to Kosovo. We therefore encourage them
to pursue their constructive engagement with Pristina
and Belgrade in order to pave the way for a solution to
the Kosovo issue.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

19-0315823/23
