S/2018/1149

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 28 of Security Council
resolutions 2408 (2018) and paragraph 55 of 2431 (2018), provides information on
the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major developments in Somalia during
the period from 23 August to 13 December 2018.

II. Political, security and economic overview
2.
The continuing standoff between the Federal Government and federal member
states and the tensions emanating from the electoral process in South -West state
dominated political developments during the reporting period. These tensions have
slowed progress in the implementation of the political priorities, as well as the
transition plan and the national security architecture, raising concerns that the gains
realized so far could be in jeopardy. At the federal level, tensions unfolded between
the legislative and the executive branches on 9 December when a group of 92
members of the House of the People submitted a motion to impeach President
Mohammed Abdullahi “Farmajo” to the Office of the Speaker of the House. Civilian
demonstrations took place in Mogadishu in support of President Farmajo and in
Baidoa, South-West state, in favour of the motion. The validity of the motion was
challenged amidst claims that some of the 92 signatures were forged.
3.
On 8 September, at the third meeting of the Council of Interstate Cooperation
in Kismaayo, the leaders of the five federal member states decided to suspend
cooperation with the Federal Government, citing unfulfilled commitments and
political interference. After a subsequent consultative meeting called by President
Farmajo did not materialize, the Upper House offered to help mediate the dispute. On
24 September, President Mohamed Abdi Ware of HirShabelle broke ranks with his
federal member state counterparts and restored cooperation with the Federal
Government. At the fourth meeting of the Council on 24 October, the leaders of the
federal member states, without HirShabelle, decided to create a political party and
their own unified security force, while reiterating the suspension of their cooperation
with the Federal Government, including on constitutional reform and preparations for
the 2020 elections. However, during a visit by my Special Representative and the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
Francisco Madeira, to each of the member state Presidents, they signalled their

18-22545 (E)

281218

*1822545*

S/2018/1149

willingness to reconcile with the Federal Government and encouraged the Upper
House to continue mediation efforts. They called on the United Nations, the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to take an active role in finding a solution to the dispute. On
23 October, Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khaire established a six-member ministerial
committee to work with the Upper House to end the stalemate.
4.
Meanwhile, the South-West state presidential election, initially planned for
17 November, was delayed amidst allegations of interference and vote buying by the
Federal Government, perceived manipulation by the administration of South -West
state and controversy over the candidature of former Al-Shabaab deputy leader,
Mukhtar Robow, which was strongly opposed by the Federal Government. These
factors led to the resignation, on 5 November, of the 27-member Elections Committee
of the South-West state Assembly. The President of South-West state, Sharif Hassan
Sheikh Aden, also resigned on 7 November, dropping his re -election bid. A new
15-member Elections Committee registered six candidates, including Robow. Robow
was arrested on 13 December in Baidoa, which prompted clashes between his
supporters and security forces, as well as violent protests in town. On the same day,
the South-West state electoral committee, which had approved Robow as an eligible
candidate, publicly confirmed 19 December as the date for its presidential elections.
5.
In Puntland, the selection process by traditional elders to determine the new
membership of the Parliament is advancing. A seven-member vetting committee
appointed by the President of Puntland, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas”, began
operations to assess and endorse clan-nominated members of the Puntland Parliament.
The clan leaders are to nominate 66 members of Parliament by 31 December,
following which the Puntland Parliament will receive presidential candidacies and
elect the president on 8 January 2019. UNSOM has joined civil society organizations
and others in advocating for increased representation of women.
6.
In Jubaland, the presidential election is due in August 2019, when the term of
President Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe” will end. Traditional elders plan to select
new members of the regional assembly by April 2019; the new members will, in turn,
elect a new President. Tensions related to these electoral processes, as well as
allegations of interference by the Federal Government, are beginning to emerge. A
perceived lack of support in the security sector and in resource -sharing was reported
as one of the driving factors of demonstrations by civil society and local
administration officials in Gedo from 24 August to 5 September. On 21 October, at
the meeting of the Council of Interstate Cooperation in Garowe, the Jubaland
President indicated that the elections would be held in accordance with the Jubaland
constitution, while dismissing speculation that he intended to extend his term. On
13 November, he undertook to reshuffle his cabinet, changing seven positions,
including one minister.
7.
In Galmudug, the leadership remains deadlocked over imp lementation of the
power-sharing agreement reached on 6 December 2017. In September, disagreement
over the term of the current administration further deepened the rift, triggering a series
of attempted impeachment and no-confidence motions against President Ahmed
Duale Gelle “Haaf”, Vice-President Mohamed Hashi Abdi “Arrabey”, Speaker Ali
Gaal Asir and First Deputy Speaker Hared Ali Hared by rival members of the
Assembly. The election of a new Speaker in Dhusamareb on 9 October prompted a
presidential election in Adado on 20 October. The group in Adado formed a parallel,
unrecognized cabinet on 3 November. The legitimate administration, led by President
“Haaf” continues to operate from the official state capital, Dhusamareb, while
reconciliation efforts are under way.

2/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

8.
In the context of the unfolding positive developments in the Horn of Africa
subregion, the leaders of Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia concluded a two -day summit
meeting in Ethiopia on 10 November. They stressed respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Somalia and reaffirmed their
commitment to inclusive regional peace and cooperation. Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Somalia welcomed the lifting of sanctions against Eritrea by the Security Council on
14 November.
9.
On 27 October, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group on
Somalia held a ministerial level meeting in Mogadishu. The Group stressed the need
to respect Somalia's unity and sovereignty, commended the agreements made by the
Somali leaders in Baidoa in June 2018 and urged member States and financial
institutions to increase their assistance to the Federal Government and vulnerable
regions.
Security developments
10. The security situation in Somalia remains volatile, and Al -Shabaab remains the
main threat to the country’s security. There was also a spike in reported activities by
pro-Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements in Mogadishu. In the
disputed Sool region, tension continued in the town of Turkaraq and adjacent areas,
with sporadic armed clashes between “Somaliland” and Puntland security forces. The
highest number of terrorism incidents of the year were recorded in the month of
November, with most cases reported in Mogadishu and in the Lower Shabelle and
Hiraan regions.
11. Al-Shabaab continues to maintain its operational strength and capability, despite
ongoing and intensified ground and air strikes across the country. Pro -ISIL elements
have increased their activities in and around Mogadishu, although their operations
remain limited to targeted killings. In Puntland, Al-Shabaab and pro-ISIL elements
remain active. During the reporting period, reported assassinations by Al -Shabaab
and pro-ISIL elements outnumbered improvised explosive device attacks in the same
region. On 4 October, pro-ISIL elements claimed responsibility for killing Ethiopian
migrants in Bosaso. There are also allegations of employees of Hormuud, a
telecommunications company and Somalia’s second largest employer, being
assassinated in Mogadishu by pro-ISIL elements.
12. In Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab continued to carry out attacks and targeted
assassinations through the use of vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, undervehicle improvised explosive devices and remote-controlled improvised explosive
devices. In September and October, brief lulls in attacks were accompanied by an
increase in general criminality in the capital.
13. On 2 September, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack, allegedly
targeting the compound of the District Commissioner in Howlwadaag District, killed
four people and injured six children. On 1 October, a suicide vehicle -borne improvised
explosive device hit an Italian military convoy of the European Union Training Mission
in Somalia near the Ministry of Defence: three civilian bystanders were killed and 11
others injured. This was the first time Al-Shabaab had directly targeted an international
military convoy not from AMISOM and could signal a shift in its tactics.
14. Security measures were heightened for the anniversary of the 14 October 2017
bombings in Mogadishu. No security incidents related to the anniversary were reported.
15. On 9 November, Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a complex attack against
the Sahafi Hotel. Two vehicles with explosives detonated in front of the main entrance
and a third exploded close to an adjacent hotel and a national intelligence and security
agency checkpoint. Following the detonations, five attackers attempted to enter the
18-22545

3/19

S/2018/1149

Sahafi Hotel compound, where an event was in progress involving numerous political
officials: the attackers were killed before they were able to enter the compound. Over
50 people, including seven Al-Shabaab militants, were killed in the attack.
16. The Lower and Middle Shabelle regions continued to record the highest levels
of Al-Shabaab activity in the country, including improvised explosive devices as well
as remote-controlled improvised explosive devices and armed attacks on AMISOM
and Somali National Army security convoys and personnel. The Middle Juba, Lower
Jub, Gedo, Hiran and Bay regions also reported activity by Al -Shabaab, although to
a lesser extent.
17. Tensions continued in the run-up to the South West state presidential election.
After the arrest of Mukhtar Robow on 13 December, demonstrations erupted
throughout Baidoa, with protesters burning tires and erecting roadblocks. Although
Somali security forces dispersed the protesters, a total of 15 civilians, including a
state Assembly Member, were killed in the confrontations. Large numbers of
AMISOM forces were deployed in the town.
18. On 13 October, two suicide bombers targeted a restaurant and a hotel in Baidoa,
killing more than 20 people and injuring 50. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility. On
3 November, eight armed men in civilian attire claiming to be police, including
militiamen travelling in a truck, attacked a United Nations convoy on a mission to
Dhusamareb. The members of the convoy were not hurt, and no United Nations
vehicles were damaged.
19. In a significant incident, on 25 August, the crew of a United Nations aircraft
found a bullet hole in the port side inboard engine after landing in Baidoa. It was t he
first time that such an incident was reported, raising the level of concerns about
aviation safety across Somali airspace.
20. On 16 October, private security aboard a Hong Kong-flagged cargo vessel foiled
an attempted piracy attack some 340 nautical miles off the coast of the Bari region.
This was the first major attack since February 2018.
Economic developments
21. Somalia’s economy continued to recover from the drought of 2016–2017. Growth
in real gross domestic product (GDP) was projected to increase to 3.1 per cent (2018)
from 2.3 per cent (2017), supported by recovering agricultural production, consolidation
of peace and security, gradual increases in private investment and donor inflows.
22. Economic growth remains too low, however, to improve the lives of most
Somalis. According to the third economic update report of the World Bank, published
on 13 September, real GDP growth averaged 2.5 per cent in the period from 2013 to
2017, while the population expanded by 2.9 per cent, resulting in a nega tive GDP per
capita growth of minus 0.3 per cent annually. The economy failed to create sufficient
opportunities, particularly for women and young people. As at the end of the reporting
period, labour force participation among men was 58 per cent, compared to 37 per
cent among women. Nearly one in three Somalis faces conditions of extreme poverty.
Regional disparities are large, with the highest rate of poverty affecting internally
displaced persons, people in rural communities and nomadic populations.
23. In September, a review by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
that sufficient progress had been made towards the benchmarks required in order for
Somalia to obtain debt relief under the Fund’s Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative. In recognition of the country’s significant progress, the World Bank’s
2019–2022 country partnership framework unlocked exceptional financing from the
International Development Association through pre-arrears clearance grants aimed at

4/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

strengthening basic service delivery, improving financial management capabilities
and restoring economic resilience and opportunities.
24. Implementation of fiscal policy improved over the reporting period, with
domestic revenue collection reaching 72 per cent of the budget target by August 2018.
This was driven by a broadening of the tax base, including: a new sales tax on goods
and services; enhanced compliance resulting from the operationalization of the large and-medium-taxpayers’ office established in June 2018; and improved collection
capacity, which has increased non-tax revenue. The cabinet approved the budget of
the Federal Government for 2019 ($340 million), 56 per cent of which will come from
domestic revenue, while the other 44 per cent will come from donors. The Federal
Government's budget for the closing fiscal year was $274.6 million.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state
Deepening federalism
25. The political stalemate between the Federal Government and the federal
member states is impeding progress on key issues related to the definition of
Somalia’s federal model, including the allocation of powers between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, the federal justice model and fiscal
federalism. My Special Representative and other international partners have engaged
in discussions with leaders of the Federal Government and the federal member states
to encourage them to continue essential work at the technical level, particularl y
through the Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee, pending the resolution
of the political standoff between the leaders. In a positive development, some
technical level cooperation has continued under the comprehensive approach to
security strands, as well as the review of the Provisional Federal Constitution and
preparations for the 2020 elections. On 12 and 13 December, in Mogadishu, members
of the Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee, the Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, among others, convened to discuss
options on fiscal federalism.
26. Discussion of Mogadishu’s boundaries took place on 29 September between the
Mayor of Mogadishu/Governor of Benaadir Regional Administration, Abdirahman
Omar Osman “Yariisow”, and representatives of the National Independent Boundaries
and Federalism Commission. The Mayor proposed the expansion of Mogadishu ’s
current boundaries, which prompted an official reaction from HirShabelle to the effect
that that any expansion into the Balad district in HirShabelle would “violate the
HirShabelle constitution”.
Constitutional review
27. Priority issues in reviewing the Federal Constitution include the allocation of
powers and resource-sharing, the system of governance, the status of Mogadishu and
the justice model. At the high-level meeting on the road map on inclusive politics
convened by Prime Minister Khaire on 1 October, it was noted that federal member
states had continued collaboration at the technical level with the Federal Government
on key constitutional issues. The aim was to prepare the ground for decision -making at
the leadership level in the National Security Council, especially on the allocation of
powers and the justice model. However, despite some limited efforts by President
Farmajo to reach out to the leaders of the federal member states, no National Security
Council meeting was held during the reporting period to enable the necessary political
decisions.

18-22545

5/19

S/2018/1149

28. Regular joint meetings between the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the
Parliamentary Oversight Committee and the Constitutional Review and Oversight
Commission contributed to improved cooperation and communication, as well as to
improved synergy between the key mandated constitutional players. The bodies
completed a technical review of the first five chapters of the Provisional Constitution
and held consultations in Garowe between 9 between 11 October, which brought
together regional actors from the federal member states.
Prevention and resolution of conflicts
29. As part of his good offices mandate, my Special Representative explored with
President Farmajo and “Somaliland” President Muse Bihi Abdi the possibility of
reviving the Somalia-“Somaliland” dialogue. He also held discussions with Federal
Government leadership and all Presidents of the federal member states and
underscored the need to break the political stalemate between the two sides, stressing
that continued progress on Somalia’s state-building and security priorities required
the Federal Government and the federal member states to work together. Three
parallel avenues for resolving the impasse were discussed, including continuation of
the technical level work; pursuing the mediation efforts in the Upper House of
Parliament; and accepting President Farmajo’s offer of direct talks. Given the
implications of the stalemate in the joint security operations t o further degrade
Al-Shabaab and the implementation of the transition plan, my Special Representative
invited the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to join him in his discussions in the capitals of the federal member states.
30. Regarding the wider national reconciliation agenda, the Ministry of the Interior,
Federal Affairs and Reconciliation held the first round of consultative meetings on
25 and 26 September to develop the national reconciliation framework; the mee ting
was attended by members of both Houses of Parliament. Consultative meetings were
also held in all federal member states in October and November, with the participation
of approximately 700 individuals from civil society and government from across
Somalia. National reconciliation also gained visibility among the international
community with the initiation of the “group of friends of reconciliation” in Nairobi
on 16 October. Launched in May 2018, the ambassadorial-level group is made up of
representatives of 10 Member States, as well as representatives of the European Union
and UNSOM, which supports the Somali-led and owned process.
31. During the reporting period, UNSOM continued to engage in conflict prevention
efforts. In addition to the electoral process in South-West state and ongoing support
to sustain peace in Galkayo, UNSOM actively engaged with Puntland and
“Somaliland” authorities on preventive efforts in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In the Tukaraq area of the disputed Sool region, my Deputy Special Representative
and the IGAD Special Envoy for Somalia led several joint United Nations -IGAD
visits to Garoowe and Hargeisa, where they discussed arrangements for a cessation
of hostilities and advocated for negotiations to secure a durable, peac eful solution.
32. Efforts continued to implement the UNSOM mediation-support and capacitybuilding strategy initiated in December 2017. With the support of the European
Union, IGAD, the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political Affairs and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNSOM organized a three day workshop on mediation and dialogue facilitation. International and national staff
from AMISOM, the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, the
European Union Training Mission in Somalia, United Nations agencies and UNSOM
acquired basic mediation skills and shared best practices on how to address conflicts
in Somalia, including land disputes, and on how to work with traditional Somali
conflict-resolution mechanisms.

6/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

Support for universal elections
33. Progress was made in translating the political agreement on the electoral model
reached by the National Security Council in Baidoa in June 2018 into a legislative
text. On 11 November, the Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
presented the draft electoral law to the Council of Ministers for discussion, prior to
its submission to the Federal Parliament The law is expected to provide the legal basis
for universal multi-party elections by the end of 2020. The proposed electoral model
is based on the principle of proportional representation and a closed party list system.
The ability to maintain the electoral timeline is dependent on the timeline for passing
and implementing the electoral law. Delays in the submission of the draft electoral
law to Parliament have negated the possibility of the law being adopted, in line with
the Government’s commitment, by the end of 2018. There is concern that these delays
could negatively impact the electoral process and the support provided by partners.
34. In September, as a first step in identifying future voter registration centres, the
National Independent Electoral Commission completed a study to map out potential
voter catchment areas. Following a field verification operation by the Commission,
the study could justify the establishment of voter registration centres. In October, a
pilot project was conducted in two districts (Wadajir district in Mogadishu and Jowhar
in the Middle Shabelle region) to verify the mapping exercise and identify suitable
locations.
35. In October, the National Independent Electoral Commission held back -to-back
workshops on institutional governance and the review of its strategic plan in order to
enhance its technical and operational capacity and remain on track in the preparations
for the elections in 2020. The Commission also recruited its first batch of field
electoral officers as part of its ongoing establishment of subnational offices.

B.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
36. On 28 October, my Special Representative convened a meeting with 35 women
leaders representing civil society, federal parliamentarians, academia,
businesswomen, journalists, the National Independent Electoral Commission,
refugees and persons with disability. The meeting served as a stocktaking of key
issues, concerns and priorities of Somali women and an assurance of the continued
support of the United Nations for women’s rights and for their participation in the
political process.
37. UNSOM and UNDP continued to provide technical support to the Somali
National Women’s Organization and the coordination office on preventing and
countering violent extremism in the Office of the Prime Minister. The support aimed
at preparing for the Benaadir consultation on women’s enhanced participation in
peace, reconciliation and preventing and countering violent extremism and the first
Somali Women’s Peace Forum, held on 28 and 29 November. In the aftermath of the
attack in Mogadishu in October 2017, the Women’s Organization, concluding that
women’s enhanced role and engagement in peace, reconciliation and preventing and
countering violent extremism was crucial to the establishment of sustained peace,
undertook State-level consultations on women’s enhanced role, engagement and
participation in these key areas. Over 200 women representations, including 55
women leaders from five federal member states attended the Forum.
38. On 24 October, members of two women caucuses from both houses of the
Federal Parliament scheduled the second annual conference for women Members of
Parliament (representatives of federal and state assemblies) from 3 to 5 December in

18-22545

7/19

S/2018/1149

Mogadishu. The constitutional review and universal suffrage elections were among
the key priorities discussed during the conference.
Youth empowerment
39. The United Nations supported the joint Galkayo youth committee in hosting
International Peace Day celebrations in Galkayo from 21 to 23 September. Over 300
youth from north and south Galkayo engaged in discussions, sports and other
activities. Youth representatives from all federal member states, elders, women, local
and regional authorities from Puntland and Galmudug and Federal Government
representatives also attended. The celebrations were presented a s a best-practice at a
youth, peace and security forum held in Sandö, Sweden, from 5 to 7 December. In
Kismaayo, the Peace Committee gathered 700 youth, women, and elders for
discussion and a subsequent march to the Presidential Palace.
40. The Somali National Youth Council, with United Nations support, hosted three
regional consultations with regional umbrella youth associations in Garowe, Adado
and Beledweyne. The United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) supported the establishment of district youth
councils in Baidoa, Dollow and Kismaayo to serve as mechanisms to promote youth
participation in local governance.

C.

Development coordination
41. Despite the stalemate between the Federal Government and the federal member
states, development coordination activities under the Somalia Development and
Reconstruction Facility continued throughout the reporting period, although some
members did not attend.
42. The final version of the recovery and resilience framework was completed in
October, with a focus on implementation of resilience-building activities. A
programmatic platform for the framework is due to be launched in January.
Agreement was reached on the need to initiate mutually reinforcing humanita rian and
development interventions. In close consultation with the Government, the United
Nations agreed to support the design of a joint programme focused on systemic and
structural resilience, providing the opportunity for donors to contribute funding to
resilience-building activities outside the scope of the humanitarian response plan.
This reflects the reality of the development, humanitarian and peacebuilding nexus in
Somalia.
43. The prioritization afforded to durable solutions in the national develop ment plan
is also reflected in the recovery and resilience framework, thanks to continued
technical support. In this regard, the establishment of a specific sub -working group
on migration, displacement and durable solutions contributed, through its activit ies,
to an increase in the funding available for programming activities to address the need
for critical durable solutions.
44. The Federal Government led a review process aiming to adapt structures,
strategies and priorities to the new and evolving context in Somalia. The Government
also initiated a review of the national development plan, which allowed stakeholders
to review progress and realign strategies and priorities based on emerging needs. In
addition, work was started on the next development plan, which is being designed to
meet the criteria for an interim poverty reduction strategy paper.
45. As a result of a series of meetings held during the reporting period, adjustments
were made to a number of benchmarks, targets and partnership principles in t he
mutual accountability framework agreed to in December 2017.

8/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

46. The United Nations and development partners agreed on a new multi -year
support package to enhance Government-led aid coordination. The project contributes
to the implementation of the New Partnership for Somalia and the national
development plan through strengthening national capacities for effective aid
management and coordination.

IV. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

International coordination
47. The strands of the comprehensive approach to security are focused on
supporting the implementation of the transition plan and the national security
architecture, as well as wider stabilization and the national strategy for preventing
and countering violent extremism. The Federal Government is also planning an
internal review to strengthen the role of the four strands of the comprehensive
approach in leading reform efforts in the security and justice sectors. However, the
ongoing political tensions between the Federal Government and federal member
states continues to impede further progress on a range of reform issues, including the
next steps in the implementation of the national security architecture and the
transition plan.

B.

Strands of the comprehensive approach to security

1.

Strand 1: enabling AMISOM operations and enhancing AMISOM effectiveness
48. UNSOS continues to provide logistical support to 21,626 uniformed and
70 civilian AMISOM personnel deployed in 78 locations in southern Somalia. On
10 October, representatives of the Mission hosted a meeting on enabling its operations
and enhancing its effectiveness, at which they reiterated the AMISOM commitment
to the transition plan and also stressed the need to generate adequate capabilities on
the part of the Somali security forces in order to enable them to ultimately take over
the Mission’s responsibilities.
49. An operational readiness assessment of AMISOM military, police and civilian
components, including field visits conducted between 16 August and 3 September to
Mission locations, was completed during the reporting period. The assessment was
carried out by the African Union, with participation from United Nations
Headquarters, AMISOM, UNSOS, UNSOM, the United Nations Office to the African
Union, the United Nations Mine Action Service and other key partners.
50. The African Union, in consultation with UNSOS, completed an assessment
report on AMISOM military aviation requirements, which was shared with UNSOS
on 18 September. The report recommends, inter alia, that AMIS OM develop an
aviation operational concept and strengthen its military aviation management
procedures. It also recommended that the Mission be provided with military utility
helicopters and unmanned aerial surveillance systems. Limited use of the main supp ly
routes by AMISOM and the inability to deliver support by road remains a challenge.
UNSOS continues to deliver essential life support to AMISOM forward locations
using its helicopters and barge services, with significant cost implications. UNSOM,
UNSOS and AMISOM also started the implementation of the risk mitigation
measures set out in the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support
to non-United Nations security forces.

18-22545

9/19

S/2018/1149

51. From 28 October to 4 November, the African Union organized a wor kshop in
Nairobi to review the AMISOM concept of operations and to revise it for the 2018–
2021 period.
52. All the troop and police contributing countries, apart from Sierra Leone, have
signed the tripartite memorandum of understanding for contingent-owned equipment
and self-sustainment. United Nations Headquarters is in the process of negotiating
the tripartite memorandum of understanding for Sierra Leone ’s recently deployed
formed police unit. Pursuant to the signing of the tripartite memorandum, claims
submitted by Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda are currently being processed at United
Nations Headquarters.
53. UNSOS continues to support the transition plan as well as the joint AMISOM Somali National Army plan for securing the Mogadishu-Baidoa main supply route
and the recovery of the town of Leego. UNSOS also supported the relocation of
AMISOM from the Mogadishu Stadium and provided accommodation at the
Al-Jazeera II camp for 312 Ugandan troops and 160 Nigerian and 160 Ugandan
formed police units.
54. UNSOS continued to provide non-lethal logistical support to 10,900 soldiers of
the Somali National Army deployed in 22 locations who participate in joint operations
with AMISOM. The Federal Government and AMISOM have not requested any
changes to this support, pursuant to operational paragraph 45 of Security Council
resolution 2431 (2018).
55. The United Nations Mine Action Service has trained 2,821 AMISOM troops in
improvised explosive device search capacity, threat mitigation and explosive
ordnance disposal. It has also provided canine teams to AMISOM to search vehicles,
luggage and infrastructure. During the reporting period, twenty-three improvised
explosive devices were safely identified along the main supply routes, of which 14
were destroyed by AMISOM teams trained by the Mine Action Service.
56. An independent review of UNSOS was conducted in August 2018. The review
reiterated the role of UNSOS as a strategic enabler for its core clients, AMISOM and
UNSOM, and identified challenges to be addressed jointly. The report also made
recommendations on how UNSOS, UNSOM and AMISOM can strengthen collective
efforts to enable progress in Somalia.
2.

Strand 2: strengthening Somali security institutions
57. The Federal Government continued to implement recommendations from the
Somali National Army operational readiness assessment, including the rollout of
biometric registration and the rewriting of the Somali National Army code of conduct.
UNSOM and AMISOM started to develop a joint security sector reform strategy to
leverage their respective comparative advantages in support of the national security
architecture agreement and the transition plan.
58. On 29 and 30 October, the Maritime Security Coordination Committee br ought
together representatives of the Federal Government, federal member states,
“Somaliland” and international partners to discuss progress in the implementation of
the Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy, upcoming priorities and the way
forward in order to improve reporting, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.
Representatives of the federal member states expressed concern with the limited
international donor support provided to maritime capacity-building activities at the
state level.
59. The UNSOM-UNDP integrated security sector reform section supported
parliamentary public consultations towards the passage of the law reviewing the
pensions and gratuities for members of the Somali National Army and security

10/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

services. Support was also provided to nationally-led coordination structures to
implement the new policing model, including the drafting of the federal police plan.
Phase 2 of the operational readiness assessment, a critical foundation for integrating
(non-state) regional forces under the national security architecture, was completed in
Galmudug, Jubaland and South-West state and will continue in Puntland and
HirShabelle. The operational readiness assessment will also contribute to the ability
of the Federal Government to make decisions with regard to the integration of
regional forces into the Somali National Army and police.
60. In August, the President removed five Supreme Court judges by decree. As the
judicial services commission had not been established, the President ’s decision was
criticized as undermining the independence of the judiciary. In October, the Council
of Interstate Cooperation warned the Federal Government against unilaterally
constituting the judicial services commission. It also stated that all previous
agreements with the Federal Government would no longer be recognized. This might
affect the approval of the justice and corrections model.
61. Through the joint police programme, funding continued to be provided for: the
training of 600 new police recruits and the construction of police stations, as well as
payment of police stipends in Jubaland; training of 400 new police recruits, as well
as the provision of vehicles and stipends in respect of security transition in South West state; training and stipends for 700 police officers and payment of stipends in
Galmudug; training of 400 police recruits in HirShabelle; establishment of an
electronic payroll system in Puntland; construction of headquarters for a criminal
investigation department; and the renovation of a police station and the provision of
vehicles and communication equipment to support security transition in the vicinity
of the Mogadishu Stadium.
62. The United Nations Mine Action Service trained community-based clearance
teams carried out activities in 84 communities, verified a 588,742 square meter area
and safely removed 478 remnants of war. The Service also deployed community
liaison officers across liberated districts and delivered explosive hazard risk education
to 7,683 local community members. Seventy-two per cent of the beneficiaries of the
latter programme were children.
63. In addition, the Mine Action Service accessed a domestic stockpile in South
Galkayo, Mudug region, recovering and destroying 271 remnants of war in
November. At the federal level, some 18,000 weapons were marked and registered.
3.

Strand 3: stabilization, community recovery and the extension of state
authority and accountability
64. On 4 October, the Federal Government approved the updated stabilization
strategy presented by Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation. The
strategy reflects progress on the transition plan process and the broader commitment
to a whole-of-government approach on stabilization. On 26 November, the state
stabilization plans developed to support the implementation of the strategy were
circulated at the national stabilization meeting.
65. The Ministry of the Interior Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, together with
stabilization partners, continued to support the implementation of the tra nsition plan.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the United
Kingdom, through its early recovery initiative, developed community-level research
along the Baidoa to Mogadishu corridor to assist the planning of stabilization
initiatives in Wanlaweyn, Leego and Burhakaba. USAID is also supporting the
expansion of local radio coverage to broadcast pro -Government messaging in those
areas. The USAID transition initiatives for stabilization programme also completed
20 infrastructure projects across the country, including: five roads, five sports

18-22545

11/19

S/2018/1149

facilities, four government administration complexes, two airstrips, a women ’s
centre, a women’s market and a community centre. The Banadir regional
administration continued to lead efforts to rehabilitate the Mogadishu Stadium with
the assistance of the Nordic International Support Foundation, including support from
the Government of Norway and the European Union.
4.

Strand 4: preventing and countering violent extremism
66. During the reporting period, the office of the Prime Minister and the United
Nations agreed on a project for operationalizing the Somali national strategy and
action plan for preventing and countering violent extremism. The project will assist
the Government in operationalizing and staffing its coordination mechanism at the
federal and subfederal levels. The project will also provide operational support for
the coordination of efforts to prevent and counter violent extremism, including the
holding of regular coordination meetings, the provision of training and technical
assistance activities and the promotion of links between Somali and related regional
initiatives.
67. On 28 and 29 August, United Nations regional offices in Amman and Addis
Ababa deployed a team of experts to enhance synergies on preventing and countering
violent extremism between the United Nations, the activities set out in the Somali
national strategy and action plan and the United Nations regional programme. The
regional programme will share global best practices with Somali stakeholders to boost
innovation and commence cross-sectoral programme development in this field.
68. Ongoing support for the national programme for the treatment and handling of
disengaged combatants continued during the reporting p eriod, with UNSOM
facilitating coordination mechanisms while focusing on the harmonization of
interventions and the consolidation of standard operating procedures. By the end of
the reporting period, the three rehabilitation centres for low-risk Al-Shabaab defectors
were housing and providing support for 69 defectors in Mogadishu, 123 in Baidoa
and 151 in Kismaayo.
69. Phase three of the Baidoa high-risk prisoner rehabilitation project is under way,
with support from the Government of Sweden. The project fo cuses on the
reintegration of former Al-Shabaab prisoners into the community, and includes
significant upgrades to the infrastructure of the Baidoa prison.

C.

Transition planning
70. The handover of Mogadishu Stadium, the first of the initial priority locations
for the transition plan, commenced at the end of August, including the transfer of
security control from AMISOM to the Somali Police Force. Since then, renovation
work has begun to restore the site as a sporting venue. Planning for the main supp ly
route between Baidoa and Mogadishu has been slowed owing to the ongoing political
impasse between the Federal Government and the federal member states. The main
supply routes in HirShabelle will be the next priorities for transition planning and
implementation.

V. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
71. Freedom of expression violations continued, with two arbitrary arrests and the
killing of two journalists. One journalist (in Galkayo) and a cameraman (in

12/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

“Somaliland”) were beaten by police; a journalist received death threats in
Mogadishu; and one media outlet was closed. One newspaper resumed operations
after being suspended in 2014.
72. While civilian casualties increased, there were over 260 abductions attributed
to Al-Shabaab. Prolonged detention without judicial review, mostly of suspected
Al-Shabaab members, continued, mainly in Puntland.
73. During the reporting period, six civilians were killed and seven injured in
airstrikes by unidentified aircraft in Middle Juba. A civilian was reportedly killed by
AMISOM in Lower Juba and four others were reported to have been killed in
Mogadishu. A total of 11 cases of sexual violence were recorded during the reporting
period; this figure cannot be considered exhaustive due to underreporti ng and lack of
access due to security constraints. Sixteen death sentences were pronounced, with
four executions carried out following violations of due process rights.
74. On 2 October, Somalia signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
75. The United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy Task Force revised its
standard operating procedures on the implementation of the due diligence policy,
including clarifications on the obligations and requirements of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the process to suspend or withdraw support. The
AMISOM/United Nations technical working group on the due diligence policy
continued to review the status and implementation of measures to prevent and respond
to violations. UNSOM held a training session for staff of the United Nations Mine
Action Service and AMISOM mentors to familiarize them with relevant prevention
measures and how to support the implementation of the poli cy. UNSOM facilitated
sessions for the humanitarian country team during a workshop on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse. In this regard, it was noted that an adequate referral
pathway for allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by AMISOM personnel
within the humanitarian country team-prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
mechanism is needed. UNSOM briefed the policy advisory group of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on the strategic use
of the due diligence policy in Somalia. OHCHR will follow up on the issues raised as
part of the outcome of the 2018 review of the policy. AMISOM and the Federal
Government issued separate press statements informing the public that allegations
against troops involving the death of four civilians on 6 November in Mogadishu are
being investigated.

C.

Children in armed conflict
76. During the period, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
documented and verified 1,020 grave violations affecting 995 children, including 581
boys and 214 girls. This represents a decrease in both the number of violations and
children affected, compared to 1,426 grave violations affecting 1,239 children
reported in the previous period. Violations included 322 cases of abduction, 308 cases
of recruitment and use of children, 167 cases of children injured, 116 cases of killing
and 82 cases of sexual violence. The task force verified 16 cases of attacks against
schools, six attacks against hospitals and three cases of denial of humanitarian access.
Sixty-nine percent of all violations were attributed to Al-Shabaab.

18-22545

13/19

S/2018/1149

77. On 20 August, after sustained advocacy by the United Nations, the President of
Puntland signed a decree to pardon 34 children who had been sentenced to various
prison terms for their association with Al-Shabaab in Garowe since 2016. On
24 November, the children were transferred from Puntland to a rehabilitation centre
in Mogadishu, where they are currently awaiting to be reunited with their families.

D.

Prevention of sexual violence
78. The sexual offences bill, passed by the Federal Government Council of
Ministers on 30 May, continues to face opposition, mainly from Somali religious
leaders, who argue that it violates sharia law. The religious leader s have called on
Somalis to oppose the Federal Parliament’s enactment of the bill. Al-Shabaab is
leveraging the criticism by publicising the bill and urging Somalis to join the group
to fight the initiative. The bill will strengthen the legal framework for addressing
sexual violence and will make provisions for services to survivors of sexual violence.

VI. Humanitarian situation
79. The food security situation continued to improve thanks to above -average
rainfall during the Gu season (March–June) in 2018 and sustained humanitarian
assistance. Nevertheless, 4.2 million people require humanitarian assistance
(including 2.7 million children) and the level of humanitarian needs remains above
pre-drought crisis levels. The improvement in food security remain s largely
dependent on the performance of seasonal rains. In addition, over 1.5 million people
face crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity and require urgent life -saving
assistance. Around 190,000 individuals were newly displaced from August to Octo ber
2018, mostly due to conflict and insecurity, bringing the number of newly displaced
from January to the end of October to 831,000. As at the end of the reporting period,
a total of 2.65 million individuals are internally displaced.
80. High malnutrition rates prevail, especially among the internally displaced
population. The nutritional status of children under the age of five has not improved,
with nearly one million children at risk of malnutrition, including over 170,000
children facing severe acute malnutrition. The limited access to public health and
nutrition services, largely due to the lack of sustainable funding, continues to be a
concern.
81. Populations in rural areas and in urban internally displaced persons sites
continue to live in the most vulnerable circumstances. The extent of livelihood losses
and debt incurred over multiple seasons of severe drought have left rural communities
with limited means to recover, and highly vulnerable to future shocks. Internally
displaced persons account for 58 per cent of those who face crisis or emergency levels
of food insecurity, and malnutrition rates among internally displaced children are
particularly high. Furthermore, a spike in forced evictions is aggravating the
vulnerability of these populations. Between January and October, over 235,000
internally displaced persons were evicted country-wide, which is more than the
number of people evicted in 2017. The highest number of evictions were reported in
Mogadishu and Baidoa.
82. The humanitarian needs overview process commenced in September with a
series of consultations with authorities, affected communities and humanitarian
partners across Somalia. An estimated 4.2 million people will require humanitarian
assistance in 2019. The reduction in needs compared to 2017 reflects both an
improvement in the overall humanitarian situation and a more focused approach to
defining needs. Nonetheless, humanitarian needs remain significantly high, and the
14/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

is chronic vulnerability among some groups, in particular internally displaced persons
in urban situations, people in rural communities and children.
83. By 26 November, the Somalia humanitarian response plan had received
$839 million in donations. Combined with the approximately $234 million received for
activities outside the plan, the Somali operation has received $1.07 billion in donor
contributions. Sustained and early financial support will be required in 2019 to ensure
the continuation of life-saving aid and to keep many affected communities on the path
to recovery. Contrary to the average-to-above-average projections for Deyr rainy
season (September–December), the rainfall was below average across most of Somalia
until the end of November, with particularly significant rainfall deficit in Puntland.
84. The operating environment continues to be challenging. So far in 2018, over
110 violent incidents have impacted humanitarian organizations, accounting for the
death of nine humanitarian workers, the injury of 13, the abduction of 18 and the
arrest and temporary detention of 17. Nearly 100 administrative impediments have
affected programming and advocacy efforts with the authorities to establish a
centralized regulatory framework for non-governmental organizations. Road access
challenges continue to mount along main supply routes. International
non-governmental organizations are preparing to relocate their operations from
Kenya to Somalia in response to the directive of the Federal Government for them to
do so by the end of 2018.
85. After Mogadishu became the first African city to sign the Cities #WithRefugees
initiative on 20 June: Berbera, Bosaso and Hargeisa followed suit in October. Through
the initiative, which was launched on World Refugee Day, cities and local authorities
across the globe who are working to promote inclusion, support refugees and bring
communities together were invited to sign a statement of solidarity.
86. The humanitarian needs overview process commenced in September with a
series of consultations with authorities, affected communities an d humanitarian
partners across Somalia. The reduction in projected needs for 2019 compared to 2018
reflects an improvement in the overall humanitarian situation and a more focused
approach to defining needs. The 2019 global humanitarian overview was launch ed on
4 December 2018.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
87. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beletweyne, Bosaso, Dhobley, Dollow, Galkayo, Garowe, Hargeisa,
Kismaayo and Mogadishu. Efforts to relocate the United Nations presence in
HirShabelle state from Beletweyne to Jowhar are ongoing, but security conditions and
poor road conditions continue to hamper the move. Important progress was made on
the establishment of the United Nations office in Dhusamareb. As of December 2018,
there were 674 international and 1,288 national staff deployed throughout Somalia.
88. The imposition of taxes and other fees on United Nations personnel, consultants
and contractors is having an adverse impact on the United Nations presence and its
ability to deliver on its mandate, including UNSOS delivery of support to AMISOM
and the Somalia National Army. Such actions are contrary to the status -of-mission
agreement concluded between the Federal Government and the United Nations in 2014.

VIII. Observations
89. In my previous report (S/2018/800), I indicated that the resolution of the
parliamentary crisis in May could allow constructive political dialogue and pro gress
18-22545

15/19

S/2018/1149

in the implementation of the political road map, particularly in relation to the
finalization of the political agreements required to define Somalia ’s federal model.
However, the political stalemate of recent months has impaired the expected progress .
With the Federal Government and the federal member states now preoccupied with
the electoral processes within the federal member states, the risk of an extended
blockage is high. This could jeopardize not only the timelines for the 2020 elections,
but also the overall gains made to date. I therefore call on Somalia ’s leaders, at the
Federal and subfederal levels, to put the national interest first and resolve their
differences without further delay. I remain optimistic that reconciliation among the
leaders is possible, as demonstrated by their past political maturity and their
determination to make progress.
90. Even while political progress at the level of principals has been disappointing,
the ongoing development of legislative and institutional fra meworks at a technical
level and cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states
are encouraging. This should lay the ground for the necessary political agreements
when the National Security Council resumes its work. Adoption of an electoral law
that has the support of all key stakeholders, including the federal member states, by
the end of this year is now unlikely. Its absence will seriously endanger the electoral
calendar.
91. The success of the electoral processes currently under way in the federal
member states will serve as benchmarks for the 2020 national elections. It is therefore
important to protect the integrity and credibility of these electoral processes by
ensuring respect for the implementing institutions, as well as t he rules established by
these institutions, and by conducting the electoral processes in a climate free of
violence, manipulation and corruption.
92. The effective and timely implementation of the transition plan and the national
security architecture, including the integration of regional security forces and the
right-sizing of the national security forces, is critical for Somalia ’s overall progress.
I commend the Federal Government for assuming ownership of the key processes and
leadership in setting the priorities. The political impasse between the Federal
Government and the federal member states and distractions caused by elections related politics should not be allowed to stall progress on security. Close coordination
with international partners who are investing in the capacity-building of the security
sector, including with AMISOM and its police- and troop-contributing countries, is
essential for the successful implementation of both the transition plan and the national
security architecture. In addition, a comprehensive approach, which ensures that
operations are underpinned by accelerated capacity-building for the Somali security
institutions in order to assist them in holding onto recovered areas and undertaking
stabilization activities to prevent and counter violent extremism, should be
maintained to ensure the sustainability of the transition process. The role of the
comprehensive approach to security strands and the comprehensive approach to
security Executive Group, led by Prime Minister Khaire, i s critical in ensuring the
preservation of this approach.
93. The role of AMISOM remains essential throughout the transition period and in
the run up to and during the 2020 elections. I welcome the AMISOM operational
readiness assessment and the commitment of the African Union to reconfigure the
force to strengthen support for the implementation of the transition plan, which is
informed by the recently revised concept of operations. I encourage the Federal
Government, AMISOM and international partners to co ordinate fully and to ensure
that adequate resources are provided for both AMISOM and the Somali security
forces to enable the implementation of the transition plan and set the conditions for
the handover of security responsibility from AMISOM to the Somal i security forces.

16/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

94. Meanwhile, the progress made by the Somali Government to build a track record
of reforms under the IMF staff-monitored programme is encouraging. I welcome the
IMF review, which concluded that progress had been made towards the benchm arks
required for Somalia to obtain debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative, and the support of the World Bank and the European Union. These are signs
of growing confidence in the financial management of the Government. I encourage
the Federal Government to continue on this path and to foster economic cooperation
with the federal member states, to tackle corruption, to maintain efforts to improve
security across the country and to demonstrate that continued economic progress can
also help move political dialogue forward.
95. Somalia continued to struggle with enormous humanitarian and socioeconomic
challenges. The ongoing vulnerability perpetuates humanitarian needs, particularly
for internally displaced persons and marginalized com munities. Sustained, early and
long-term financial support are critical in 2019 and beyond. This support will ensure
that life-saving aid is complemented with predictable support to Somali communities
for resilience-building and recovery. I call on donors to consider contributing to the
2019 humanitarian response plan and to boost investment in resilience -building
efforts.
96. The imposition of taxation and other fees on United Nations personnel,
consultants and contractors by the Federal Government risks making United Nations
operations in Somalia, including the delivery of support to AMISOM and the Somali
national army, more difficult. I urge Somali authorities to address any outstanding
matters related to the status-of-mission agreement through the established
mechanisms.
97. The accession by Somalia to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and Somalia’s election to the Human Rights Council in October constitute
key developments. According to General Assembly resolution 60/251, “members
elected to the Council shall uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights”. Somalia’s membership in the Council should therefore
provide the impetus to strengthen national protection mechanisms, including
addressing the establishment of the national human rights commission. I reiterate the
need to complete the legislative framework to address sexual offences, including the
sexual offences bill, which enjoys significant support from women parliamentarians
and civil society. I note with concern the continued violations against freedom of
expression, which could increase in the elections period, and I urge all actors to
respect the rule of law throughout the upcoming electoral proc esses.
98. I remain concerned about civilian casualties and urge all parties to respect
international human rights law and international humanitarian law in the conduct of
hostilities. Although the incidents of violations against children attributed to Som ali
security forces have been on the decrease, cases of children used by Somali security
forces are still being recorded. I call on the Federal Government of Somalia to adopt
a zero-tolerance policy towards the use of children as vehicle escorts and to man
checkpoints of security forces.
99. The changing political dynamics in the Horn of Africa hold promise for Somalia,
which stands to benefit from closer regional cooperation. Effective transboundary
water management is essential for the country to move awa y from recurring
humanitarian crises towards resilience and recovery, as elaborated in the recovery and
resilience framework and the national development plan. Closer cooperation in the
borderlands of the regions also holds potential for economic growth, p eacebuilding
and stabilization, as the informal cross-border movement of goods and people could
be integrated into formal economic systems and better monitored for illicit activities.

18-22545

17/19

S/2018/1149

Such cooperation is also important for improving security and social ser vices for
populations that have long been marginalized.
100. I commend my Special Representative Nicholas Haysom, my Deputy Special
Representatives and the dedicated and courageous staff members of UNSOM,
UNSOS, the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies and other
international and regional organizations in Somalia for their continued hard work
under challenging conditions. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the
European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
development partners for their sustained support in building lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in Somalia.

18/19

18-22545

S/2018/1149

18-22545

19/19
