United Nations

A/RES/61/205

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 53 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2006
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/61/422/Add.7)]

61/205. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its ninth special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 53/242 of
28 July 1999, 56/193 of 21 December 2001, 57/251 of 20 December 2002, 58/209 of
23 December 2003, 59/226 of 22 December 2004 and 60/189 of 22 December 2005,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Recognizing the need for more efficient environmental activities in the United
Nations system, and noting the need to consider possible options to address this
need,
Taking into account Agenda 21 2 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 3
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the
principal body within the United Nations system in the field of environment, which
should take into account, within its mandate, the sustainable development needs of
developing countries, as well as countries with economies in transition,
Emphasizing that capacity-building and technology support for developing
countries, as well as countries with economies in transition, in environment-related
fields are important components of the work of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recognizing the need to accelerate implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan
for Technology Support and Capacity-building of the United Nations Environment
Programme, 4
_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
4
UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex.
2

06-50667

A/RES/61/205

1.
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme at its ninth special session 5 and the decision contained
therein; 6
2.
Takes note also of the report of the Secretary-General on universal
membership of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum of
the United Nations Environment Programme; 7
3.
Notes that the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme at its ninth special session discussed all components of the
recommendations on international environmental governance as contained in its
decision SS.VII/1, 8 and also notes the continued discussions scheduled for the
twenty-fourth session of the Governing Council;
4.
Emphasizes the need to further advance and fully implement the Bali
Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building,4 and, in this regard,
calls upon Governments as well as other stakeholders that are in a position to do so
to provide the necessary funding and technical assistance for its full
implementation, and also calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to
continue its efforts to fully implement the Bali Strategic Plan through strengthened
cooperation with other stakeholders, based on their comparative advantages;
Welcomes the endorsement of the Strategic Approach to International
5.
Chemicals Management6 by the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment
Forum of the United Nations Environment Programme at its ninth special session,5
and invites Governments, regional economic integration organizations,
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to engage
actively and cooperate closely to support the Strategic Approach implementation
activities of the United Nations Environment Programme, including the Strategic
Approach Quick Start Programme, 9 including through providing adequate resources,
as appropriate;
6.
Emphasizes the need to further enhance coordination and cooperation
among the relevant United Nations organizations in the promotion of the
environmental dimension of sustainable development, and welcomes the continued
active participation of the United Nations Environment Programme in the United
Nations Development Group and the Environment Management Group;
Also emphasizes the need for the United Nations Environment
7.
Programme, within its mandate, to further contribute to sustainable development
programmes, the implementation of Agenda 212 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation,3 at all levels, and to the work of the Commission on Sustainable
Development, bearing in mind the mandate of the Commission;
8.
Recognizes the need to strengthen the scientific base of the United
Nations Environment Programme, as recommended by the intergovernmental
consultation on strengthening the scientific base of the Programme, including the
reinforcement of the scientific capacity of developing countries, as well as countries
_______________
5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/61/25).
Ibid., annex I.
7
A/61/322.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25),
annex I.
9
See SAICM/ICCM.1/7, annex IV.
6

2

A/RES/61/205

with economies in transition, including through the provision of adequate financial
resources;
9.
Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial
resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII), underlines the need to consider the
adequate reflection of all administrative and management costs of the Programme in
the context of the United Nations regular budget;
10. Invites Governments that are in a position to do so to increase their
contributions to the Environment Fund;
11. Emphasizes the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of the
United Nations Environment Programme, and requests the Secretary-General to
keep the resource needs of the Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi
under review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary
services to the Programme and to the other United Nations organs and organizations
in Nairobi;
12. Decides to consider, if necessary, the issue of universal membership of
the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum of the United
Nations Environment Programme at its sixty-fourth session, while noting the
differences in views expressed so far on this important but complex issue;
13. Decides also to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled
“Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
on its twenty-fourth session”.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 2006

3
