S/2015/472

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 23 December 2013 (S/2013/759), the President of the Security
Council informed me of the Council’s concurrence with my recommendation to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) until
31 December 2016, and requested that I report to the Council every six months on
the implementation of the mandate.
2.
The present report covers the period from 1 January to 30 June 2015. It
provides an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and outlines the
activities undertaken by UNOWA in the areas of good offices, enhancing
subregional capacities to address cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and
security and promoting good governance, respect for the rule of law and human
rights and gender mainstreaming. It also outlines the efforts of UNOWA in engaging
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the Mano River Union, in order to promote peac e and stability in
West Africa.

II. Developments and trends in West Africa
3.
Since the issuance of my last report (S/2014/945), there have been a number of
key political and security developments in West Africa, particularly in countries that
have held or plan to hold elections in 2015. In Nigeria, the presidential, legislative,
gubernatorial and state assembly elections were conducted in a generally peaceful
manner, despite the high political stakes and continuing insecurity in the north -east
of the country. Presidential elections in Togo and legislative and local elections in
Benin took place in a peaceful manner, notwithstanding re ported technical and
organizational challenges. In Guinea, tensions between the Government and the
opposition escalated over the proposed sequence of the elections. In Burkina Faso,
the Government’s approval of an amended electoral code, which excludes som e
individuals associated with the ousted regime from contesting the elections, led to
renewed tensions. In Sierra Leone, tensions within the ruling party led to the
dismissal of Vice-President Samuel Sam-Sumana.

15-09604 (E)

260615

*1509604*

S/2015/472

4.
Challenges related to transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking,
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and cross-border security threats in the Sahel continued
to affect West Africa. Among the most serious threats were the continuing attacks by
violent extremists in Mali, as well as the Boko Haram insurgency in north-eastern
Nigeria that affected the security of the Lake Chad Basin countries. On a positive
note, the operational headquarters of the Multinational Joint Task Force, established
to combat Boko Haram, was inaugurated in N’Djamen a on 25 May, on the margins
of the sixteenth ordinary session of the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).
5.
The global response to eliminate the Ebola outbreak in the three most -affected
countries, namely Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, recorded significant
achievements. On 9 May, Liberia was declared free of Ebola transmission following
a period of 42 days during which no cases of new infection were reported. There
were also reductions in the reported number of cases of the disease in Guinea and
Sierra Leone, although a “state of health emergency” remains in effect in the two
countries.

A.

Political developments
6.
In Nigeria, presidential and legislative elections were held on 28 March, and
gubernatorial and state assembly elections took place on 11 April. Fourteen
candidates, including one woman candidate, contested the presidential elections.
The opposition candidate for the All Progressives Congress, Muhammadu Buhari,
won 54 per cent of the presidential votes, while the incumbent President, Goodluck
Jonathan of the People’s Democratic Party, garnered 45 per cent of the votes.
Despite heightened tensions in the lead-up to the elections and strong apprehensions
regarding the possibility of violence, the elections were assessed by international
and national observers as being generally peaceful and transparent.
7.
President Jonathan’s concession of defeat on 31 March, hours before the final
results were announced, played a role in preventing post-election violence in
Nigeria. In conceding, he reaffirmed his commitment to free and fair elections and
to peacefully accepting the outcome of the electoral proc ess as agreed to by all
presidential candidates in the Abuja accord signed on 14 January and as renewed in
their collective pledges on 26 March. My Special Representative for West Africa
and High-level Representative to Nigeria, together with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in Nigeria, supported the National Peace
Committee, chaired by former Head of State and retired General Abdulsalami
Abubakar, in the preparation and facilitation of the signing of the Abuja accord.
8.
The determination of ordinary Nigerians to vote, the integrity and
professionalism of the Independent National Electoral Commission, led by
Chairman Attahiru Jega, and the introduction of various safeguards to ensure the
integrity of polling together contributed to the peace ful holding of the general
elections. In addition, the increased engagement and coordinated messaging of
regional and international actors also played a key role. In the lead -up to, during and
after the elections, I spoke with both Mr. Jonathan and Mr. Buh ari periodically and
issued statements aimed at reducing tensions and encouraging all parties to engage
in credible and peaceful elections. I also dispatched the Under -Secretary-General for
Political Affairs to Nigeria from 16 to 18 March, accompanied by m y Special

2/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

Representative, to convey similar messages to national stakeholders. He also made
frequent trips to Nigeria in the lead-up to the elections and remained in the country
for several days during the presidential and legislative elections until the f inal
announcement of the results. On 29 May, Mr. Buhari was sworn in as the new
President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Nigeria.
9.
In Guinea, political tensions between the Government and the opposition
escalated following the announcement of the electoral calendar by the Independent
National Electoral Commission on 10 March. According to the calendar, the
presidential elections are scheduled to take place on 11 October 2015, while the
local elections will be held in March 2016. The opposition immediately rejected the
proposed sequence of the elections, insisting that local elections must precede the
presidential elections. They argued that the majority of mayors appointed by the
ruling party had overstayed their mandate by more than six ye ars. On 17 March
2015, the opposition withdrew their representatives from the National Assembly,
declared that they no longer recognized the Independent National Electoral
Commission and its decisions and announced the resumption of public
demonstrations. Since then, several protest rallies have been organized throughout
the country, including in the capital city, Conakry, which, in some cases, has
resulted in clashes between protesters and national security forces. Several injuries
and deaths have been reported during these clashes.
10. Meanwhile, the Government of Guinea maintained that the presidential
election should be held in 2015 to avoid a potential constitutional crisis. They
argued that they could only hold one election in 2015, owing to budgetary
constraints and the need to focus on the ongoing fight against Ebola. On 20 May,
President Alpha Condé met with opposition leader Cellou Dalein Diallo. The
opposition welcomed the initiative. On 5 June, on instructions from the President,
the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Defence and the Secretary-General of the
Presidency held consultations with the opposition, during which it was tentatively
agreed that a national dialogue would commence on 18 June. In another
development, on 11 May, the former military Head of State, Dadis Camara, who is
in exile in Burkina Faso, announced his intention to run in the presidential election
in Guinea.
11. In Burkina Faso, the process of transition following the popular uprising of
October 2014 remains on track. On 27 January 2015, the Council of Ministers
confirmed that presidential and legislative elections would be held on 11 October
2015, and municipal elections would be held on 31 January 2016. Preparations for
the elections in October 2015 are well under way. I n the wake of tensions related to
the reorganization of the presidential guard, members of the presidential guard, on
4 February, called for the resignation of Transitional Prime Minister Yacouba Isaac
Zida, which triggered street demonstrations in support of the dissolution of the
presidential guard. Following intensive consultations between political and military
leaders and appeals by members of the international community, the parties agreed
to address the reform of the presidential guard at a later stage. On 16 February,
26 parties of the former opposition founded the Cadre de concertation des partis
politiques to monitor and track problems in the transitional process and to support
the organization of transparent and credible elections.
12. On 7 April, the National Transitional Council of Burkina Faso adopted a
controversial law modifying the electoral code, which banned from contesting the

15-09604

3/18

S/2015/472

upcoming elections all those who supported an unconstitutional change, challenging
the principle of democratic alternation, especially the limitation of the number of
presidential mandates leading to an insurrection or to any other form of uprising.
The law was promulgated by Transitional President Michel Kafando on 9 April. In
reaction to the adoption of this amendment, several parties aligned with the former
majority coalition, the Congress for Democracy and Progress, announced their
withdrawal from transitional institutions. On 15 April, parties from the former
majority coalition also lodged an appeal against the a mendment in the Constitutional
Court. However, on 5 May, the Court rejected the appeal on technical grounds.
13. In Sierra Leone, political tensions increased following the expulsion of Vice President Sam-Sumana from the ruling All People’s Congress on 7 March and his
dismissal as Vice-President on 17 March on the grounds that he no longer satisfied
the constitutional requirement of being a member of a political party. In response,
Mr. Sam-Sumana filed an action contesting his dismissal. Opposition and civ il
society groups also expressed concern over his dismissal and organized
demonstrations. On 20 March, a former Secretary-General of the All People’s
Congress, Victor Bockarie Foh, was sworn in as the new Vice-President of Sierra
Leone. An injunction filed by Mr. Sam-Sumana on 23 March to prevent Mr. Foh
from acting in the office of the Vice-President was rejected by the Supreme Court on
5 May. The Court has not yet ruled on the constitutionality of Mr. Sam -Sumana’s
removal from office.
14. In Togo, the presidential election held on 25 April was won by incumbent
President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé. On 28 April, the opposition party, the
Combat pour l’alternance politique, rejected as fraudulent the preliminary results
announced by the Independent National Electoral Commission and declared the
leader of the party, Jean-Pierre Fabre, to be the winner of the election. On 3 May,
the Constitutional Court confirmed the election victory of President Gnassingbé.
The opposition has claimed that it will not challenge the results of the election in the
Constitutional Court because of its bias in favour of President Gnassingbé.
15. In Benin, legislative elections were conducted on 26 April in a peaceful
manner despite the sociopolitical tensions that had preceded the p olls. The ruling
alliance, the Forces cauris pour un Bénin emergent, won 33 of the 83 seats, 8 seats
less than in the previous elections. The other contesting opposition parties and
coalitions, the Union fait la nation, the Parti du renouveau démocratique, the
Renaissance du Bénin and the Forces démocratiques unies, won 13, 10, 7 and
4 seats, respectively. Some opposition parties accused the ruling coalition of fraud and
of using the state apparatus in its campaign. The Constitutional Court proclaimed
the final results of the legislative elections on 3 May. On 19 May, the Constitutional
Court authorized the postponement of the local elections until 28 June.

B.

Security trends
16. The security situation in West Africa remains fragile. In Mali, clashes between
armed groups and attacks by armed groups against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
government forces increased.
17. The activities of Boko Haram against civilians in the north -east of Nigeria
peaked in the first half of the reporting period. On 3 January, the group conducted

4/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

an attack on the remote town of Baga, Borno State, which destroyed the
headquarters of the Multinational Joint Task Force. Following the withdrawal of
military forces from the area, Boko Haram reportedly killed several hundred
civilians. On 25 January, Boko Haram fighters launched an attempt to take over
Maiduguri but were eventually repelled after a protracted confrontation with
Nigerian security forces. During the first quarter of 2015, at least 24 incidents of
suicide bombings took place in the states of Yobe (8 incidents), Gombe (5), Kani (1)
and Borno (10); the incidents involved 31 suicide bombers, 4 of whom were
reported to be children. Meanwhile, sporadic insurgency attacks have continued in
north-east Nigeria.
18. The Niger continues to face security risks, particularly in areas along its
borders with Libya, Mali and Nigeria. From 8 to 12 February, Boko Haram
insurgents launched a succession of cross-border attacks, including three suicide
attacks, on the border cities of Bosso and Diffa, in the Niger. On 25 April, Boko
Haram militants attacked Karamga, a strategic island in Lake Chad, killing at least
50 soldiers and prompting the Government of the Niger to order t he evacuation of
all inhabited islands prior to a large-scale military operation in the area. On 6 May,
militants raided the border town of Koukodou in the Niger, where at least five
people were killed. Since the beginning of the year, the authorities of t he Niger have
witnessed a dramatic increase in refugees and returnees to the south -western region
of Diffa. The overpopulation of Diffa, the unstable security environment and limited
humanitarian access and resources have led to increased tension within lo cal
communities. This has been compounded by concerns over the possible infiltration
of Boko Haram militants in the area and the group’s recruitment of fighters from
among the returnees and refugees.
19. In late February and March, coordinated operations of forces from Chad, the
Niger and Nigeria succeeded in wresting a number of locations from Boko Haram’s
control. On 18 February, Monguno and Marte in Borno State were retaken by the
Nigerian military, which also seized the town of Baga in Borno State four days later.
On 2 February, Chadian forces recaptured the strategic border town of Gamboru,
followed by Dikwa on 2 March and Damasak on 9 March, all located in Borno
State. Nigerian forces took over Bama and Gwoza, Borno State, on 16 and
27 March, respectively. In April, the Nigerian army commenced operations in the
Sambisa forest. Between 28 April and 6 May, a spokesperson for the Nigerian army
announced the freeing of at least 787 women and children who had been kidnapped
by Boko Haram. More than 20 makeshift camps, previously used by Boko Haram
elements in the area, were reported to have been destroyed during the operation. The
total number of freed Boko Haram hostages reached approximately 1,000 at the end
of May and has continued to increase since then. Recent information suggests that
the capabilities of Boko Haram were significantly reduced as a result of joint
regional military efforts under the Multinational Joint Task Force. Nonetheless, the
group remains active.
20. There was evidence of transatlantic drug trafficking during the reporting
period. On 15 January, the Spanish navy intercepted a shipment of 1.5 tons of
cocaine in the Atlantic Ocean, 80 miles west of Cabo Verde, on a vessel en route to
the Canary Islands, Spain. On 20 April, authorities in the Niger intercepted a
shipment of nearly 3 tons of cannabis that was being escorted by a group of heavily
armed smugglers in the mountains in the northern part of the country. In April, the
transnational organized crime unit in Sierra Leone supported an international

15-09604

5/18

S/2015/472

investigation to determine the origin of 9 tons of cannabis resin (“hashish”) that had
been seized on a ship navigating under a Sierra Leonean flag in Moroccan waters.
Trafficking in amphetamine-type stimulants also remains a major source of concern
in West Africa; 120 kilograms of amphetamine -type stimulants were seized in the
subregion during the reporting period.

C.

Humanitarian trends
21. The humanitarian situation in West Africa remains a matter of great concern,
largely due to the Boko Haram insurgency in Nigeria and the impact of the Ebola
outbreak on Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In the Sahel, some 20 million people
continue to struggle with food insecurity. In February, partners launched the Sahel
response plan for 2015, seeking $1.96 billion to assist 9.3 million food -insecure
people, 9 million people at risk of epidemics and 3.2 million acutely malnourished
children, as well as to provide safe water and sanitation for over 4 million people in
nine countries.
22. Violence and conflict have triggered a new surge in large -scale displacements
in the Lake Chad Basin area. In the north-east of Nigeria, nearly 1.5 million people
have been displaced by the Boko Haram insurgency, an increase of 28 per cent since
the start of the year. Nearly 60 per cent of those displaced are persons under
18 years old. The majority of those displaced persons live in host communities, and
the remainder live in camps or camp-like sites. Meanwhile, food insecurity has
worsened, and in the coming months some 3 million Nigerians in the north-east are
expected to require assistance. An estimated 157,000 refugees and 53,000 returnees
have fled to Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, putting an additional strain on highly
vulnerable host communities. Insecurity and logistical constraints continue to
hamper humanitarian access in Nigeria, particularly in areas liberated from Boko
Haram by the Multinational Joint Task Force.
23. The Niger continues to be one of the countries in the Sahel that are th e most
vulnerable to malnutrition. Food insecurity has affected 2.5 million people,
representing 15 per cent of the rural population. In the Diffa region, insecurity and
an influx of people fleeing the Boko Haram insurgency have exacerbated a situation
that is already fragile due to the poor agricultural season. The vast majority of the
66,000 internally displaced persons and 105,600 refugees from Nigeria live with
host families and have very limited access to humanitarian assistance. To compound
the situation, the meningitis outbreak in Niamey and in the Dosso region has
reached an epidemic level, with over 6,000 suspected cases since the beginning of
2015, compared with 154 cases in 2014.
24. The Ebola outbreak has generated immense needs in Guinea, Liber ia and
Sierra Leone, though the number of cases has significantly decreased. The disease
has left more than 16,000 children without one or both parents, while 5 million have
been deprived of learning opportunities due to school closures. More than
1.2 million people are currently food-insecure and require immediate assistance.
Moreover, over 2.2 million people risk experiencing critical levels of food
insecurity during the lean season. The United Nations is preparing to host a high level meeting on 9 and 10 July to support post-Ebola recovery coordination and
resource mobilization efforts.

6/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

D.

Trends on human rights
25. Despite positive developments related to the conduct of peaceful elections in a
number of countries, the human rights situation in West Africa remains fragile.
Recurrent strikes throughout the subregion have restricted the right to education of a
generation of youth in a period marked by high unemployment. While increased
sensitization regarding Ebola has raised awareness, identity-based discrimination
and stigmatization, including a ban on pregnant girls attending school in Sierra
Leone, are matters of concern. On 23 March, the Human Rights Commission of
Sierra Leone warned about the discriminatory imposition of a state of emergency
due to the Ebola outbreak, which, according to the Commission, restricted the right
to freedom of assembly and the right to freedom of association.
26. In Nigeria, the indiscriminate violence and killing of civilians by Boko Haram
have continued. Several mass graves and execution sites have been discovered
following the recapture of areas that were under the control of Boko Haram.
Moreover, children have continued to be recruited and abducted by the group, while
women and young girls are increasingly being used as sex slaves and for suicide
attacks. There were also reports of serious violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law by Nigerian security forces during counter -insurgency
operations. On 17 February, an unidentified plane bombed a funer al gathering near a
mosque in the village of Abadam in the Niger, reportedly killing 36 civilians. In
Nigeria, the recruitment and use of children by the civilian joint task force in Borno
State and other militia in the states of Adamawa and Yobe were also reported. The
approximately 1,000 women and children liberated by Nigerian forces in areas
previously under the control of Boko Haram are reportedly being provided with
support for rehabilitation and reintegration into their communities. On 25 May, the
long-awaited bill on the prohibition of violence against persons became law,
providing a legal framework for the prevention of all forms of violence against
vulnerable persons, especially women and girls. It prohibits female genital mutilation,
the abandonment of spouses, children and other dependants without sustenance,
battery and other harmful traditional practices against women and children.
27. In Mauritania, human rights groups called for the release of anti -slavery
activists, including Biram Dah Abeid, the winner of the United Nations Prize in the
Field of Human Rights and leader of the Initiative for the Resurgence of the
Abolitionist Movement, who had been arrested following demonstrations in
November 2014. The use of excessive force also remains a matter of concern in
other countries, notably in Guinea, where the intervention by security forces during
opposition demonstrations between April and May 2015 led to fatalities.
28. In the Gambia, dozens of military personnel and civilians, including the f amily
members of those accused of being involved in an attempted coup d’état that had
taken place on 30 December 2014, were arrested, questioned and detained without
charge. The National Intelligence Agency of the Gambia reportedly conducted door to-door searches in the days following the incident. On 2 April 2015, following a
court martial, three of the military officers involved in the incident were sentenced
to death, while three others received sentences of life imprisonment. In a separate
case, the trials of three men accused of “homosexual acts” are taking place. The men
face up to 15 years of imprisonment if found guilty. Prior to their transfer to prison,
the men were reportedly subjected to acts of torture during their detention at the
headquarters of the National Intelligence Agency.

15-09604

7/18

S/2015/472

29. In Guinea, on 2 June, the National Assembly passed a bill aimed at regulating
the use of force during demonstrations. The National Assembly also passed a bill
introducing penalties of up to five years’ imprisonment for offending or defaming
the President and other public officials. Both bills passed in the absence of the
opposition, which had withdrawn its representatives from the legislative body in
protest over the electoral calendar announced by the Independent N ational Electoral
Commission.

E.

Trends on gender issues
30. Some progress was achieved in the political and electoral participation of
women in West Africa during the reporting period. Several countries, including
Benin, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo, increased the number or the position of women in
their electoral management bodies. Women’s civil society groups were involved in
the electoral process in Benin, Nigeria and Togo, including through the “women’s
situation rooms” that were set up during the recent elections in those countries. In
Togo, President Gnassingbé appointed Amadou Abdou-Nana Awa-Daboya as the
chairperson of a commission on political, institutional and constitutional reforms. In
Benin and the Niger, steps were taken to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), and support was requested from UNOWA in the mobilization of
financial and human resources for the adoption and implementation of the national
action plans.

F.

Socioeconomic trends
31. The Ebola outbreak has continued to negatively affect local economies, cross border trade, farming activities and production industries in Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. According to World Bank estimates, on 17 April, the total loss of
gross domestic product in the affected countries reached $2.2 billion. The Ebola
outbreak has also disrupted the countries’ progress towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, collecting taxes and investing in infrastructure and
social services.
32. Overall, the reporting period saw a considerable slackening in the mining
sector in West Africa, which further aggravated unemployment and affected state
revenues. The lull in construction and other employment -generating activities,
including in the informal sector, continued to have a significant impact on
livelihoods, especially affecting women, youth and poor rural households.
33. Challenges linked to climate change and successive droughts, as well as lack
of opportunities for youth, contributed to increased migrati on. In May 2015, the
International Organization for Migration reported that Gambians, Malians,
Nigerians and Senegalese accounted for most of the persons migrating from West
Africa to Europe.
34. The education sector in some countries in West Africa was negatively affected
by strikes or quarantine measures resulting from the Ebola outbreak, leading to an
extension of the school year in some countries. Among the countries affected were
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

8/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

35. During the reporting period, ECOWAS launched the sea link initiative, which
is aimed at operationalizing maritime shipping and minimizing the challenges
related to the movement of people, goods and services in the subregion. The
initiative, which will link West African and Central African countries, is expected to
boost trade and enhance economic growth in West Africa.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
A.

Good offices and special assignments by my Special Representative
Nigeria
36. Given the increasing political tensions in the lead-up to the presidential,
legislative, gubernatorial and state assembly elections in Nigeria in March and
April, my Special Representative for West Africa travelled regularly to the country
to engage with national stakeholders with a view to defusing tensions, supporting
efforts to prevent election-related violence and encouraging efforts to combat Boko
Haram. He held a series of consultations with key political figures, human rights
actors, civil society representatives, religious leaders, the Sultan of Sokoto, the
Bishop of Sokoto and the heads of military, intelligence and security agencies. He
also participated in the inaugural meeting of the National Peace Committee on
25 January.
37. From 15 March to 4 April, my Special Representative remained in Nigeria,
working closely with the heads of electoral observer missions from the African
Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and the Commonwealth, as well as
international partners, as part of efforts to coordinate support for pe aceful elections
in Nigeria and support of relevant national authorities. He also worked closely with
the United Nations country team, which provided technical support for the elections,
in addition to carrying out its broader mandated activities.
Guinea
38. During the reporting period, my Special Representative conducted several
missions to Guinea to support efforts to defuse tension and encourage political
dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition. In his meetings with President
Condé, government ministers, members of the opposition parties and the ruling
coalition, he reiterated the need to maintain national unity and cohesion and ensure
the necessary conditions to respond to the Ebola outbreak. He also emphasized the
need to build a political atmosphere conducive to the holding of peaceful, inclusive
and credible elections.
39. From 23 to 26 April, an electoral needs assessment mission of the United
Nations visited Guinea at the invitation of the Government. The mission concluded
that the conditions were not conducive to the holding of the local elections because
of, inter alia, the lack of consensus on the electoral calendar. Nonetheless, the
mission recommended that the United Nations provide technical assistance and
support donor resource mobilization pending the resolution of the issues related to
the electoral calendar.
40. My Special Representative will continue to work closely with national
stakeholders and international partners to help defuse tension and build confidence

15-09604

9/18

S/2015/472

prior to the elections. He deployed a small team to Guinea on 23 May to assist in
monitoring developments in the country and to provide advisory support to the
Resident Coordinator.
Burkina Faso
41. In Burkina Faso, my Special Representative continued to support the process
of transition, in close coordination with regional and international stakeholders. The
International Follow-up and Support Group for the Transition in Burkina Faso,
co-chaired by my Special Representative along with the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Smail Chergui, and the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo, met in Ouagadougou on
13 January and 30 March and in Johannesburg, South Africa, on 12 June. During the
meetings, participants expressed satisfaction with the progress made in the
transitional process.
42. On 4 February, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, accompanied
by my Special Representative, visited Burkina Faso to hold consultations with the
transitional authorities and representatives of political parties and civil society. The
visit coincided with growing tensions in the country following a request by the
presidential guard for the resignation of Transitional Prime Minister Zida. The two
officials emphasized that the international community would not tolerate any
obstacles to the successful completion of the transition in Burkina Faso and called
on all parties to ensure that the transitional process remained on track.
43. An electoral needs assessment mission was deployed to Burkina Faso in
January following a request from the Transitional Government for United Nations
assistance. The mission identified four areas in which increased technical and
operational assistance would need to be provided to the national electoral
institutions. There is currently a budgetary shortfall of $30 million in the $90
million election budget. The United Nations will continue to support efforts to
mobilize resources to fill the funding gap, including through the International
Follow-up and Support Group for the Transition in Burkina Faso.
Sierra Leone
44. In response to the political tensions in Sierra Leone over the dismissal of
former Vice-President Sam-Sumana, my Special Representative travelled to
Freetown on 21 March to meet with President Ernest Bai Koroma and Mr. SamSumana, as well as international stakeholders, and convey my concern that political
upheavals should not distract from the ongoing Ebola response and recovery efforts
and reiterate the importance of maintaining national cohesion and respect for the
Constitution. The President gave his assurances that the Government remained
focused on the fight against Ebola and would work towards de -escalating tension.
Mr. Sam-Sumana also gave assurances that he would pursue a resolution of the
matter through legal means.
Togo
45. My Special Representative travelled to Togo with the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union on 12 January and the Under -Secretary-General
for Political Affairs on 3 February, with a view to urging political stakeholders to
engage in peaceful and transparent elections. He visited Lomé again from 27 to

10/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

30 April with the objective of consulting with all relevant political and electoral
stakeholders to defuse tensions prior to the announce ment of the election results. He
met with key national stakeholders, including the Independent National Electoral
Commission and opposition candidate Jean-Pierre Fabre. That was done in close
coordination with the African Union, ECOWAS and international ob server missions
present in the country.
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
46. Notwithstanding the security challenges related to Boko Haram, the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission made significant progress in resolving
outstanding areas of disagreement between the two parties. Field assessments and
demarcations were conducted relying principally on cartographic methodologies.
Agreement was reached on coordinates extending over 2,001 kilometres of the land
boundary, which significantly enhances prospects for the completion of the
demarcation without further field assessments. The parties also agreed on
coordinates for the emplacement of the remaining 1,800 pillars, which will complete
the physical demarcation of the entire Cameroon-Nigeria land boundary. To date,
896 pillars have been put into position or are subject to current action. A joint
technical team conducted an inspection mission from 10 January to 16 February to
review the condition of pillars positioned in the southernmost part of the Nigerian
boundary. The inspection mission confirmed that the pillars were in good condition
and in full compliance with contractual expectations.
47. During the reporting period, confidence-building initiatives for populations
affected by the demarcation continued. Following a request by the Government of
Cameroon to review the socioeconomic projects, the United Nations support team
for the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission undertook a mission to assess
population displacements in the border areas affected by the Boko Haram
insurgency, particularly along the northern border. Feasibility studies and cost
estimates for the socioeconomic projects in Nigeria will be finalized d uring the last
quarter of 2015.
48. In support of the implementation of measures agreed to d uring the summit of
Heads of State on security in Nigeria, held in Paris on 17 May 2014, a concept note
was developed in collaboration with the Lake Chad Basin Commission during the
period under review. According to the note, the Cameroon -Nigeria Mixed
Commission will provide technical support to the Lake Chad Basin Commission
secretariat for the design and implementation of a rapid action plan, a
socioeconomic project for women and youth and support for the rehabilitation and
densification of the boundary in the Lake Chad area.
49. My Special Representative continued to engage with the parties to the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission in his capacity as Chairman of the
Commission. The next meeting of the heads of delegation is expected to take place
shortly. In the meantime, the United Nations support team for the Cameroon -Nigeria
Mixed Commission has designed a completion strategy that will serve as a road map
for delivering the specific outstanding activities related to the mandate of the
Commission, notably, the confidence-building projects, the pillar emplacement
operations and the final mapping exercise.

15-09604

11/18

S/2015/472

B.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
50. On 2 February, UNOWA and the Lake Chad Basin Commission organized a
workshop on threats to peace and security in the Lake Chad Basin and cooperation
between the Commission and regional United Nations entities. The workshop
brought together 61 participants, including the Executive Secretary of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, as well as representatives of Benin, Cameroon, Chad, the
Niger and Nigeria, ECOWAS, civil society and research institutes. United Nations
entities, including the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNDP,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Department
of Political Affairs, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (U NODC) and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, participated in the
meeting. The discussion focused on the structure and objectives of Boko Haram and
its modus operandi, the provision of humanitarian assistance to the affect ed
population and the need for additional United Nations assistance in environmental
and socioeconomic matters.
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
51. UNOWA, as the convener of the working group on security of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, has supported the implementation of the
Strategy. The Working Group identified three main projects for implementation:
(a) the UNODC capacity-building project to combat drug trafficking, organized
crime, terrorism and corruption; (b) the provision of technical assistance by the
Economic Commission for Africa to enhance small arms control, physical security
and stockpile management in the Sahel; and (c) the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism project on violent extremism and radicalization in the Sahel.
As of May 2015, more than 2,500 people in the Sahel have directly benefited from
the UNODC capacity-building project.
Cross-border security strategy for the Mano River Union
52. The Ebola outbreak stalled activities that were to take place under the Mano
River Union cross-border security strategy. However, support for national and
regional responses to Ebola continued. With the assistance of UNOWA, the joint
border security and confidence-building units established under the strategy
supported sensitization and coordination efforts in response to the Ebola outbreak.
The Mano River Union secretariat conducted media campaigns and training for the
unit members and held national consultative meetings that brough t together
traditional leaders, youth and women’s groups. The Mano River Union has also been
engaged in post-Ebola recovery efforts and has held several meetings to ensure that
planning for the recovery phase takes into account regional dimensions of the
outbreak.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
53. Little progress was achieved in the implementation of the decisions adopted at
the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in
the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé in June 2013. That was because of the focus in
the region on addressing the threat posed by Boko Haram, as well as the lack of

12/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

logistical and financial resources to implement the agreed road map. Since i ts
inauguration, the Inter-regional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea has not commenced operations due to administrative
obstacles and delays in onboarding staff on secondment from member States.
Similarly, the regional coordination centre for maritime security in West Africa has
not been established. UNOWA, in collaboration with the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), is continuing its advocacy of international
support to facilitate the work of the Inter-regional Coordination Centre.
54. On 13 March, UNOWA, together with UNOCA, participated in the launching
of the ECOWAS Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre. From 11 to 12 May
2015, UNOWA, UNOCA and other partners in West Africa and Cent ral Africa
participated in a meeting of the Group of Seven and Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
held in Pointe-Noire, Republic of the Congo. The meeting was convened to mobilize
support for the implementation of the Declaration of the Heads of State and
Government of Central and West African States on Maritime Safety and Security in
Their Common Maritime Domain, done at Yaoundé on 25 June 2013, the code of
conduct and the memorandum of understanding on maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea.
Security sector reform
55. In Guinea, national efforts to reform the security sector have been hindered by
the Ebola outbreak. Further to the 2014 national strategy for priority action, the
United Nations assisted the national technical monitoring commission in the
preparatory work for the amended 2015 budget law, including the integration of
elements of the strategy in three priority areas, namely, the strengthening of security
sector governance, the enhancement of operational capacities and improvement of
the civil-military relationship.
56. The United Nations participated in a Joint Assessment Mission to Guinea Bissau, led by the African Union from 2 to 12 March. The Mission made
recommendations on the gaps and deficiencies in security sector reform and
identified opportunities to assist the Government in its effort to reform security
institutions in line with national priorities, the African Union Policy Framework on
Security Sector Reform and Security Council resolution 2203 (2015).
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
57. The Ebola outbreak continued to slow down the activities of the transnational
crime units established under the West Africa Coast Initiative in Liberia and Sierra
Leone and prevented the creation of the transnational crime unit in Guinea.
Notwithstanding the Ebola outbreak, the transnational crime unit in Sierra Leone
has resumed its daily operations, including criminal investigations. In Liberia, the
United Nations Mission in Liberia continued to build the capacity of the
transnational crime unit through the training of specialized staff. In Guinea -Bissau,
the re-establishment of the transnational crime unit is being fast -tracked by national
authorities, and the unit is expected to be fully operational by mid-2015. UNODC
and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire have continued to support
national authorities in Côte d’Ivoire in establishing a transnational crime unit, in
accordance with a decree issued in November 2014.

15-09604

13/18

S/2015/472

Counter-terrorism and Boko Haram
58. In response to the rising threat posed by Boko Haram, my Special
Representative participated in the ministerial meeting of the countries of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and Benin in Niamey on 20 January, where the discussion
focused on the operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
59. On 29 January, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its
484th meeting, authorized the deployment of the Multinational Joint Task Force for
an initial period of 12 months, with a mandated strength of up to 7,500 military
personnel. On 3 March, the troop ceiling was increased to 10,000 personnel.
UNOWA participated in two meetings of experts, one held in Yaoundé from 5 to
7 February and the other in N’Djamena from 23 to 27 February, to advance the
operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task Force and the development of the
Task Force’s strategic concept of operations. On 25 May, the headquarters of the
Multinational Joint Task Force was inaugurated in N’Djamena, on the margins of
the sixteenth ordinary session of the Conference of Heads of State and Government
of ECCAS. On 9 June, senior defence officials from Benin, Cameroon, Chad, the
Niger and Nigeria met in Abuja to discuss, prior to the summit of Heads of State of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to be held on 11 June, the future of joint
operations to combat Boko Haram.
60. On 29 January, my Special Representative for West Africa participated in the
484th meeting of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. From 13 to
18 April, my Special Representative for West Africa and my Special Representative
for Central Africa undertook a diplomatic tour of countries affected by the Boko
Haram insurgency, where they met with the Presidents of Benin, Chad, the N iger
and Nigeria, the Prime Minister of Cameroon and the President -elect of Nigeria.
From 23 to 25 May, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union
and my Special Representatives conducted a joint mission to countries affected by
the Boko Haram insurgency, before attending the ceremony for the inauguration of
the headquarters of the Multinational Joint Task Force in N’Djamena.

C.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
61. On 23 March, UNOWA organized a meeting with regional representatives of
civil society organizations and networks, aimed at fostering an exchange on human
rights and rule of law. A second meeting was held on 26 March, focusing on
governance of natural resources and the promotion of sustainable peace in West
Africa. UNOWA supported a civil society forum held in Banjul from 17 to 22 April,
on the margins of the fifty-sixth ordinary session of the African Commission on
Human and People’s Rights; representatives of about 200 organizations attended the
forum, discussing challenges to human rights and the rule of law in West Africa.
62. In Dakar on 12 January, UNOWA participated in an ECOWAS meeting of
experts on gender and women’s affairs on the theme “Gender equality and
sustainable development”; the participants assessed the impact of the ECOWAS
legal framework for gender equality and women’s empowerment. UNOWA also
contributed to the revision of Senegal’s national strategy on gender equality and
equity and convened two sessions of the Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security in West Africa, sharing good practices and lessons learned. In addition,

14/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

from 15 to 26 March, UNOWA, together with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Gorée Institute, participated in a joint
mission to Benin and Togo to support the establishment of “women’s situation
rooms” as part of the efforts to ensure peaceful, non -violent and inclusive elections.
63. On 27 March, UNOWA participated in the launch of a communication network
on women, peace and security at the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping
Training Centre in Accra, aimed at building support for the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions on wom en, peace
and security. Throughout the reporting period, UNOWA continued to work with
regional stakeholders and United Nations entities to finalize the evaluation of the
regional plan to implement Council resolution 1325 (2000).

D.

Inter-institutional cooperation
United Nations inter-institutional cooperation
64. My Special Representative for West Africa held regular meetings with the
regional heads of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes based in Dakar to
share information and strengthen cooperation. On 23 February, he briefed the
Regional Directors’ Team on political developments in the region, particularly the
impact of the Boko Haram insurgency on the north-eastern part of Nigeria and
neighbouring countries. On 10 April, my Special Representative for West Africa, my
Special Representative for Central Africa and my Special Envoy for the Sahel took
part in an inter-office retreat in Dakar to discuss synergies involving their three
offices and identify areas to strengthen cooperation.
65. On 19 and 20 April, my Special Representative for West Africa participated in
the UNDP regional consultations on peace, security and development in Central
Africa and West Africa, held in Yaoundé. The participants developed a shared
understanding of the regional dimensions of the Boko Haram insurgency and the
crisis in the Central African Republic and identified synergies and opportunities for
collaboration and coordinated efforts.
66. In Dakar on 8 May, UNOWA convened the 27th consultative meeting o f Heads
of United Nations Peace Missions in West Africa, which reviewed developments in
the subregion, as well as progress made in the implementation of their mandates.
Cooperation with regional and subregional partners
67. Throughout the reporting period, UNOWA remained engaged with the Mano
River Union with a view to finalizing the regional Ebola rehabilitation strategy. In
addition, UNOWA contributed to the United Nations Ebola recovery assessment
mission and supported the exchange of information with regional institutions and
peace missions, focusing on the implementation of the Mano River Union cross border security strategy. UNOWA also continued to engage with the Mano River
Union secretariat in activating the resource mobilization plan adopted in Abidjan in
June 2014 to enable the implementation of the strategy.
68. From 2 to 6 March, my Special Representative travelled to Brussels, London
and Paris, where he held consultations with the European Union, the Commonwealth,
the International Organization of la Francophonie and the secretariat of the African,

15-09604

15/18

S/2015/472

Caribbean and Pacific States on efforts to ensure peace and stability in West Africa,
particularly the fight against Boko Haram and the post-Ebola rehabilitation efforts.
69. From 27 April to 3 May, UNOWA, together with ECOWAS and the African
Union, conducted a joint post-election assessment of the political and security
situation in Nigeria to help identify the areas and scope for future international
assistance.
Observations and recommendations
70. I welcome the peaceful holding of general elections in Nigeria that has set a
positive example for the region to follow. These elections have shown the
determination of the Nigerian people to bring about democratic go vernance through
a peaceful process. I salute the political leaders for putting the interest of the
country before party politics, and I hope that the aspirations of the Nigerian people
will be upheld and respected.
71. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing attacks by Boko Haram and its
destabilizing humanitarian, human rights and security impact on the Lake Chad
Basin region, particularly north-eastern Nigeria. The recent attacks by Boko Haram
and its capture of Marte town in Borno State on 16 May are a reminder that the
group’s residual capabilities should not be underestimated. Efforts by regional and
subregional actors to address this threat should continue in full compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law. I welcome the recent
establishment of the headquarters of the Multinational Joint Task Force in
N’Djamena, and I call on the international community to support the
operationalization of the Task Force by mobilizing the requisite political, logistical
and financial support and providing the necessary expertise.
72. The United Nations is committed to working closely with regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union, ECOWAS, ECCAS and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission in order to continue strengthening re gional
cooperation to address cross-border security threats and prevent the spread of
violent extremism and terrorism. I encourage ECOWAS and ECCAS to hold the
planned summit of Heads of State to address the root causes of the Boko Haram
insurgency in a holistic and integrated manner. UNOWA will continue to support
these efforts in collaboration with relevant United Nations entities.
73. I welcome the release of hundreds of women and children from Boko Haram
captivity and note that national authorities, with support from relevant United
Nations entities, are providing the needed assistance. The United Nations system in
Nigeria, with the support of my Special Representative for West Africa and High level Representative to Nigeria, will continue to cooperate with relevant
stakeholders in support of national stabilization efforts, particularly in the north -east
of Nigeria, as outlined in the new Government’s priorities. This would enable the
safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons, refugees a nd returnees. I
reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to support the Nigerian authorities, as
well as the authorities of neighbouring countries, with humanitarian assistance. In
this regard, I call on Member States to contribute generously to the U nited Nations
operations.
74. I welcome the holding of peaceful presidential elections in Togo. I urge
national stakeholders to continue to engage in dialogue towards the consolidation of

16/18

15-09604

S/2015/472

democratic institutions and electoral reform. I commend the people of Benin on the
peaceful conduct of parliamentary elections. In Guinea, my Special Representative
will continue to support efforts to defuse tensions between the Government and the
opposition and assist in creating an environment conducive to the holding of
peaceful, credible and fair elections. I urge Guinean political stakeholders to engage
in dialogue to address, through consensus, all contentious issues. I also call on
national, regional and international partners to provide support for the successful
holding of the elections.
75. The upcoming elections in Burkina Faso will need to be closely monitored, as
the transition has shown recurrent signs of fragility in recent months. The role being
played by the International Follow-up and Support Group for the Transition in
Burkina Faso is commendable; this mechanism is one of the best examples of
effective regional and international preventive diplomacy.
76. The subregion continues to face serious human rights concerns, including
reported violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in Nigeria. I
welcome the Government’s commitment to addressing both the root causes of the
Boko Haram insurgency and the more recent human rights concerns. I am concerned
about attacks on civilians in Mali and Nigeria, abuses reported in the Gambia since
the attempted coup in December 2014 and episodes of violence during recent
demonstrations in Benin and Guinea. In the upcoming elections, the risk of political
and electoral violence remains particularly high in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and
Guinea. I urge the Governments, the opposition parties and their supporters in those
countries to exercise restraint during rallies and to refrain from using inflammatory
language that may incite violence.
77. I welcome the encouraging progress achieved in the Ebola response in Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone and the resolute commitment of thousands of health -care
workers who remained at the front lines during and in the aftermath of the outbreak.
I note with concern, however, that some aspects of the national responses affected
the socioeconomic situation and curtailed civil liberties. I encourage national
authorities to continue the fight against the epidemic until the objective of zero
Ebola cases is reached while ensuring that the fundamental human rights of its
citizens are fully respected. The achievement of the objective is also crucial to the
reactivation of key regional processes that have been slowed down by the impact of
the epidemic. I urge donors and regional organizations to coordinate closely with
United Nations entities and national authorities in support of each country’s
reconstruction plans.
78. Maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea remains an issue of concern. I
encourage States and regional and subregional organizations to remain committed to
fully implementing the decisions of the Yaoundé summit. I strongly encourage West
African States to work together to establish and operationalize the planned regional
coordination centre for maritime security in West Africa. I also call on States in the
region and partners to provide the necessary resources for the completion of the
information-sharing architecture in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOWA, in collaboration
with UNOCA, will continue to assist the Central and West African subregions in
mobilizing resources to achieve these objectives. I also call on member States of the
West Africa Coast Initiative to reinforce the existing transnational crime units, and I
urge the international community to support the joint efforts of ECOWAS, the

15-09604

17/18

S/2015/472

International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the United Nations in
this regard.
79. I commend the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for its continued efforts
to implement the judgment of the International Court of Jus tice of 10 October 2002
and complete the demarcation exercise. I encourage the Governments of Cameroon
and Nigeria to resolve the outstanding areas of disagreement for the demarcation to
create conditions conducive to the swift completion of the border dem arcation. My
Special Representative will continue to work with both countries, towards reaching
a conclusive settlement of the land boundary this year. This will enable the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission and the two parties to focus their resources
and attention to support activities for cross-border development projects and final
mapping.
80. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of States
in West Africa, the ECOWAS Commission, the African Union, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the Mano River Union for their continued cooperation with the
United Nations in efforts to address challenges to peace and security in the region. I
also wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative for West Africa,
as well as the staff of UNOWA, the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission and all
United Nations entities in West Africa for their efforts to advance peace and security
in the region.

18/18

15-09604
