A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/100
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.1)]
49/100.

Specific measures in favour of island
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/202 of 21 December 1990 and 47/186 of 22
December 1992 and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Recognizing that, in addition to the general problems facing developing
countries, many island developing countries experience specific trade- and
financing-related handicaps and that many of these factors subsist
concurrently in island developing countries, resulting in economic and social
vulnerability and dependence, particularly in those countries that are small
and/or geographically dispersed,
Mindful of the fact that in the 1990s, island developing countries,
particularly the small island developing countries that have extremely open
and volatile economies, are facing an international economic environment that
may adversely affect their trading opportunities,
Stressing the need for support measures to enable the island developing
countries to obtain maximum benefit from the Final Act Embodying the Results
of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 1/
Underscoring the importance of international cooperation to support
policies and measures of island developing countries in the area of trade so

1/
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT
secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7), vol. 1.
95-76879

/...

A/RES/49/100
Page 2

as to complement the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, 2/ adopted at the Global Conference on the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Noting that many island developing countries are least developed
countries,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the States, organizations and
bodies, within and outside the United Nations system, that have responded to
the special needs of island developing countries;
2.
Welcomes the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States 2/ and the Declaration of Barbados, 3/
adopted at the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, held at Bridgetown, from 25 April to 6 May 1994
(hereinafter referred to as the Barbados Conference);
3.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on a development strategy for island developing countries; 4/
4.
Welcomes the efforts made by island developing countries at
national and regional levels to enhance their international competitiveness
and to expand their trading opportunities;
5.
Calls upon the international community to implement all the
commitments achieved and the recommendations made at the Barbados Conference
and to take the necessary action to give effective follow-up to the Programme
of Action, and, in relation to trade and development issues with respect to
island developing countries, reiterates the appeals made in paragraph 6 of
resolution 47/186;
6.
Notes the valuable role of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development in support of island developing countries, as recalled in
resolution 47/186, and welcomes the provision made in paragraph 13 of its
resolution 49/122 of 19 December 1994 for strengthening the capacity of the
Conference to carry out, in accordance with its mandate, research and analysis
necessary to complement the work of the Department for Policy Coordination and
Sustainable Development of the Secretariat;
7.
Invites the Commission on Sustainable Development to convene,
during its session in 1996, a high-level panel to discuss the challenges faced
by island developing countries, particularly in the area of external trade,
and to assist the Commission in its review of the implementation of the
Programme of Action agreed at the Barbados Conference, and also invites the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to organize that panel in

2/
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, 25 April-6 May 1994 (A/CONF.167/9
and Corr.1 and 2) (United Nations publication, Sales No. 94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3/

Ibid., annex I.

4/

A/49/227 and Add.1 and 2.
/...

A/RES/49/100
Page 3

cooperation with the Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable
Development;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and review
in a coordinated manner, inter alia, within the Inter-Agency Committee on
Sustainable Development and the secretariats of the Commission on Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
concerns and needs of island developing countries;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session on the implementation of the present
resolution and, in recognition of the complementarity between the follow-up to
the Barbados Conference and ongoing island developing country programmes,
further requests the Secretary-General to take measures to provide for
integrated reporting on, and synergetic consideration of, these issues.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
