UNITED NATIONS

FFICIA
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
! ,pi;. 1
::*:,a

th
MEETING:

12 JANUARY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
... ,......, ,... .. ,.. .. .. ,.. ... .. .. . ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (198 1);
(II) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2326)

SlPV.2326

NOTE
Symbols of,Ur&ed Nations .,documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pplcmenrs of the Officinl Records of fhc SecL/rity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2326th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 January 1982, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President:

Prrwnt:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

I.

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2326)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/ 14821)

Adoption

2. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): It is with particular
pleasure, Sir, that my delegation sees the presidency
of the Council in this month of January fall to the
representative of a country with which Guyana maintains relations of such cordiality and friendship as
those we maintain with the Soviet Union. The mature
wisdom which has characterized your service as
representative of the Soviet Union has earned you the
respect and admiration
of your colleagues in the
United Nations. That wisdom combines with your
well-known skill and integrity to inspire my delegation with confidence in the success which will attend
your presidency in this month of January.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(0) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/14821)

-

1. The PRESIDENT
(interprctcrtion
j%m Russian):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd to 2325th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Israel and of the Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria,
Cuba, Democratic
Yemen, the
German Democratic
Republic,
Greece, Hungary,
India, Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan,
Portugal,
Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Viet Nam,
Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber; I invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber,

3. You, Mr. President, have assumed a mantle
borne with singular honour and distinction
in the
month of December by Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda,
to whom my delegation would like to pay a well- 3
deserved tribute for the efficiency and mature judgement, the integrity, the openness and the brilliance
with which he superintended the affairs of the Council
at a moment of delicacy and of challenge.
4. For the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier P&rez
de CuCllar, my delegation reserves the- warmest and
sincerest felicitations. As a Latin American country,
Guyana shares the pride and pleasure which the Government and the people of Peru must feel at this distinction. We recall the privilege that was ours to have
worked very closely here in New York with him, and
that the seat on the Security Council which Guyana
occupied in 1975 was the one made vacant upon the
expiry of the term of Peru under his worthy leader- s
ship. We are confident that with his sobriety, his rich s
1

and his consummate diplomatic
skills
placed at the service of the Organization, and with
his unassailable credentials as a true servant of Peace,
the United Nations is assured of the orientation and
inspiration
so necessary for the fulfilment of its historic vocation of saving succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and promoting social progress and
better standards of life in larger freedom. MY deIegation pledges to him its unswerving and steadfast SUPport and co-operation.

9. In brief, the Council demanded in resolution -197
(I%I) that Israel rescind its decisions to impohc il\

experience

Iaws, .iurisdiction und administration in the occupi4
Syrian Golan Heights. The Israelis have not merely
ignored this demand: they have responded by seeking i
to show why they believe that their decision was L\ j
correct one. The Council has now reconvened in :
pursuance of that same resolution to consider what /

appropriate--and
I stress appropriate-measures
should be taken in the face of that non-compliance.

!

10. When in its collective
wisdom the Council /
decided in December last to reconvene in the even{ )
of Israel’s non-compliance
with its decision, it was
in recognition of the grave consequences for international peace and security which could result if
attitudes and actions such as those displayed :und
carried out by Israel recently were allowed to 60
unchecked or were to appear to be condoned.

5. I wish also to pay a tribute to the former SecretaryGeneral, Mr, Kurt Waldheim, who, in an era of great
turmoil and challenge, served untiringly, devotedly
and well. My delegation extends to him its sincere
. gratitude and its warmest wishes for success in his new
career.
6. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, and
all the delegations which have so graciously extended
words of welcome to Guyana on our membership of
the Council. Guyana occupies its seat on the Council
in replacement
of Mexico, a sister Latin American
country with which we share a joint commitment
to
the causes of international
peace and security, and
I must here and now express my delegation’s genuine
appreciation
to Mr. Porfirio Muiioz Ledo for the
forthright
and outstanding manner in which he discharged the responsibilities
of membership of the
Council. Guyana succeeds Mexico with a clear Latin
American vision and with a deep consciousness of
the responsibilities
of membership in relation to the
region, and of Latin America’s transcendental interests. Ours is a willingness and a preparedness to fulfil
these responsibilities
with serenity, with objectivity
and to the best of our ability.

I 1. Israel‘s annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights took place against the backdrop of an international situation marked by grave uncertainty. with II
potential
for explosive
conflict. Deep suspicions
becloud the international
political atmosphere; there
is a marked heightening of tension in inter-State relntions. The language of reasoned discourse is giving
way to postures of belligerence. In a world already
overshadowed by the existence and proliferation
of
weapons of mass destruction,
there is a growing
tendency on the part of some States to advocate the
efficacy of military solutions to problems. Likewise,
some States are becoming
increasingly
covetous
of the territories of their neighbours, displaying disturbing desires to violate legally established frontiers.

7. On 17 December last [23/9th rn~~cti/l~~], the Council declared null and void and without international
legal effect the Israeli decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. The Council decided in resolution
497 (1981) to provide Israel the opportunity and the
time to rescind the patently illegal decision in respect
of the occupied Golan Heights,

12. In the Middle East region itself the peace process remains seriously impeded. Peace and security
are being further imperilled
by attempts to superimpose on the regional impulses for change the dynamics of conflict deriving from the pursuit of interests
external to the region. Against this background.
Israel’s provocative
action leads to the heightening
of tension in the Middle East region and adds a new
dimension
of complication
to the already complex
Middle East situation.

8. My delegation has given the most careful study to
document
S/14821 of 3 1 December 1981 containing
the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 497 (1981). The response by the
representative
of Israel as contained in paragraph 3
of that document represents, in my delegation’s view,
nothing more than a restatement of the position which
the Israelis have been seeking to have the international
community
accept in respect of its annexation of
territory
belonging to its neighbour, Syria. In this
attempt Israel, while claiming to be the offended party,
has also set itself Up ~1sjudge and jury and has proceeded to mete out the sentence in complete disregard
of Council resolutions, which impose clear obligations
on that State in respect of the occupied territories,

13. When the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
requested the convening of the Council [S/147YIl to
consider Israel’s annexation of part of its territory. it
was reflecting the faith of many a small State Member of the Organization
that the Council can be of
assistance to States threatened with, or victims of,
aggression, and the faith that the Council has a right
-indeed
an obligation-in
keeping with its primary
responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations
to play a positive role in defusing or resolving situations which threaten to endanger international
peace
and security. Members of the Council, individually
as
well as collectively,
must recognize a duty to sustain
that faith in the effectiveness of the Council, My
delegation, for its part, is prepared to lend its support
to any action directed to that end.
2

I
:

14. Israel has once again given confirmation of its
unmistakable
expansionist ambitions. In 1980 it was
Jerusalem: in 1981, the Golan Heights. Is it far-fetched
to imagine that failure by the Council to act decisively
at this time will result in further annexationist measures by Israel in 1982? This land-grabbing, whether
by Israel or any other State, must not be allowed to
become accepted practice and the Council must take
an unequivocal and uncompromising
position against
this disturbing trend. To turn a Nelson’s eye to this
overt act of annexation would be to render the Council effete and moribund. The maintenance of peace and
security in our time demands vigorous and effective
intervention by the Council.

cupied since 5 June 1967, including the Syrian Golan
Heights, as called for in Council resolution 242 ( 1967).
Guyana therefore welcomed the unanimous decision
by the Council last December [rv~st~//rtion 407 (/Y8/)]
that Israel’s action was null and void and without
international legal effect and its demand that Israel
should rescind the decision with respect to the Golan
Heights. Now that Israel has responded in the way
it has, my delegation expects that the Council, without
prevarication and with all deliberate speed, will proceed to firm, credible action consistent l*/ith the determination so clearly present in its decision of 17 December last.
19. There is no doubt that the Council is now faced
with an act of overt aggression, as defined in General
Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), one which is in
clear violation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and also of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Charter makes specific provision
for dealing with cases of aggression. It is the opinion
of my delegation that the Council should not, nor can
it afford to, equivocate before this brazen act of lawlessness. In my delegation’s view aggression must be
punished and in a manner that sends a clear signal to
other would-be aggressors and land-grabbers that the
Council takes a serious view of its responsibility fol
the maintenance of law and order. The Council must
not appear to be condoning aggression either actively
or by default.

15. The territories of Israel’s neighbours must no
longer be perceived by the Israeli rulers as so many
pieces of no man’s land to be violated at will in the
name of a security which their own actions make
more elusive.
16. What is more frightening in the pattern of Israeli
behaviour towards its neighbours is the manner in
which that State has set itself above all law, all canons,
all accepted international
practice, unilaterally arrogating unto itself the right to fix what it regards as
secure frontiers even at the price of the usurpation of
the territory of its neighbours. To concede any such
unilateral right is to underwrite anarchy in international relations. The Council does not exist to preside
over anarchy but to ensure order. What characterizes
Israel’s behaviour in respect of Lebanon, Iraq and
now Syria is the brazen lawlessness of its actions.
The Council must act to reassert the primacy of the
rule of law in international relations.

20. My delegation is not impressed by the position
advanced by Israel-as
set out in paragraph 3 of
document S/14821--to the effect that it is willing to
negotiate unconditionally
with Syria for a lasting
peace. Israel’s annexation of the Golan Heights came
14 years after the adoption of Council resolution 242
(1967). which provided the framework for a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East. Instead of withdrawing
from the Golan Heights, as required by that resolution, Israel has now annexed that territory. What
Israel is therefore doing in effect is unilaterally seeking
to alter the accepted basis for a Middle East settlement, which the Council must not permit. In a system
based on the rule of law, the occupier must not be
allowed to dictate to the international community his
own terms for relinquishing that occupation.

17. The concern which my delegation ‘feels over
Israel’s defiant disregard for the United Nations can
hardly be overstated. It is that kind of attitude that
does the greatest violence to the very principle of
international
organization
and to the fundamental
purposes of the Charter. The Council cannot appear to
be endorsing Israel’s continued mocking of the Organizatiqn. Israel, itself a creature of the United Nations,
evidently regards the Organization as nothing but a
necessary nuisance and the Organization’s decisions
against it as mere ritualistic
slaps on the wrist, with
which it can easily live. The members of the Council
must surely see it as their obligation to act to disabuse
Israel of any such illusion.

21. At any rate, we should not view Israel’s response to the Secretary-General in isolation. We must
consider it in the context of other statements by Prime
Minister Begin in relation to the annexation of the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights. For example, the
Israeli Prime Minister has stated that there is no one
in the entire world who can influence the Knesset to
repeal the law in question and that there is no Power
on earth that will bring about its repeal. The Israeli
response to the Secretary-General is therefore nothing
but an attempt to place an acceptable face on what is
a naked act of aggression and defiance.

18. The Government of Guyana has consistently and
emphatically
maintained the principle of respect fol
territorial integrity, the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force, the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations and mutual respect for sovereignty and the political independence of States.
We have consistently advocated that a secure and
lasting peace in the Middle East can be found only
within a framework which calls for, among other
things, Israel’s withdrawal from all territories oc-

22. My delegation is gratified indeed at the universal
condemnation which Israel’s annexation of the Golan
3

Heights has provoked, We have taken careful note of
the many statements issued by individual Governments, including the IO members of the European
Community,
and we ourselves have joined with other
non-aligned
States in expressing our condemnation
of this action by the Israelis. We believe that on the
basis of those expressions there exists a broad base
of support for firm and appropriate action by the
Council. In the view of the Guyana delegation, that
action can and should include the imposition
of a
regime of sanctions against the Israeli aggressor, in
accordance with Article 41 of the Charter.
23. Such a decision will do much more than impose
sanctions against Israel. It will represent the triumph
of principled international relations and the rule of law.
It will signify the resolute determination
of the international community to discourage the use of force in
international relations. It will underscore the principle
of territorial inviolability,
while reaffirming the Council’s primary responsibility
for international
peace
and security, It will help considerably to restore, in
-the public eye, the image of the Organization and of
the Council as political instruments relevant to the
needs of our time.

CuCllar, and most cordially wish him success in his
activities, which are fraught with responsibility, I am
pleased to assure him of my Government’s full support
as he discharges his duties.
30. The Council is meeting for the second time in :I
period of one month on the same subject: the decision
adopted by the Knesset to extend Israeli laws, jurisdiction and administration
over the region of the Golan
Heights. As is known, that decision has aroused deep
indignation
throughout the world, including within
Bulgarian
public opinion. In this connection, the
Bulgarian Telegraphic Agency published the following
statement:
“In practic.e, this act constitutes an annexation of
territory plundered as a result of aggression against
the Syrian Arab Republic, and is another demanstration of the expansionist political line of Israeli
leading circles. This decision can only be described
as a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and United Nations decisions concerning
the question of the Middle East, as well as a violation of international
law and an insolent provocation of Arab peoples and the international
community . ”

24. Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate
Guyana’s full support for the Government
of the
Syrian Arab Republic in its effort to bring an end to
the illegal occupation of its territory and to recover
its territorial integrity and ensure fullest respect fol
its independence and sovereignty.

31. I take this occasion to express once again the
active solidarity of my country with the just cause of
the Arab peoples and, in particular, our solidarity with
the Syrian Arab Republic, which was reaffirmed during
President Assad’s visit to Bulgaria last year.

25. The PRESIDENT
(ii?te~p~c~frrtio,zJi’l.,rn Rl~~sian):
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

32. The principle of the inadmissibility
of acquisition of territory by force is the corner-stone of international legal order, Israel’s violation of this principle.
in fact, constitutes an additional brutal infraction of
the most fundamental
norms governing relations
among States. The obvious illegality of this act means
that the decision taken by Israel does not and cannot
have any legal effect, a view explicitly expressed by
the Council in its resolution 497 (1981).

26. Mr,
TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria)
(interpretrrtion
,fiom F/YJ/x%): Comrade President, I should like first
to thank you and all the members of the Council for
having granted me this opportunity
to express my
Government’s position on the question on the agenda.

33. However, the Israeli authorities’ decision was
not only juridically
arbitrary; it was also a premeditated political
provocation
designed to heighten
tension in the Middle East, with all the attendant
dangerous consequences to world peace and security.
This open defiance of the international community
is
all the more insolent in view of the fact that the annexation decision was taken just as the question of the
Middle
East was being discussed in the Gene]-al
Assembly. As might have been expected, Israel has
disdainfully flouted resolution 497 (1981), which was
unanimously
adopted. That is a breach of the Security Council’s authority.

27. I hasten to convey to you, Comrade President,
my entire satisfaction at seeing you preside over the
Council’s proceedings during the month of January.
My satisfaction is all the greater since you represent
the great country with which Bulgaria enjoys the
closest fraternal relations. The fact that your country
is most faithfully practising a policy of peace and
progress, as well as your unanimously
recognized
political wisdom and diplomatic skill, will surely contribute to ensuring the Council’s discharge of its
onerous task.
28. I wish also to pay a tribute to Mr, Otunnu of
Uganda for the outstanding way in which he presided
over the Council’s proceedings during the month of
December.

34. Israel’s persistent refusal to abide by Council
resolution 497 ( 198 1) obviously stems from its policy of
fi/ir rrccompli. The logical question which arises is:
What will be the next occupied territories over which
Israel will attempt to perpetuate its domination?

29. Similarly, I should like to express warmest congratulations to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Pkrez de

4’

35. In this case, the Israeli authorities’
arrogance
is the direct result of the Camp David policy. Unfortunately, events have confirmed the judgement repeatedly expressed by the overwhelming ma.jority of the
international community,
that separate deals merely
camouflage the perpetuation of Israeli occupation of
Arab territories. We must note once again that the
Camp David accords in no way whatsoever contribute
to settling the Middle East conflict; quite the contrary, they pose additional obstacles to such a settlement.

the Mongolian People’s Republic wishes to express
its appreciation to you and to the members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to speak on
this item.
43. We are glad to see that the Council is beginning
its work this new year under the presidency of the
representative of the Soviet Union, a country with
which Mongolia has long-standing, very friendly and
close relations. I am confident that your recognized
ability, wisdom and vast experience will promote
successful work in the Council.

36. It was quite obvious that the decision of the
Knesset stemmed from United States systematic,
massive support for Israel. Obviously, Washington is
counting on Israeli expansionism in its plans to establish its supremacy in the Middle East. It therefore
comes as no surprise that reactions in certain United
States circles were inspired not so much by concern
over the new aggravation of the situation in the region
as by irritation over the fact that Israel had not consulted its protectors in advance. Apparently,
the
Israeli Government did not feel any need for such
consultation, in view of the fact that for a long time
it had been given a free hand to take action of that
sort.

44. Our delegation would also like to pay due tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for his
very able guidance of the work of the Council last
month.
45. We also take this opportunity to welcome most
sincerely Mr. Javier PCrez de Cuillar, who has been
elected to the post of Secretary-General.
We wish
him every success in his work in this important post.
46. The Council has once again been obliged to
take up a problem that has arisen as a result of illegal
actions by the Israeli authorities. For over I4 years,
Israel’s criminal activities in the occupied Arab territories and actions against the Arab people of Palestine
and sovereign States in the Middle East have been and
remain a constant threat to international peace and the
security of peoples and a source of serious concern to
the world community.

37. The latest events have proved once again that
Israel’s blustering about seeking peace and negotiations is devoid of any political and moral value.
38. In such circumstances,
we consider that the
Council should again condemn the acts of the aggressor. Israel should be compelled to abide by Council resolutions and to renounce attempts to annex the
occupied Arab territories.
Complete withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories and
the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Arab
people of Palestine: these are the indispensable conditions for the settlement of the Middle East problem.

47. The policy of “creeping” annexation carried out
by the Tel Aviv ruling circles in the occupied territories and the gangster-like raids carried out by Israeli
troops against neighbouring
Arab countries have
been frequently discussed in the United Nations and
strongly condemned by the overwhelming majority of
Member States, and each time the world community
has called on Israel to withdraw its troops from the
occupied territories and transfer those territories to the
legal authorities.

39. In the opinion of my delegation, the Council,
confronted by Israel’s refusal to respect the decision
adopted by the Council on I7 December 1981, should
discharge its duty to safeguard international peace and
security by imposing upon Israel mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

48. Just last year the Council devoted more than
one third of its meetings to matters related to acts of
aggression committed by Israel in the Middle East
region.

40. In conclusion, I should like to express my delegation’s hope that the Council, fully aware of the responsibility incumbent upon it, will adopt a decision
obliging Israel to abide by the will of the international
community, expressed in countless resolutions of the
very Council, so that peace and stability may reign
in that region of the world.

49. Nevertheless, the Zionist rCgime of Israel, in
violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, the demands contained in
numerous resolutions and generally recognized norms
of international law, not only has stubbornly continued
its occupation but is also undertaking action in the
occupied territories designed to perpetuate its dominion there.

41. The PRESIDENT
(inte~pi’cttrtic)n .fiw~ Aussitrn):
The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
42. Mr. DASHTSEREN
from Russion): Comrade

50. This was the goal of the recent decision taken
by the Knesset to extend Israeli jurisdiction
to the
Golan Heights seized from the Syrian Arab Republic
in 1967. Last year, as is known, the Zionists declared
Jerusalem the “eternal and unified capital” of Israel.

(Mongolia) finterpretotion
President, the delegation of
5

.

51. And so there can be no doubt about Tel Aviv’s
intention to annex other territories occupied by it since
1967, That is, indeed, the direction in which things are
moving.

their militant solidarity with the Syrian people in its
struggle to defend the sovereignty and territori;ll
integrity of its country against the attacks of imptrrialism and Zionism, and for the establishment
uf
lasting peace in the Middle East” 1.s~)~’S//4HZs.

52,

(iWlC.Y].

According

to The Christian

SraiPncP hdOllit(W

Of

4 January
this year, in those territories 89 Israeli
settlements have been established and another 48 are
planned.
The occupiers are resorting to such barbarous
methods as wiping out farm lands, dOSing
Off Water
sources so as to force the indigenous inhabitants to
leave their homes and seizing and expropriating their
land by force. According to press reports, the Israeli
authorities are envisaging an increase in the number
of settlers over the next four years so that they will
amount to 120,000 people.

58. The Mongolian People’s Republic has constuntlr
and strictly abided by the view that the only corrct’t
path to a lasting peace in the Middle East involves ih
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem.
and the determining condition for that is the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of a11 Isr:reti
troops from the occupied Arab territories. The who1c
course of events in the region bears witness to the
correctness of that position.
59. The Israeli authorities’ complete disregard f~lr
Council resolution 497 (198 I). demanding that Is~-:rcf
rescind its decision to extend its jurisdiction
to the
Golan Heights, is a serious test for this prestigious
body. The Mongolian delegation hopes that States
members of the Council-and
primarily the permanent
members, who bear a special responsibility
for the
maintenance of international peace and security--will
demonstrate
political will and common sense rind
that the Council will this time take the appropriate
decision.

53. This illegal occupation of other peoples’ territories can now be said to be moving on to the next
stage-annexation. And here there is a surprising consistency in the policy of the aggressors, who are confident that they will go completely unpunished. I think
everybody understands what has led to this feeling
that they will go unpunished and who it is that guarantees this. Comprehensive economic, military and
political assistance and support from the United States
of America have served and now serve as a guarantee that Israel will go unpunished, and that is tantamount to encouraging such actions.

60. In our view, that decision should be to itpply
mandatory sanctions against the aggressor, in acctl~&
ante with Chapter VII of the Charter. In this connCCtion I should like to express the hope that the permunent member that literally just a couple of days agu
hurried to take a decision to apply sanctions agitinst
another country for an action it had not taken and
stubbornly demanded that its allies also do so will this
time join the other members of the Council in the
adoption of mandatory sanctions against the aggressi\r-.

54. For its part, Israel eagerly plays the role assigned
to it by its defender-namely,
policeman in the Middle
East. With the conclusion between Washington and
Tel Aviv of the agreement on so-called strategic cooperation-envisaging
the deployment of American
heavy weaponry on Israel’s territory, the establishment of strong points for the rapid deployment force,
the participation of Israeli military units in that forcethe alliance between imperialism and Zionism has now
attained its apogee.

6 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiou
.jiwrn Rnssitrn):
The next speaker is the representative of Portcr&%&l.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

55. The aggressive intention of this anti-Arab agreement is perfectly clear and its consequences can
be extremely dangerous to the security of States in
the Near and Middle East. Nobody can therefore be
misled by the “concern” and even “condemnation”
expressed by the United States over Israel’s actions in
the Golan Heights.

62.

Mr.

MEIXNA
(Portugal) (ilZt(J/./~/.L’t11tiot1 .fh,,)l
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to
congratulate
you on your accession to the presidency of the Council, within which your eminent yuuiifications and competence have won you unanim~>~~s
respect, which increases the awareness of the irnI~>rtance of the role in this body given to your col~ntr-y
by the Charter ofthe United Nations. I should also IIke
to pay a particular tribute to Mr. Olara Otunntl
fat
the outstanding way in which he presided over the
work of the Council during the month of December,
when he so brilliantly dealt with matters of ~l:t~-;i.
mount importance whose fortunate outcome will stl I-C~Y
influence the future of the Organization.

Fwr7d7):

56. The position of the Mongolian People’s Republic
on the Middle East problem is well known, We have
strongly condemned and now strongly condemn the
aggressive actions of Tel Aviv against peace-loving
Arab countries and consistently support the just
struggle of the Arab peoples.
57. The statement of 18 December 1981 of the representative Of the Mongolian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
reads as follows, inter* (r/it/:
“The Government of the Mongolian People’s
Republic and the entire Mongolian people reaffirm

63. MY mention of those events quite
leads me to avail myself of this opportunity
6

natur-~tlly

to col;-

i
:
i
’

gratulate Mr. Javier Pirez de Cukllar, the SecretaryGeneral. His dedication and experience in international problems, so amply demonstrated
when, as
representative
of the Secretary-General,
he made
admirable efforts to stabilize so many troubled regions,
guarantee his success in the duties incumbent upon
him. Succeeding the outstanding diplomat Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, to whom we should like to express our
respect for the manner in which he discharged his
important duties and lofty tasks, he will certainly
enhance the prestige of the United Nations. At the
outset my delegation would like to assure him of its
dedicated co-operation.

laws and regulations in effect in Israel-a decision
which runs counter to international
low-is within
the context of such an evolution. Portugal, which is
linked with the States principally involved in this
conflict through a wide-ranging network of relations
based on historical and cultural ties, is following this
disquieting situation with apprehension.
69. My Government considers that it is the duty of
all the members of the international community to bend
all efforts to implement, by ensuring scrupulous respect
for the rules 0fjrl.v gentirltn and the decisions of the
Council, principles on which there is today an obvious
consensus.

64. At this time I should also like to congratulate the
representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and
Zaire on their joining the Council, which will benefit
from their contributions
as it did from the contributions made hy the representatives
of the German
Democratic Republic, Mexico, Niger, the Philippines
and Tunisia when they were members. Their merits
were widely recognized.

70. My delegation therefore appeals to the Council
to ensure that favourable conditions are established
for the observance of the principles agreed on by the
international community, which should form the basis
for a just, lasting and peaceful solution of the ArabIsraeli conflict, And, in this context, my delegation
attaches particular importance to ensuring that any
decision adopted by this organ would enlarge its
undeniable scope with increased moral authority,
which would result if it were adopted unanimously
as in the case of the Council’s most recent resolution
on this problem, the implications of which are a matte1
of predominant
concern to the international
community.

65. In the course of the work of the General Assembly, my delegation had an opportunity to emphasize the strong desire of the Portuguese Government
for a negotiated, comprehensive
and peaceful solution to the conflict in the Middle East. It pointed out
that evacuation of territories occupied since 1967 and
integral respect for internationally
recognized borders,
including the borders of the State of Israel, underlie
any just and lasting peace and constitute an essential
prerequisite for the maintenance of security in all the
States of the region.

7 I . The PRESIDENT
(intPt+pret(ition .fiom Russirrn):
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
72. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): Permit me to extend
to yen, Mr. President, the greetings of the delegation
of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan as you
preside over the proceedings of the Council during
the month of January and to wish you every success
in fulfilling your responsible duties. You represent a
nation which in the entire course of its revolutionary
era has proved to be the greatest and most reliable
friend of all peoples in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism,
alien domination and foreign occupation, and for independence, national sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The history of co-operative and
fraternal relations between our two countries provides
us with the most brilliant example of the principled
foreign policy of your great country. Your outstanding
qualities and broad experience will no doubt serve as
a very positive factor in ensuring the fruitful conduct
of this vitally important debate.

66. My delegation also drew attention to the existence
of an international
consensus which, in calling for a
peaceful solution,
implied
condemnation
of any
unilateral act that might impede or indeed prevent
concord and, in particular, postulated the condemnation of any unilateral decision susceptible of modifying
thejuridical status of the territories involved that would
be adopted in violation of the principles 0f.jll.s Rentium
and running counter to Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).
67. The existence of such a consensus was demonstrated once again when, on 17 December last, Council
resolution 497 (1981) was unanimously adopted. The
significance of that decision cannot be minimized
in view of its contents and in particular because it
revealed a concurrence of views that reflected the
feelings of the international
community
expressed
within the Organization in several resolutions adopted
in the course of the last 30 years.

73. I should like also to pay a warm tribute to your
distinguished
predecessor Mr. Olara Otunnu of
Uganda, who very ably and wisely guided the Council’s
work last month, a turbulent one.

68. It therefore seems undeniable that such precision
in defining principles and such scrupulousness in
making judgements would impart particular meaning to
the current situation. The injunction that the Council
unanimously addressed to the occupying Power to
rescind the decison to extend to the Golan territory

74. May I also seize this opportunity to congratulate
most sincerely Mr. Javier PCrez de CuCllar on his
election to the high post of Secretary-General.
His
7

75. our felicitations also go to the newly elected
members of the Council, to whom we wish every
success.

accomplices. headed by the United States. from isolation and total disgrace. It is also a calculated pressure
to draw other Arab countries into that infamous and
bloody deal, It is a dangerous and adventurous
move
which comes in the wake of other Zionist plans like
declaring the Holy City of Jerusalem as the so-culled
eternal capital of Israel, the continuous aggression
against Lebanon, the attack on Iraq, and the policy
of brutally suppressing
the Palestine
resistance
movement.

76, The Council is meeting for the second time in less
than a month to consider one of the gravest and most
blatant manifestations of acts of aggression COmmitted bY the Israeli Zionists, an act that sparked the
strong and vigorous condemnation of the vast majority of nations.

82, At a previous meeting, the Council unanimously
declared null and void the Israeli decision with regard
to the Syrian Golan Heights. The Council agreed to
reconvene in the event of Israel’s failure to rescind its
illegal decision in order to consider measures to ensure
the implementation
of the Council’s resolution
[/*(Js~J-

wide experience, high competence and vast knowledge of the Organization’s work which are so evident
in his pel.son give us every confidence that wc can hope
for a more efficient system and an enhanced role fol
the United
Nations in solving problems facing the
international community.

lrrtion 497 (lY8/)1.

77. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan strongly believes that the action taken by
Israel on 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration
on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights constitutes an unequivocal act of
aggression under the provisions of Article 39 of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as General Assembly resolution 33 14 (XXIX). It further believes that
the Knesset resolution and the proclamation of the
Israeli Prime Minister are in complete defiance of the
Charter and international law, and thus are null and
void.
78. It must be categorically stated that, were it not
for the overt and covert encouragement and support
of the United States, the Israeli authorities could not
continue with their gross violations of the Charter and
numerous United Nations resolutions, as well as
breaches of internationally
accepted norms and
principles. It is not accidental that this fresh antiArab step was taken soon after the signing of the
American-Israeli
so-called memorandum
of mutual
understanding in the sphere of strategic co-operation
and the arrival of Washington’s emissary in the Middle
East.
79. The signing of that agreement provided the
world with fresh evidence of the fact that Washington
and Tel Aviv are acting in a united aggressive front,
the aim of which is to continue the occupation of the
Arab territories and the usurpation of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.
80. The Washington-Tel
Aviv military
aI1iance
which is taking shape now is a direct product of the
very same Camp David process advertised as the
beginning of the “peace era” in the Middle East. The
promised “peace”, however, has turned in practice
into the building UP of an American military presence
in the region and the growth of Israel’s aggressiveness and expansionism,
81 I This ignominious, wicked and childish manoeuvre
is an attempt to save the Camp David process and its

83. The Israeli representative lost no time in declaring
that his Government could not and did not accept
that resolution 12319th n7ecfing,
prrtt. 371, and GIUS
proved the lawlessness and arrogance of his rkgime
for the umpteenth time.
84. The plenary meeting of the non-aligned countries
held on 5 January 1982 expressed its deepest concern
and indignation at Israel’s defiance of Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and General Assembly
resolution 36/226 B. The meeting further expressed its firm
conviction that the international
community
should
immediately
apply the necessary sanctions in conformity with Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations [set S/14829, m17es].
85. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of
Afghanistan, while strongly condemning Israel for its
provocative action, firmly associates itself with the
demand of the international community that all necessary measures, including the application of sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter, should be adopted
to put an end to the expansionist ambitions of Israel.
86. In conclusion, on behalf of the people and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghnnistan, we reiterate once again our firm and strong
solidarity with and unreserved support for the Government and the people of friendly and fraternal Syria.
87. I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the
members of the Council for affording us the oppor-.
tunity of expressing our views on the item under
discussion.
88. The PRESIDENT
(ini~~pt’L’tlrtiorz.pon?
Rtrssicrrl):
The next speaker is the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, Mr. Clovis Maksoud.
At its
2322nd meeting, the Council decided to extend
iin
invitation to him to participate in this debate un&l
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to rnuk!e
his statement.

89. Mr. MAKSOUD:
The various statements that
have been made by member States and delegations
constitute a very strong identification
with the need
to preserve international
law, the credibility of the
United Nations, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
90, In view of the immense support and solidarity
that have been manifested during the deliberations
of this body, I had no intention of making an additional
statement. However, it has become necessary to do so
because of the most recent development in the occupied Golan Heights. It has been reported that
Colonel Allen, Deputy Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
has stated that it is the intention of the Israeli occupying
authority to transform the military checkpoints into a
so-called international border; that, indeed, Israel has
taken the necessary measures to begin such a transformation. It has also been reported that the Deputy
Chief of Staff of UNDOF is asking aloud whether this
means that that transformation is an attempt by Israel
to extend its sovereignty, thus crippling the United
Nations mechanism so that it will be unable to perform
the functions that have been laid down for it.
91. This new development testifies to Israel’s utter
*contempt-and
not only for United Nations resolutions: that contempt is well documented and recorded.
But it testifies to the fact that while the Council is
seized of the question, Israel is unfolding its own
annexationist designs without any-even
minimalcourtesy in regard to the deliberations of the Council.
That is an addition to Israel’s usual contempt for
United Nations resolutions; a new quality of contempt
has been added to and has pre-empted its usual contempt. This is contempt not only for the resolutions but
also for the proceedings of the Council. This contempt
has given rise to the notion that whatever resolution
is adopted, Israel’s counterfeit legalism is the only
legalism and that whatever the international commu-

nity determines to be legitimacy
consequence.

is irrelevant and of no

92. In view of this qualitative change in the manipulation of what might appear to be minor legalisms, in
the service of substantive annexation, what is now
involved is not only open contempt for United Nations
resolutions-and
particularly for Council resolution
497 (1981), which declared all of Israel’s measures
null and void-but
also new measures which are in
total contradistinction
to the measures of the Council
and to its resolution 497 (1981).
93. Now, we are being advised to tone down, to
measures” as prescribed by
redefine “appropriate
resolution 497 (198 I). We are being requested to be
more moderate so that we can achieve a broad consensus resolution. But with due respect for the need
for flexibility
in international
negotiations, and for
achieving a broad consensus that reflects the international community’s determination to penalize such
an obvious violator of the Charter and international
law, we must ask this question of the Security Council: In view of this new defiance, this new legalistic
twist, this new act of piracy, this new consecration
of annexation, this new dimension of contempt for
the proceedings as well as the resolutions of the Council-in
other words, this proven demonstration
of
Israeli contempt-what
kind of advice should be
given on the nature of the Council’s consensus and its
resolution?
94. We think that this is a most dangerous development which accelerates the tension and the threat to
peace in the region. We expect this body, being seized
of the matter, to realize that what Israel is doing is
escalating further the dangers inherent in its act of
annexation. We hope that this body will take this
development very seriously in view of the inherent
dangers that it poses for peace in the region.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr8s
des venues. New York ou Cenive,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

sent en vente darn les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Lithu

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

R&60989-April

1%9--2.0~0
