xm
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE JOINT SECOND AND THIRD
COMMITIEE AND THE FIFTH COMMITfEE, MEETING JOINTLY
CONTENTS
Page

533 (VI). Co-ordination between the United Nations and the specialized agencies: concentration of effort and resources (4 February 1952) (items 11, 28)
534 (VI). Co-ordination between the United Nations and the specialized agencies: programme of conferences at Headquarters and Geneva ( 4 February
1952) (items 11, 28).................................................
533 (VI). Co-ordination between the United Nations and the spr,cialized agencies: concentration of effort and resources

31

32

ized agencies to these reports as well as to the views
expressed by Members during the sixth session of the
General Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

A

B

The General Assembly,
Reaffimin[J the need for unremitting efforts by the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to ensure
that the international resources devoted to economic and
social work should be concentrated on tasks of primary
importance,
Cognizant of the scope and urgency of the task of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies in promoting higher standards of living and conditions of
economic and social progress and development,
1. N ates the action taken by the Economic and Social Council at its twelfth and thirteenth sessions, by
its regional and functional commissions and by the specialized agencies, to implement General Assembly resolution 413 (V) of 1 December 1950, in particular by
reviewing their 1952 programmes, using the criteria
recommended by the Economic and Social Council ;
2. Expresses the hope that further development by
the Council of procedures adopted in the current year
may increase the efficiency of the economic and social
activities of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, through measures of economy and concentration of effort ;
3. Takes note u.rith satisfaction of the relevant sections of the report 1 of the Economic and Social Council
for 1951 dealing with "concentration of effort and resources" and the reports 2 of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions dealing
with the administrative budgets of the specialized
agencies;
4. Invites the attention of the Secretary-General,
of the Economic and Social Council and of the special-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 413 (V) of 1 December 1950
in which it requested the Economic and Social Council
to indicate, when new projects are adopted, which current projects may be deferred, modified or eliminated
to ensure that the economic and social work of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies will be
carried on most effectively,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 402 B (XIII) of 17 September 1951 decided to place on the provisional agenda of its fifteenth
session an item entitled "Adoption of United Nations
priority programmes in the economic and social fields",
1. Requests the Secretary-General, with due regard
to normal financial procedures, to continue to assist the
Economic and Social Council to discharge its obligations under General Assembly resolution 413 (V) and
Council resolution 402 B (XIII) by making to the
Council and to its functional and regional commissions suitable suggestions as regards priorities and the
co-ordination of programmes ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, when presenting
estimates of the financial implications of a project in
accordance with rule 33 of the rules of procedure of
the Economic and Social Council, to give an estimate
of the time required to complete the project;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
its functional and regional commissions, in considering
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 413
(V), to focus attention upon the results achieved in
relation to expenditure for economic and social activities and to indicate the duration of its authoriution of
each proj~ct so as to ensure that no short-term activity
becomes a continuing or permanent activity without a
thorough examination of the size, efficiency and other
relevant factors of the service concerned;

• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
S•pplement No. 3.
'Ibid., AKnexes, agenda item 28, documents A/1956 and
A/1971.

31

32

General Assembly-Sixtb Se11ion

4. Commends to the consideration of the specialized
agencies, so far as their constitutional processes will
permit, the adoption of similar procedures.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

C
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council reso_lution 402 B (XIII) of 17 September 1951 concerning
the concentration of effort and resources of the United
Nations in the economic and social fields,
Recognizing that the formulation of policy and the
financial and budgetary processes must be closely coordinated if effective concentration of effort and resources is to be achieved,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare as an
annex to his annual budget estimates an analysis, by
fields of activity and by budget sections, of the estimated cost during that year of the economic and social
activities of the United Nations; and to circulate this
analysis to the Economic and Social Council at the beginning of its regular session immediately preceding
the next regular session of the General Assembly;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to review its
procedures for examining the relative priorities and
financial implications of new projects under consideration, in such a way that the Council may consider such
projects not only in their substance but also in their
relationship to existing activities in the field concerned,
thereby promoting establishment of a balanced and
realistic work programme for the future and facilitating subsequent consideration by the General Assembly
of the related budgetary appropriations.;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as soon as possible after the regular session of the Economic and
Social Council immediately preceding the next regular
session of the General Assembly, to submit to that session of the General Assembly such supplementary information relating to the decisions of the Council and

to the priorities which it may have established as will
facilitate consideration by the General Assembly of
the related budgetary appropriations;
4. Recommends that the General Assembly defer
consideration of the sections of the budget estimates
relating to economic and social activities until the supplementary information concerning the decisi~ns of th_e
Economic and Social Council has been submitted to 1t
and reported upon by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

534 (VI). Co-ordination between the United Natio111 and the specialized agencies: pro•
gramme of conferences at Headquarters and
Geneva
The General Assembly,
Mindful of its co-ordinating responsibilities set forth
in Articles 58, 60 and 63 of the'Charter,
Having received with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on co-ordination of services in
Geneva, 3
Having noted in particular the importance of fixing
a basic pattern of United Nations conference activity
in Geneva which would lead to the most effective utilization of the available facilities at Geneva and Headquarters and, possibly, to saving on the total expenditure of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the executive heads of the specialized agencies and
the principal organs of the United Nations concerned,
to prepare such an annual conference pattern for submission to the next regular session of the General
Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
1
See Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/C.2&3/103-A/C.5/460.
