S/2020/339

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 28 April 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with
the video-teleconference convened on Friday, 24 April 2020. Statements were also
delivered by His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Glauk Konjufca.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the briefing
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
President of the Security Council

20-06190 (E) 300420 050520

*2006190*

S/2020/339

Annex I
Statement by Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Allow me to start by expressing condolences to everyone in our Mission area
whose lives have been so affected by the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. The
pandemic has been an unprecedented challenge for Kosovo and for the region and
a reminder that such challenges can be resolved only through regional cooperation.
The human toll has continued to rise in Kosovo and throughout the region.
In Kosovo, the public health authorities, in consultation with the World Health
Organization and other international bodies, reacted swiftly to put in place measures
to curtail the spread of the disease. Those included closing borders and boundaries,
broad restrictions on movement, the closure of schools and many private businesses
and the isolation of severely affected municipalities. With its smaller population
and more limited resources, Kosovo remains particularly vulnerable to the threat
of a wider outbreak or a significant increase in critical cases. Even as heroic efforts
are being made by medical personnel, the health-care resources of Kosovo are
stretched thin.
In addition, the immense economic and social burden of the health crisis on
Kosovo’s fragile economy is just beginning to be felt. This month, the International
Monetary Fund approved a $56.5-million emergency loan to Kosovo, targeting the
health-care sector as well as other sectors affected by the crisis, while the European
Union (EU) has just pledged some €100 million in favourable loans to help stabilize
the economy and overcome balance of payments difficulties. Some Member States
have also begun to increase their direct support. More will surely be needed, along
with strong monitoring, transparency and accountability measures to ensure that
assistance reaches the people most in need.
International cooperation has been galvanized on the ground. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations
Kosovo team are cooperating closely with the local public health authorities and
with all our international partners. As the Council will expect, UNMIK is adapting
its work, and we stand together with the people of Kosovo in fighting the COVID-19
pandemic. The Mission has revised its programmatic work for 2020. Among
other adjustments, it has been providing direct support to the municipalities and
communities that are most vulnerable. Our online platforms and communications
team have been cooperating with local media and partners to produce and disseminate
health information, in partnership with the United Nations Kosovo team. I have
personally been in contact with leaders in the region, including the Prime Minister
of Albania, Mr. Rama, and the President of Serbia, Mr. Vučić, to solicit their help in
promoting an inclusive and unified response. UNMIK and UN-Women are ramping
up ongoing support to shelters and other responses to domestic violence, with
reported cases having risen by 36 per cent during March. We are closely monitoring
the human rights implications arising from this pandemic, including the right to
privacy. We have also taken all requisite measures to address the health and safety of
Mission personnel, with, to date, no cases of the COVID-19 illness among Mission
or any other United Nations staff in Kosovo.
As experience shows everywhere, success in defeating the COVID-19 virus
requires, at a minimum, first, a focused Government; secondly, the mobilization of
people and resources; and, thirdly, strong leadership. It is an unfortunate feature of the
present circumstances in Kosovo that political divisions have distracted the attention
of many leaders away from the health crisis. These divisions have served to reduce
2/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

public trust in the political leadership during a time of heightened public anxiety
and uncertainty. Since the close of the reporting period, the political landscape in
Pristina has been characterized by polarization among parties and competing claims
to power between factions. This has been manifested in sharp disagreements both
within the governing coalition and between the Government and the President on
a range of issues, from the response to the pandemic to the lifting of the tariff on
Serbian goods and the dialogue with Belgrade.
The conflicting agendas culminated in a vote of no confidence against the
coalition Government on 25 March, just as the COVID-19 crisis was striking. A
caretaker Government is in place, but, as I speak to the Council today, the President
has called for a new Government to be formed by an alternative majority, while
the Prime Minister has called this action unlawful, vowing to challenge it in the
Constitutional Court. Whatever next steps may ensue, it is clear at this stage that
popular discontent has been palpable for weeks. It is essential that the political
uncertainties not interfere with non-partisan action to fight the pandemic.
This internal political instability may lead Kosovo to face additional challenges
in joining with broader efforts to confront the crisis. However, I wish equally to
highlight numerous examples of positive cross-community and cross-boundary
coordination when it has been most needed. Health officials in Pristina, in northern
Kosovo and in Belgrade have recently established improved communication and
coordination, which was missing at the onset of this crisis. Essential items have
moved more freely across the boundary, while the Serbian Government recently
donated a consignment of testing kits to Pristina’s health authorities, regardless of
a few public figures in Pristina choosing to react negatively along nationalist lines.
The solidarity shown between leading medical professionals and officials across
ethnic and political divides gives hope that cooperation can still increase as the rate
of infections also continues to rise.
The removal of the 100 per cent tariff on imports from Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina for an initial period, coupled with the introduction of reciprocity
measures vis-à-vis Belgrade, has been welcomed by some, although viewed as
insufficient by others. Irrespectively, this decision marked a step towards resuming
more regular commercial relations and a return towards the principles of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement. It is also an important signpost towards a restart
of the political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. I note that the European
Network of Transmission System Operators has voted to endorse an agreement with
the Kosovo operator KOSTT, which is an important achievement for advancing energy
efficiency in the region and for implementing the EU-facilitated energy agreement.
Although there is as yet no clear road map for continuing the dialogue, there
are at least signals that attention continues to be focused upon the issue even as the
COVID-19 emergency takes precedence. I welcome the appointment by the European
Union of a dedicated Special Representative charged with advancing the BelgradePristina dialogue. Recent joint infrastructure and transportation initiatives, launched
under the auspices of the United States Government’s Special Presidential Envoy,
marked another example of the practical engagement that is possible when there is
mutual political will and international support. Looking farther ahead, a coordinated
international approach in support of the EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade will be essential, and this remains our best hope for reaching a
comprehensive agreement and for sustaining peace.
This crisis has tested the strengths and weaknesses of Member States and
territories the world over. In closing, I wish to pay tribute to those leaders and
professionals on both sides of the boundary who are supporting one another in
fighting the pandemic. I urge political leaders to follow their example and to focus on
20-061903/31

S/2020/339

unifying their energy while putting personal and political agendas aside. UNMIK,
the United Nations Kosovo team and our partners will continue devoting our own
collective resources and knowledge to help. I take this opportunity to call for further
direct support to Kosovo to address its very urgent health and social welfare needs.
As the Secretary-General has stressed, only through solidarity and unity of effort
can we succeed in meeting and overcoming this enormous challenge.
I thank all members of the Council for their continuing support for UNMIK.

4/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex II
Statement by Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his briefing and welcome the presence of both Ministers for Foreign Affairs.
Let me first turn to the recent political developments in Kosovo. In the interests
of its people, we call on political leaders to show unity and cooperation. Political
stability is key to keeping the country on the reform track and for Kosovo to pursue
its European aspirations. We particularly underline the progress required with regard
to the rule of law.
The urgency imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) should inspire
the political leadership to put its political differences aside and to provide Kosovo’s
citizens the protection and assistance needed under the current circumstances. At
the end of March, the European Union (EU) reallocated €37 million for emergency
support to its partners in the Western Balkans, and €5 million in COVID-19
emergency support has been awarded to Kosovo. A further €61 million for economic
recovery measures and loans are awaiting approval.
The efficient allocation of these and other resources is a considerable
undertaking. It necessitates a stable political environment that fosters bold and
inclusive policymaking, with special attention paid to vulnerable groups. We call on
the relevant actors to prioritize services for the prevention of and response to genderbased violence, given the worldwide reported increase in domestic violence, affecting
in particular women and girls. We reiterate the call of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on all Kosovo institutions and stakeholders to uphold human
rights and to leave no one behind in the fight against COVID-19.
The struggle against the virus and its impact benefits from tangible regional
cooperation without ulterior motives. We welcome the pragmatic approach taken
by the Serbian and Kosovo authorities on health issues during the current crisis,
facilitated by prior agreements under the EU dialogue. We encourage the parties to
continue and further expand these efforts for the benefit of their populations.
Also, the recent decision of the Kosovo Government to lift the customs
tariffs on goods imported from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has produced
tangible results on the ground as the flow of goods has resumed. We hope that this
first positive gesture is the prelude to further confidence-building initiatives and the
resumption of the EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We call
for the implementation of the existing agreements concluded in the framework of
the EU-facilitated dialogue and welcome the recent appointment of Miroslav Lajčák
as EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and other Western
Balkans regional issues. The EU remains resolved to end the current status quo
between Pristina and Belgrade. We invite both parties to engage with the EU Special
Representative with a view to reaching a comprehensive normalization of relations in
the form of a legally binding agreement.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our engagement in favour of transitional
justice. Contradictory narratives about Kosovo’s past continue to create division.
Only by truthfully facing its past will Kosovo be able to consolidate lasting peace and
reconciliation. In their efforts to achieve truth, justice and reparations for past human
rights violations, it is important that the authorities consult and engage with civil
society and grass-roots organizations. Victims’ needs must be placed at the centre of
the process, with special attention to the plight of missing persons and their families.
20-061905/31

S/2020/339

Annex III
Statement by Mr. Yao Shaojun, Minister Counsellor of China to
the United Nations
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin for
his briefing. I also thank Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his attendance and for his statement. I also listened
carefully to the statement made by Mr. Konjufca.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for the settlement of the
Kosovo issue. China has always maintained that the best way to resolve the Kosovo
issue is for the parties concerned to reach a mutually acceptable solution through
dialogue and consultation, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions. We
welcome the recent positive developments in this regard.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia. We
understand its legitimate concerns with regard to the Kosovo issue and commend
its efforts to find a political solution thereto. We hope that Kosovo will demonstrate
the necessary political will, effectively lift its unilateral tariff measures and work
towards the resumption of dialogue between the two parties.
Reconciliation and harmonious coexistence among all ethnicities in Kosovo
are in the fundamental interests of peoples from all communities. At this critical
time, when the world is facing the extraordinary challenge of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, cooperation and solidarity are more imperative than
ever. China hopes that all parties concerned will put the interests of the people first,
refrain from any rhetoric or actions that could complicate or escalate the situation,
and create conditions for the proper settlement of the Kosovo issue.
Against that backdrop, it is important for the Security Council to remain seized
of the Kosovo issue. China commends Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for their active efforts in bringing about a political solution to the Kosovo
issue. We also appreciate the efforts of UNMIK to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
China firmly supports the Mission in the diligent implementation of its mandate and
the playing of its important role. We call on the relevant parties to fully ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and to create conditions conducive
to the implementation of their mandate within agreed parameters.

6/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex IV
Statement by Mr. José Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic
We thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing and the
commendable work that his team continues to do to fully implement their mandate
on the ground even in the current circumstances. We also thank His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić and Mr. Glauk Konjufca for their statements today.
At the outset, we would like to echo the call of the Secretary-General for
a global ceasefire and his invitation to the world to focus on the fight against the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In this regard, we take note of Belgrade’s recent
declaration of its willingness to cooperate with Pristina to combat the pandemic.
We would like to congratulate the citizens of Kosovo on the success of their
recent legislative elections, with the highest participation ever recorded for a general
election in the country, giving rise to a democratic and peaceful transition. At the
same time, we regret the subsequent impasse that caused the fall of the current
coalition Government. We acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the elected
authorities aimed at forming a new Government and trying to develop an agenda
that reflects the need of the people of Kosovo to move forward, including the need
to normalize relations with Belgrade. However, we urge the political authorities in
the country to take current conditions into account and implement the measures
necessary to fight COVID-19 before setting the date for the next elections.
We take note of the decision taken in Pristina on 1 April with regard to tariffs.
We also note that this measure included removing 100 per cent of tariffs on goods
from Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is vitally important that the parties move forward
with measures that could help accelerate the resumption of negotiations between
Pristina and Belgrade, taking into account the current circumstances.
We believe that cooperation and the promotion of measures to build trust
continue to represent an important pillar in accomplishing the normalization of
relations. In this regard, we wish to acknowledge the cooperation shown by the
Government, civil society and the international community in support of these
confidence-building measures.
We support the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in collaboration with the United
Nations team in Kosovo, particularly those designed to empower youth, women
and civil society and those aimed at promoting multilingualism, intercommunity
dialogue and respect for human rights. We take this opportunity to congratulate
Ms. Vjosa Osmani-Sadriu on being elected Chair of the Assembly of Kosovo. She is
the first woman elected to this post. We also extend congratulations to all the women
recently elected to various positions.
It is appropriate to mention the important role a reliable justice system plays
in strengthening the rule of law. We would therefore like to highlight the efforts
made by the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) Case
Monitoring Unit in strengthening access to justice and improving the independence
of the judiciary.
Finally, we encourage the parties to uphold their commitments pursuant to the
Brussels Agreement and act in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). At the same
time, we reiterate our support and appreciation for the work carried out in Kosovo by
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and EULEX in pursuit of building peace.
20-061907/31

S/2020/339

Annex V
Statement of Mr. Gert Auväärt, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations
We would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. We would also like to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Glauk
Konjufca, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their statements.
Estonia commends Mr. Tanin in particular for the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2020/255) and for leading the work of UNMIK, which has helped advance the
democratization of Kosovo and promoted human rights. We also appreciate UNMIK’s
support for women’s participation in decision-making processes and for initiatives
targeting youth and the fight against gender-based violence. During the critical time
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, we commend the positive actions
taken by UNMIK, including the donation of medical equipment to the country’s
Ministry of Health.
We would like stress that the parliamentary no-confidence vote has further
complicated the political situation in Kosovo during the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Political stability should be restored as soon as possible, and all political actors must
work together to ensure that citizens receive the medical assistance and economic
support they need. We therefore call on political and institutional leaders in Kosovo
to unite their efforts to mitigate the social and economic impact of COVID-19.
We hereby highlight the contribution made by the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to help Kosovo, especially during these difficult
times. Recently, for example, EULEX helped to build the capacity of security bodies
within the institutions of the Kosovo Correctional Service by donating information
technology equipment to assist its staff in holding virtual meetings.
The normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo is the key to
regional stability, and the dialogue between them should resume after the pandemic
is over. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Miroslav Lajčák as European Union
Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other Western
Balkan regional issues at the beginning of this month and wish him much success in
his endeavours.
We commend the decision taken by the Kosovo Government to lift the
customs tariffs on imports from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is an
important first step towards the resumption of the dialogue. We are also glad that
the President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, has affirmed his readiness to fully
cooperate with the Pristina authorities in responding to the outbreak and helping
the people of Kosovo. As time passes and as both countries continue to demonstrate
actions of good faith, the challenges faced by Kosovo and Serbia will hopefully be
increasingly addressed in the context of the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union (EU), which remains an essential requirement in order for each to advance on
its respective European paths.
With regard to Kosovo’s EU integration path, we look forward to Kosovo’s
continued implementation of the Stabilization and Association Agreement, which
is also important to the completion of further reforms in support of socioeconomic
development, the rule of law, and the fight against corruption and organized crime.
Accordingly, as strong cooperation with EULEX becomes increasingly prevalent in
due course, we would welcome the strategic review of UNMIK.

8/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Finally, we wish to express the hope that the plan proposed by President Macron
and Chancellor Merkel to host a summit meeting between Serbia and Kosovo in
Paris, with the participation of both parties’ leaders and EU High Representative
Borrell, will come to fruition.
As we face the global health crisis presented by COVID-19, let us stand together
in solidarity, unity and compassion, in line with the Secretary-General’s appeal.

20-061909/31

S/2020/339

Annex VI
Statement by Mr. Wadid Benaabou, Deputy Political Coordinator
at the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. I also welcome the participation in this videoteleconference of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia and of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo.
Concerning Kosovo, one of France’s utmost priorities is the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, within the framework of the dialogue
conducted under the leadership of the European Union (EU). That objective is our
compass, and I would like to make two remarks in that respect.
First, France welcomes the appointment on 3 April of Miroslav Lajčák as
the European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue. We
fully support mediation by the European Union, given that the dispute is a European
security issue. We call on the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia to engage with Mr. Lajčák.
Secondly, we welcome the announcement on 1 April by the caretaker
Government of Kosovo of the full suspension of the 100 per cent tariffs on goods
from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is an important step in the right direction.
The flow of goods between Serbia and Kosovo has restarted, which is an important
development. We encourage both sides to take further steps to enable the resumption
of the EU-led dialogue.
We are aware that the pursuit of that objective is taking place in a difficult
context owing to the mobilization of all resources for the fight against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 crisis nevertheless shows that
cooperation is the best way to fight against common challenges and, in that respect,
I welcome the cooperation on the ground between Belgrade and Pristina to fight the
pandemic and hope that it will help rebuild trust between the parties. In addition,
bearing in mind the political situation in Kosovo, we call on all stakeholders to set
aside their political differences and prioritize the fight against COVID-19.
In addition, I reiterate France’s support for the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, which works tirelessly to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region. Its work
in bringing communities closer together and promoting the women, peace and
security agenda is essential and must be commended. Those efforts must continue,
in conjunction with the initiatives of other regional and international actors, in
particular the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.
France is convinced that Serbia and Kosovo have a shared European future.
In order to build that future, we will continue to support the reforms needed to
consolidate the rule of law and socioeconomic development. In support of the EU-led
mediation, we will ramp up our efforts to facilitate the conclusion of a comprehensive,
final and legally binding agreement between the two parties, which will contribute
to the lasting stabilization of the Western Balkans.

10/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex VII
Statement by Mr. Jürgen Schulz, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations
The last few weeks have changed the world. We are all struggling with
the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. That also applies to the
countries of the Western Balkans. We are encouraged by the way Kosovo’s caretaker
Government is managing the current pandemic. They have taken swift and successful
action to limit the spread of the coronavirus and mitigate the effects of the crisis
on the country. We call on all actors and decision-makers in the country to work
together in that regard. What Kosovo requires now is stability and for all actors to act
responsibly and in the interest of Kosovo’s citizens. We commend the cross-border
cooperation between the caretaker Government of Kosovo and the Government of
Serbia to fight the health crisis together. It is encouraging proof that progress is
possible when all work towards the same goal. That spirit of collaboration should be
a positive example of resolving differences.
The unresolved relationship between Kosovo and Serbia remains a source of
bilateral tensions, an obstacle in the everyday lives of the citizens of both countries
and a stumbling block on both Kosovo’s and Serbia’s paths to the European Union
(EU). It is clear that progress in Kosovo-Serbia relations is urgently needed. The
goal must be a comprehensive, legally binding agreement that is sustainable, enables
both countries to become members of the EU and contributes to regional stability.
That, in turn, will require well-structured negotiations with significant input from
the European Union as the facilitator of the dialogue. In that context, we very
much welcome the recent appointment of the new EU Special Representative for
the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, and look forward to closely
working with him.
We also welcome the Kosovo Government’s lifting of tariffs on goods from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina as of 1 April. In the first three weeks since
the lifting, trade has been flowing freely across the border. It was the necessary
step by the Kosovar side to resume the EU-facilitated dialogue. Existing grievances
concerning, for example, non-tariff trade barriers should be settled in the framework
of the dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The EU has offered its support.
We call on both sides to further build confidence, which includes halting
Serbia’s de-recognition campaign. It also includes adopting conciliatory rhetoric
towards one another, as well as transparent communication towards constituencies
on why finding a comprehensive agreement is in their mutual interest.
We continue to support the efforts in Kosovo to adopt and implement a
survivor-centred approach to addressing conflict-related sexual violence, in line
with resolution 2467 (2019). In that regard, we welcome the ongoing work of the
Kosovar Government commission responsible for the verification and recognition of
the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, which has so far granted
survivor status to 785 applicants, including 758 women and 27 men. We call on the
Kosovo institutions to further intensify their work on empowering women survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence from different communities to overcome isolation,
contribute to the well-being of their families and elevate their status and role within
their community.
At the same time, it is essential that women participate meaningfully and
equally in the political process. We call upon the EU Special Representative to
include women and civil society in the Dialogue and on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to mainstream gender issues across all their work
and policies.
20-0619011/31

S/2020/339

Let me conclude with a practical example for the need and benefit of closer
regional cooperation. Together with our French partners, we have initiated a
regional road map for the Western Balkans to strengthen the control of small arms
that are all too readily available in the region. We are encouraged by the progress
achieved both at the national level in building new capacities and at the regional
level in strengthening cross-border cooperation and coordination. The ministerial
conference chaired by the German and French Ministers for Foreign Affairs on
31 January reaffirmed the strong commitment of the entire region to making that
advance a success and to solving the problem of illicitly circulating weapons in the
Western Balkans in a lasting way.

12/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex VIII
Statement by Mr. Muhsin Syihab, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations
On behalf of my delegation, I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I would also like to welcome the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dačić.
I would further like to join others in expressing our concern over the recent
developments in the field. Today, I would like to bring the following three points to
the attention of the Council.
First is the need to resume dialogue immediately. It is regrettable that the
European Union-facilitated dialogue is at a standstill. Any peaceful avenue to resume
talks should be explored by all stakeholders. The highest political figures should
demonstrate commitment to dialogue so as to convince their constituents that they
are serious about peace. There will be no progress in combatting organized crime and
corruption or in advancing economic development without first resuming dialogue.
We condemn the incidents of desecration and vandalization of religious sites
of cemeteries, which are among the negative impacts of lack of dialogue. This should
be taken very seriously.
Secondly, I turn to the important role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in maintaining stability in the
region. Indonesia commends UNMIK’s multiple approaches to engaging grassroots
communities through capacity-building, roundtables and workshops. Its support in
the Working Group on Persons Unaccounted for in Relation to the Events in Kosovo
provides a bridge to mend the wounds of conflict.
UNMIK also deserves the recognition of the Council for becoming the first
peacekeeping operation to obtain the ISO 9001:2015 quality management standard
for end-to-end mission support field operations. This is a clear confirmation that
UNMIK’s operations are client-oriented, transparent and accountable, and serves as
a testament to a desirable performance culture.
My third and last point concerns coronavirus disease (COVID-19) prevention
measures. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/255) highlights the fact that
authorities in Pristina declared a public health emergency in the region as the number
of confirmed cases rose. As we know, this global pandemic draws attention to the
need for cooperation and to protect the vulnerable. Working with neighbours plays
a vital role in managing, containing and eliminating the pandemic. It is therefore
critical that the authorities in Pristina start to work together with neighbouring
communities to address this issue promptly. We call for unity of action in addressing
COVID-19 and its potential security-related impact so to ensure that the situation
does not deteriorate.
If there is a lesson to be drawn from the current global pandemic, it is that we
must work seriously on achieving unity and peace worldwide. It is time to put aside
all the past resentments and seek to live as a single human heart — one heart that
beats for the single cause of peace for each nation and all people.

20-0619013/31

S/2020/339

Annex IX
Statement by Mr. Abdou Abarry, Permanent Representative of the
Niger to the United Nations
I begin by extending my warm welcome to Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Glauk Konjufca,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, who joined us this morning.
Let me also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), for his precise and detailed briefing on the activities of the Mission.
My delegation welcomes the holding of early parliamentary elections in
Kosovo on 6 October 2019, which, according to local and international observers,
were held in good conditions despite incidents in some localities.
However, we deplore the stalemate in the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade, despite the tireless efforts of regional and international actors. The
resumption of dialogue, with mutual concessions aimed at removing all obstacles
to negotiations, would contribute to the normalization of relations between the
two parties.
The security situation in Kosovo, marked by incidents targeting religious sites
and cemeteries and by terrorist activities, some of the perpetrators of which had been
repatriated from Syria, deserves special attention.
We welcome the efforts of the International Organization for Migration,
in cooperation with UNMIK and the Division of Prevention and Reintegration
of the Kosovo Ministry of Internal Affairs, to establish guidelines for assessing
reintegration needs and building the capacity of local and central authorities.
The return of the communities of Kosovo, reconciliation and community
relations are dynamics that require the support of the international community —
first and foremost the United Nations. In this regard, UNMIK, in partnership with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Kosovo
Ministry for Communities and Return, has initiated a series of coordination meetings
with a view to addressing the challenges related to internally displaced persons
and the voluntary return process through enhanced cooperation and institutional
coordination. This process, which includes local and central authorities as well as
civil society organizations, should be encouraged. That is why I call for international
solidarity in support of the trust fund, established at the recommendation of the
UNMIK Commission on Human Rights, to assist communities suffering from
lead poisoning.
Efforts to promote security and stability in Kosovo and the region will be
in vain if they are not accompanied by measures to consolidate the rule of law and
promote human rights.
First, with regard to the consolidation of the rule of law, the indictment of
persons allegedly guilty of war crimes against the civilian population in some
municipalities is commendable in many respects. The same is true of the public
consultations involving UNMIK, civil society, academics and local communities to
discuss the modalities for the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission.
Secondly, with regard to the promotion of human rights, capacity-building of
the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo and the Kosovo Agency of Statistics have
made it possible to apply a human rights policy in the collection, analysis and use
of data. This approach has contributed to improved monitoring and evaluation of
human rights progress and implementation of commitments under the 2030 Agenda
14/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

for Sustainable Development in a manner consistent with international human
rights law.
Furthermore, UNMIK’s efforts to increase the capacity of civil society
organizations to monitor and report on human rights violations and to support their
engagement with United Nations human rights mechanisms should be encouraged.
UNMIK’s actions in the context of institution-building and the consolidation
of the rule of law in Kosovo are worth mentioning.
The Niger welcomes the leadership training provided to women by UNMIK, in
partnership with UN-Women and the European Union, with a view to strengthening
the capacity of women to influence political and peace processes, as part of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
In 2018, the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum was held in
Ljubljana. In accordance with the Forum’s recommendations and with the support
of UNMIK, the Kosovo Law Institute provided free legal assistance on women’s
property rights, minority rights, the rights of internally displaced persons, refugees,
asylum-seekers and detainees.
Also, as part of the implementation of the United Nations framework strategy
on youth, peace and security, UNMIK, in partnership with the United Youth Task
Force, launched a construction project aimed at promoting the participation of
young people from all communities in decision-making processes by strengthening
municipal youth councils and introducing youth-sensitive budgeting.
In conclusion, my delegation would appreciate if Mr. Tanin could tell us more
about the actions taken by UNMIK to support the Government of Kosovo in dealing
with the coronavirus disease pandemic.

20-0619015/31

S/2020/339

Annex X
Statement by Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations
We thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for
his briefing. We welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We listened
carefully to what Mr. Konjufca had to tell us today.
By the way, I am looking at the flag in the background of the picture of
Mr. Konjufca and I fail to recognize what flag it is. Judging by the colours, it
may be Swedish or Ukrainian, or it may be the flag of Barbados. Or, since we are
discussing the Balkans, is it perhaps the flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina? I note that
Mr. Konjufca spoke under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. We
would therefore like to request that all who speak under this rule be informed of what
background and symbols are appropriate when they brief the Council.
The situation in Kosovo continues to deteriorate. The rosy pictures of Kosovo’s
democratic achievements that we were presented with and heard at this meeting did
not convince us otherwise. We have been consistently saying that this project is
not viable.
We hear today about a new looming political crisis in Kosovo. What is more,
Kosovo-Albanian leadership demonstrates no interest in dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, despite Serbia’s readiness to resume negotiations upon Pristina lifting
discriminatory tariffs. Many in the West hurried to welcome, as they did in today’s
meeting, the announcement by Mr. Albin Kurti that the tariffs were abolished as of
1 April. The fact is, they were only temporarily suspended, accompanied by Pristina
making even more unacceptable demands of Belgrade.
We see and notice attempts by the United States and the European Union (EU)
to create conditions for dialogue to resume. We believe that such attempts will fail
if they ignore the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and if unilateral measures
introduced by Pristina are not lifted.
EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina remains stalled, first and
foremost because the EU did not ensure that Kosovo Albanians fulfil the obligations
taken on seven years ago — to establish a community of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo. We trust that Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, the new EU Special Representative for
the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other Western Balkan regional issues, will be
able to find a solution to this issue.
We continue to deplore plans backed by some Member States to create
a so-called Kosovo army, which run counter to the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999) and will lead only to the destabilization of the situation in Kosovo and in the
Balkans as a whole. We bring to the attention of our American colleagues that the
NATO Bondsteel facility was established within the framework of peacekeeping
operations in order to implement resolution 1244 (1999), but it later became a de-facto
American military base in Kosovo. It is now being used to train Kosovo Albanian
units with the aim of creating Kosovo armed forces — contrary to the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999).
We still await concrete information on the perpetrators of an incident in the
Zubin Potok municipality on 28 May 2019, where officials of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were detained and beaten by
Kosovo police. That crime remains uninvestigated and its perpetrators unpunished.
16/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

We demand and insist on a thorough investigation and that its perpetrators be brought
to justice.
Incidents targeting Serbian religious sites and cemeteries also continue. The
decision on the plot of land owned by the Visoki Dečani Monastery has not been
implemented for several years.
Pristina continues to shy away from cooperating with Belgrade in the
investigation of the murder of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanović in January
2018. In December 2019, six Kosovo Serbs were indicted, but there are serious doubts
regarding the impartiality of investigative procedures.
We must once again point out that the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in The Hague are doing nothing to investigate crimes
committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army. After many years of endless red tape by
yet another expensive army of judges, prosecutors and experts, not a single indictment
has yet been issued. All this legal folderol has been going on since 2011 when the EU
took it upon itself to investigate facts stated in the report issued by Mr. Dick Marty,
former member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. We have
a question: When will criminals who committed numerous atrocities against the
Serbs, including trade in human organs, be brought to justice?
The President of Serbia offered cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina
in fighting the coronavirus disease. We welcome it, but we note with concern the
publication in Kosovo media of personal data of Kosovo Serbs infected with the
disease. That is irresponsible and unacceptable.
In conclusion, we support Belgrade and Pristina in their efforts to achieve
a sustainable and mutually acceptable solution based primarily on resolution 1244
(1999) — one in line with international law and endorsed by the Security Council. No
fast-tracking of the so-called final normalization between Belgrade and Pristina or
imposition of artificial deadlines can produce that goal. The Council should continue
to lend its support to UNMIK, which is a key international presence in Kosovo that
plays a leading role in monitoring the situation, maintaining stability and creating
conditions conducive to a negotiated solution.

20-0619017/31

S/2020/339

Annex XI
Statement by Ms. Halimah DeShong, Second Deputy Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the
United Nations
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for his
valuable updates, for the continued cooperation with the Security Council and
for presenting the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/255)
on the activities of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome all representatives to this virtual meeting.
We begin by acknowledging all efforts aimed at responding to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to have far-reaching consequences
for international peace and security. This response must be collaborative, and in
that regard we encourage all States and multilateral bodies and agencies to engage
constructively with each other.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes the need for the good-faith
commitment of both parties to a peaceful political solution. In that regard, we urge
the parties to utilize the tools of diplomacy, including dialogue, mediation, political
negotiations and other peaceful means.
We take this opportunity to condemn the incidents targeting religious sites
and cemeteries, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report. Such actions prevent
the creation and maintenance of an environment conducive to stability and progress.
We underscore the significance of women’s participation in the peace process
and commend UNMIK’s work in helping advance women’s political participation.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends UNMIK’s efforts in promoting
security and stability in Kosovo and welcomes all initiatives to that end, which include
engagement with young people and the implementation of the recommendations of the
2018 United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum. We also acknowledge UNMIK’s
close cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and domestic bodies as it discharges its mandate.
As we conclude, we note with concern the challenging political situation in
Kosovo and hope for a peaceful and workable solution.

18/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex XII
Statement by Mr. Jerry Matjila, Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations
Allow me to begin by welcoming the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), with support from the United
Nations Kosovo team. I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing and note the significant role
of the Secretary-General in creating an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in his latest report (S/2020/255)
of 31 March 2020.
We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United Nations in Kosovo is critical
to reaching a peaceful and sustainable solution and in encouraging cooperation
among all parties and stakeholders. We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate UNMIK on becoming the first United Nations peacekeeping operation
to receive an International Organization for Standardization quality management
standard for end-to-end mission support field operations. That is a commendable
achievement for the UNMIK team.
South Africa continues to support the work of UNMIK and its constructive
engagement with all stakeholders to create an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation, unity and stability in Kosovo. In that regard, we support its continued
cooperation with UN-Women and the empowerment of women and young people in
peacebuilding and training.
We also wish to reiterate our support for the continued engagement with
the authorities and civil society, as well as bilateral and international partners, in
building peace and inter-community trust in Kosovo.
We note with concern the ongoing stalemate, which has brought the political
dialogue to a halt, and call on both sides to recommit to the dialogue and to take the
necessary steps to bring the process back on track.
We call on the parties during this time to redouble their efforts towards
reducing tension, as it undermines any future prospects for successful dialogue
and reconciliation. The differences between the parties regarding conditions for
the resumption of negotiations have negative implications for progress. It is only
through dialogue that existing disagreements can be resolved and the foundations
laid for an inclusive and fair political settlement acceptable to both sides. We believe
that, through confidence and trust-building measures, a sustained dialogue between
the sides will prevail.
We laud the efforts by all sides to respond to the challenges posed by the
onset of the coronavirus pandemic. We hope that the spirit of compromise will be
the foundation for negotiations towards an inclusive, fair political settlement that is
acceptable to both sides.

20-0619019/31

S/2020/339

Annex XIII
Statement by Mr. Kais Kabtani, Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations
At the outset, I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2020/255). I would like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mr. Glauk Konjufca.
As we reiterate our appreciation for the role of the United Nations and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo in protecting human
rights, building institutions and creating a platform for a stable political system,
we underscore the importance of continuing efforts to find a political settlement
between Belgrade and Pristina.
In that regard, Tunisia expresses its support for the dialogue, under the
auspices of the European Union (EU), between the two parties. That dialogue serves
as the most suitable path to resolve the outstanding issues between the two parties
and to reach solutions that will lead to a comprehensive settlement.
We welcome the designation of a new EU Special Representative in Kosovo to
facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, and we hope that it will give new
momentum to the dialogue. We also welcome the initiative of France and Germany
to organize a summit on Kosovo when conditions are established.
Likewise, we call for the international community to continue its efforts to
encourage Pristina and Belgrade to set aside their differences and focus on reaching
consensus-based solutions within the framework of Security Council resolutions.
In that context, Tunisia welcomes the tangible steps taken by Belgrade and
Pristina, with support from the United States, to promote connectivity and regional
cooperation by committing themselves to working towards direct air, rail and
road connections.
As we express the importance of the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity, we urge the two parties to pursue formal talks and to reconsider all
unilateral measures that are holding back meaningful dialogue.
In conclusion, we commend the positive cross-border communication and
collaboration in response to the coronavirus pandemic. We hope that it will lead to
great solidarity that creates a conducive environment to dialogue.
We also reiterate our full support for all United Nations personnel and UNMIK
during these difficult and uncertain times due to the pandemic. We commend
UNMIK’s efforts to provide direct support to the most vulnerable communities
in Kosovo.

20/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex XIV
Statement by Mr. David Clay, Political Coordinator of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations
I would like to begin by thanking the Special Representative and his team
for their continued commitment and dedication to Kosovo, as laid out in the
comprehensive report on the activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2020/255). I would also like to extend my thanks
to His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Serbia and His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Kosovo for their briefings this morning.
The situation in Kosovo in 2020 is very different to that of 1999, when UNMIK
started its work. UNMIK has played a key role in that transformation. Together with
the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
NATO, it has promoted security, stability and respect for human rights not only
in Kosovo but in the region more widely. However, significant challenges remain,
and it is important that UNMIK’s efforts be carefully tailored to address them. We
continue to support a review of UNMIK to ensure that it is able to meet current
needs as effectively as possible.
Dealing with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has to be the primary
task of the incumbent Government in Kosovo, as indeed it is for Serbia and other
Governments throughout the world. The United Kingdom stands with the people of
Kosovo during this global crisis. This is a time not for political manoeuvring but for
cooperation, domestically and regionally. Following the vote of no-confidence in
the Prime Minister by the Assembly of Kosovo, we call upon all actors to continue
to respect the Constitution and for decisions to be taken quickly to enable the
incumbent or new Government to make the protection of citizens’ lives the paramount
consideration. We welcome the support that the United Nations is providing the
Government of Kosovo to help deal with the crisis through the establishment of an
inter-agency task force to support the procurement and coordination of supplies of
medical equipment. We urge that action be taken forward quickly.
There have been many positive examples of various communities working
together to deal with COVID-19. The Council should welcome the cooperation
that we have recently seen between the Minister of Health and the Minister of
Communities and Returns, and the mayors of North and South Mitrovica on issues
relating to the Kosovo Serb community. We should also welcome and encourage
cooperation between health ministries in Kosovo and Serbia, such as the recent
virtual meeting held between Ministers of both countries to discuss their response
to the crisis. I would like to thank the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs for making
such a constructive exchange possible. We hope that these actions will solidify the
foundations for closer cooperation both within Kosovo and between Kosovo and
Serbia, during the pandemic and thereafter. Access to information on COVID-19
is essential. To that end, we welcome the Kosovo Government’s development
of a multi-language website and ask that it ensure that all information related to
COVID-19 is available in all the official languages of Kosovo.
I echo the Secretary-General’s report in welcoming developments in this period
to increase connectivity between Kosovo and Serbia. The normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia remains crucial for regional stability and prosperity and
is in the interests of both countries. I reiterate the United Kingdom’s long-standing
support for the European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue as the route to achieving
a legally binding, comprehensive and sustainable agreement between Kosovo and
Serbia. We welcome the decision of the incumbent Government of Kosovo on 1 April
20-0619021/31

S/2020/339

to lift the tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on
Serbia to respond positively and to halt its de-recognition campaign. We believe
that grievances, including non-tariff barriers, can be settled in the framework of the
EU-facilitated dialogue, if there is the political will and courage to do so. We look
to both parties to take the necessary steps to return to the dialogue at the earliest
possible opportunity.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of Miroslav
Lajčák as the EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and
other Western Balkans issues. We look forward to working with him, with our Quint
partners and with Serbia and Kosovo to achieve a comprehensive, conclusive, legally
binding normalization agreement that respects territorial integrity, is acceptable to
the citizens of both countries and will deliver long-term benefits to them and to the
whole region.
We welcome the progress made by the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. The United Kingdom strongly supports those
institutions and the important work that they do. We urge the Governments of
Kosovo and Serbia and the members of the Council to cooperate fully with them.
Justice must be delivered for victims and their families. We cannot allow a culture
of impunity to exist for the most serious crimes; to do so would be unconscionable
and enormously damaging to the rule of law and prospects of reconciliation across
the region. We regret the slow progress in domestic prosecutions for war crimes
and urge the authorities in Kosovo and Serbia to push ahead in dealing with these
historic crimes.
We welcome the progress made by the Government of Kosovo in dealing with
the legacy of conflict-related sexual violence, with the first indictment filed by a
local prosecution for conflict-related sexual violence as a war crime. We commend
the work that UNMIK has done in supporting survivors to share their stories and
encouraging the Government of Kosovo to prioritize addressing sexual violence. The
United Kingdom is committed to supporting victims and preventing sexual violence
in all its forms. Through funding the “Be My Voice” campaign in Kosovo, we are
raising public awareness and tackling head-on the stigma experienced by victims.
Last October, the people of Kosovo voted for change. They voted for a
Government that promised to tackle corruption and promote economic development.
There is still considerable work to be done to strengthen the rule of law and deal
with weaknesses in the justice system in Kosovo. We call upon the incumbent or new
Government to prioritize work to deliver the people’s long-term priorities.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks to the Special Representative
and his team. We look forward to continuing to support them in their important work.

22/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex XV
Statement by Ms. Cherith Norman-Chalet, Acting Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations
I wish to thank Special Representative Tanin for his briefing this morning.
We also welcome the participation of Kosovo and Serbia’s Foreign Ministers today.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has demonstrated that
international cooperation is more important than ever. This is especially true
in the Western Balkans. The United States recognizes the notable efforts of the
Governments of Kosovo and Serbia to respond to the pandemic, and we are encouraged
by the increased cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade to facilitate the flow of
essential goods and personnel required to combat COVID-19. In addition, I want to
express our gratitude to the Serbian Government for its support with repatriation
flights for American citizens and the generous offer by the Kosovo Government for
support in the United States fight against COVID-19.
The United States supports a stable, secure and prosperous Western Balkans,
and we are committed to helping countries in the region advance their integration
into Western institutions. Furthermore, we find it encouraging to hear continued
statements from both Kosovo and Serbian leaders that they remain committed to the
normalization of relations.
The current situation emphasizes the priority the United States has placed
on the development of economic and commercial ties between Kosovo and Serbia.
Although tariffs have been suspended, Kosovo must remove all reciprocal measures
immediately and unconditionally. We encourage both sides to implement agreements
to help businesses flourish, open up economic opportunities for their citizens and
resume the dialogue process in earnest.
Today we reiterate the importance of the meaningful participation of women
in decision-making, and we welcome recent progress in gender representation in
the new Kosovo Government. Furthermore, we expect the political establishment
in Kosovo to focus on shared priorities and adhere to Kosovo’s Constitution and
law in its efforts. We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Miroslav Lajčák as the
new European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and
other Western Balkan regional issues. We look forward to continued United StatesEuropean Union coordination in the region.
While the unprecedented circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic reveal the
importance of cooperation, they also illustrate the fact that the Council’s time and
resources must be utilized wisely — and where the need is the greatest. The United
States reiterates its firm conviction that the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has long since fulfilled its original purpose and should
close. The United States looks forward to working with other Security Council
members to draw down UNMIK and determine a more relevant role for the United
Nations in helping Kosovo and the Western Balkans realize their full potential.

20-0619023/31

S/2020/339

Annex XVI
Statement by Mr. Dang Dinh Quy, Permanent Representative of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations
I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for
his detailed briefing. I welcome the participation at today’s meeting of the Security
Council of His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and of Mr. Glauk Konjufca.
I would like to recall that this month seven years ago, Serbia and Kosovo
concluded a historic agreement, the Brussels Agreement, also known as the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations between Serbia
and Kosovo. Since then, step by step, various accords in key areas have been signed.
My delegation is also encouraged to learn that two months ago, transportation links
were created, with the resumption of direct flights between Belgrade and Pristina.
We also welcome the recent high-level meeting.
However, despite these positive developments, there remain reasons to worry
about a number of issues. Various agreements were signed, but we have seen almost
no implementation thereof. We have also witnessed less constructive behaviours and
attitudes of one side towards the other side, among other things. These obstacles are
not helpful to they are to overcome their remaining differences.
We urge Serbia and Kosovo to remove all remaining obstacles. We call on
the parties to engage in good-faith dialogue and peaceful negotiation to resolve
their differences. We support the parties concerned in achieving a durable and
comprehensive solution that is in line with the fundamental principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
In this process, we applaud the support of the international community, the United
Nations and regional and individual actors for peace and stability, not only in Kosovo
but also in the rest of the Balkans, in Europe and throughout the world.
We are pleased to note that, in November 2019, UNMIK became the first
peacekeeping operation to attain the International Organization for Standardization
quality-management standard for end-to-end mission-support field operations.
We commend UNMIK’s efforts in engaging with all communities in Kosovo and
conducting various activities during the reporting period to facilitate cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina. We continue to support the critical role of UNMIK
in Kosovo.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has also spread to Kosovo,
with hundreds of confirmed cases. We express our serious concern about the
pandemic’s devastating impact on socioeconomic developments and the well-being
of the people in Kosovo. In this regard, we support UNMIK in implementing four
key objectives for peacekeeping operations in the fight against COVID-19, which
were addressed to the Security Council by the Secretary-General on 9 April. At the
same time, we urge all Mission personnel to stay safe.

24/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex XVII
Statement by Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
Unfortunately, I address the Security Council today at a time when the whole
world is facing the huge challenge posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. I would like to voice my hope that our joint efforts, mutual solidarity and
cooperation will see us overcome this difficult situation in the very near future. I
would like to take this opportunity to extend my deepest condolences to the families
of the victims of the coronavirus disease throughout the world and to show the strong
solidarity of Serbia with all countries affected by the pandemic.
I wish to point out the importance of this meeting being held, as it conveys
a strong message to the people in Kosovo and Metohija that they have not been
forgotten, at this difficult hour, and that we care for them more than ever before,
well aware of the fact that their living conditions were difficult even before the
pandemic outbreak.
We have undertaken decisive measures to help Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
fight the epidemic — by supplying medical and protective equipment and sending
medical doctors and staff. But we have also expressed readiness from the very
beginning to fully cooperate with Albanians and work together with representatives
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) in Pristina to combat the
epidemic. Persons who had been infected in Kosovo and Metohija and who have been
receiving medical treatment in central Serbia include both Serbs and Albanians, and
last week we donated 1,000 coronavirus test kits to the Institute of Public Health
in Pristina.
I would like to reiterate that Serbia will continue to extend all the necessary
assistance and show solidarity to all in these difficult times, as well as that the fight
against coronavirus and the protection of human lives are the top priority today. In
this context, I will briefly reflect only on the previous period, covered in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/255).
Serbia has time and time again, and most notably in the past year, demonstrated
its strong commitment to finding a compromise solution for the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija that would secure lasting peace and stability, while also showing its
readiness to reach a solution by which neither side would be an absolute winner, but
would gain enough for the solution to be a long-term and sustainable one. Serbia has
responded with restraint to all the unilateral and discriminatory actions of Pristina
PISGs, while refraining from countermeasures and acting as a responsible partner,
one contributing to stabilization of the situation and aiming to secure conditions for
an unimpeded course of dialogue.
We had hoped that the October election in Kosovo and Metohija and the
appointment of new authorities in February this year would have been a good
opportunity for Pristina PISGs to turn over a new leaf in their approach to the
dialogue, to finally show readiness for talks and revoke the controversial decision on
the imposition of tariffs, which resulted in the dialogue being stalemated for a long
time now. However, we ended up being faced with positions even more extreme and
an absolute lack of goodwill for the dialogue, which was all made blatantly obvious
in the programme presented and decisions made by the Albin Kurti Government.
Their position as to the tariffs imposed by Pristina on goods originating from central
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina — thus inflicting immeasurable political and
economic damage on Serbia and the region as a whole — has best illustrated their
approach to the dialogue as well.
20-0619025/31

S/2020/339

Despite all of that, Serbia has continued to show its commitment to the
resolution of all issues relevant to the lives of our citizens, while striving to promote
connectivity and freedom of movement as well as the flow of goods, capital, services
and people. In view of that, and as a token of goodwill, we recently signed letters of
intent to establish air and railway traffic between Belgrade and Pristina, as well as
a statement of intent to finalize the construction of a motorway connecting the two
cities. I take this opportunity to express gratitude to Ambassador Richard Grenell,
Special Envoy of the President of the United States, for his initiative and all the
efforts he made towards reaching the agreement.
Support and assistance in the context of dialogue is always welcome. We
hope that the engagement on the part of the European Union (EU) will also gain
new momentum with the appointment of Mr. Miroslav Lajčák as the EU Special
Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and that conditions for the
continuation of the dialogue will be in place immediately upon the end of the
pandemic. All it takes for that to happen is for one step to be made by Pristina.
We have heard countless calls made by all the stakeholders involved for the
revocation of the senseless tariffs, including at Security Council meetings, but
Pristina has persistently refused to do so. We were recently informed that Kurti
made a decision to lift the tariffs, but to also impose “reciprocity measures” at the
same time. Such a disingenuous move by Pristina was meant to “pull the wool over
the eyes” of everyone who called for the revocation of the tariffs, while practically
making no difference as compared to the previous measures.
For that reason, I would like to remind once again that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains the only valid United Nations document, which must be respected, and that
the formation of the community of Serbian municipalities is Pristina’s obligation in
accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
I take this opportunity to once again call for a return to dialogue and refraining
from unilateral moves. The ongoing situation has taught us better than any before
that we need to rely on each other and be aware of the importance of cooperation and
connectivity. Regrettably, the current political atmosphere in Kosovo and Metohija
has resulted in even the assistance and solidarity of Serbia in the fight against
COVID-19 being a subject of politicization and misinterpretation by way of brutal
attacks and unseemly accusations, to which the entire international community
responded with condemnation. It is therefore incumbent upon us to set aside our
differences once we overcome the coronavirus pandemic, and arrive at decisions
and solutions that will ensure normal and peaceful life to all communities in Kosovo
and Metohija.
I need to reiterate once again that we see it as unacceptable to draw any
correlation between the imposition of anti-civilizational tariffs and the decisions
to revoke recognitions of the unilateral declaration of independence by so-called
Kosovo, particularly bearing in mind that Pristina, by its own admission, has
continued lobbying across the globe in favour of the recognition of so-called
“Kosovo”, in which, as they have claimed, they enjoyed selfless support by some
members of the Council. If members are requesting that we stop campaigning for the
revocation of recognitions, would it not make perfect sense for them to stop lobbying
in favour of Kosovo unilateral declaration of independence first, while asking the
so-called Kosovo authorities to do the same?
In February of this year, when the fake news appeared that Jamaica purportedly
recognized Kosovo unilateral declaration of independence, Pristina representatives,
including Hashim Thaçi and Behgjet Pacolli, expressed their gratitude to United
States Congressman Eliot Engel for his assistance. In a letter to Secretary of State
26/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Michael Pompeo, Congressman Engel and Senator Robert Menendez requested to
be informed “why the [United States] Administration has neither imposed those
sanctions nor actively pressed Serbia to end its global de-recognition efforts”. Please,
let me know how such steps could be considered as conducive to a good climate for
the continuation of the dialogue. Only if everyone stops lobbying, the same can be
asked of Serbia.
In the previous period, we were particularly alarmed by two highly important
issues concerning the vows to make military service compulsory in Kosovo and
Metohija and to pass the so-called law on war crimes, genocide and alleged Serbian
aggression. I remind the Council that a special Security Council meeting was held
in December 2018 (see S/PV.8427) to address the announced establishment of the
so-called Kosovo armed forces and that on that occasion, and several times after
that, we warned about the serious consequences of such steps that would immediately
threaten the safety of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija and drastically deteriorate the
security situation in the region. The statement about military service indicates
another forthcoming unilateral and absolutely unacceptable act by Pristina, in
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kosovo Force mandate it established, as
the only legal and legitimate military structure in the province.
With regard to the announcement to bring a case against Serbia before the
International Court of Justice on the count of alleged genocide, that has been clearly
motivated by Pristina’s attempts to somehow obscure the issue of trials for crimes
committed by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), particularly now that
it has become apparent that it is highly likely that, despite years of delays, formal
indictments will soon be raised before the Specialist Chambers.
If it is indeed our wish to build a future together, we are also obliged to act
in a responsible way and say that those who suffered the most in the conflicts in
Kosovo and Metohija were innocent civilians, regardless of their ethnicity. We
cannot allow one side to assume the role of sole victim while denying the crimes
committed against the Serb population. The farming families killed in Staro Gracko
and the child victims in Goraždevac, victims of the massacre at Lake Radonjić and
the Klečka killings, as well as each and every one of the 200,000 Serbs persecuted
by the so-called KLA from Kosovo and Metohija, of whom only 1.9 per cent have
achieved sustainable return, and who are not able to get back to their homes in
Kosovo and Metohija for safety reasons even after more than 20 years, all deserve
answers. Therefore, it is our hope that the activity of the Specialist Chambers for
crimes committed in Kosovo and Metohija will contribute to justice being served
for all.
At a time when the whole world is facing one of the greatest challenges of the
century and when we are required to show maturity and seriousness, the Pristina
authorities have demonstrated that they do not consider the safety and the lives of
citizens to be a top priority and that nothing matters to them more than who will
assume political power. They have shown an utmost lack of understanding of what a
responsible approach means, while failing to address the difficult challenges we are
all facing at the moment.
The political messages conveyed by representatives of the then new
Government, which was dismissed in less than two months in a vote of no-confidence,
can be taken seriously or not, or seen either as only serving local political purposes
or as being addressed to the international public. However, it is a fact that every word
uttered at any time and any decision we make can have unforeseen consequences
for all citizens. The weight of responsibility is all the greater if one is dealing with
a sensitive situation, as is the case in Kosovo and Metohija. The main victims of
political conduct that shows no signs of readiness for a compromise solution that
20-0619027/31

S/2020/339

would satisfy the interests of both the Serbian and Albanian sides are not the
politicians, but Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, who have been physically assaulted,
threatened and exposed to hate speech on a daily basis, and also Albanians who are
now rushing to Serbia to receive medical treatment. Therefore, the responsibility
lies with political leaders not to generate contexts that prevent the development of a
society towards a democratic and modern one.
Sadly, I cannot help but conclude that Pristina politicians have, through their
behaviour in these difficult times, once again affirmed a fact that has been clear to all,
but that some Council members would not admit to, namely, that the project to create
an independent State of Kosovo was a big mistake made by a part of the international
community, as well as that States cannot be created by unilateral decisions.
Let me reiterate once again that the Republic of Serbia firmly believes that
problems should be resolved through dialogue and hopes that conditions for this will
be in place as soon as possible. Serbia’s endeavour is to ensure that we build a joint
future by pursuing a policy of peace and cooperation.

28/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

Annex XVIII
Statement by Mr. Glauk Konjufca
It is a great honour and privilege for me to address the Security Council as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosova.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Kosova, its citizens and
myself, I take this opportunity to extend our sincere condolences to the families
that have lost their loved ones to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
anywhere in the world, and especially in the respected countries comprising the
membership of the Security Council.
Before the first cases of COVID-19 appeared in Kosovo, on 11 March, our
Government took immediate preventive measures, including closing schools and
banning flights. As a result of a rapid, professional and efficient operation, the
number of people in Kosova infected with COVID-19 has been relatively small, and
the number of deaths in the country from the virus is smaller than in other countries
of the region.
On 6 October 2019, parliamentary elections were held in the Republic of
Kosova. The elections demonstrated a high degree of democratic awareness among
the citizens of Kosova and received positive evaluations from international monitors.
The opposition won the elections, with the political movement I represent, Lëvizja
Vetëvendosje! — which means “the Self-Determination Movement!” — obtaining
the relative majority in the Parliament of the Republic of Kosova. Prime Minister
Albin Kurti was granted the mandate of the citizens to govern the country.
Election turnout in municipalities with Serb ethnic majorities was higher
than in the municipalities with Albanian ethnic majorities. Representatives of the
Serb ethnic minority in Kosova won just six seats by vote, but, as guaranteed by
our Constitution, also obtained four additional seats. The same has also occurred
with respect to other ethnic minorities in the country. Although the counting and
recounting process took some time, the transfer of power took place in a proper
manner. Accordingly, the 6 October 2019 election represents a major step forward
for democracy in Kosova.
Resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted in another context. Its purpose was
to resolve the humanitarian catastrophe, end the fighting, return the refugees to
their homes and stop the ethnic cleansing in Kosova after the implementation of a
terrible hegemonic project by Serbia. Now the situation has changed radically. As
reflected in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/255), in the last six months there
have been no inter-ethnic conflicts in Kosova. Therefore, the time has come for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to complete
its mission.
In my first month as Foreign Minister, I participated in a number of regional
meetings with the countries of the Western Balkans; representatives of Serbia were
also present at all the meetings. The impression that I garnered during the meetings
is that Serbia is still unable to accept the simple fact that, on 22 July 2010, the
International Court of Justice in The Hague sealed the legacy and legitimacy of
the independence of the Republic of Kosova, which is irreversible. Let us all take a
moment to remember the Court’s explicit statement that
“[t]he court is of the opinion that the declaration of independence of
Kosovo adopted on 17 February 2008 did not violate international law.”
The sooner Serbia understands this, the more benefits there will be for Serbia, for us
and for our region.
20-0619029/31

S/2020/339

I know that some of the States represented today in Security Council have
not recognized Kosova as an independent sovereign State. The absolute majority of
United Nations Members, however, have recognized the Republic of Kosova. I invite
the members to recognize the Republic of Kosova. Through that act, they would not
only respect the legitimate will of the absolute majority of the citizens of Kosova but
also respect the decision of the International Court of Justice and support peace and
cooperation in our region.
The report of Secretary-General cites the International Committee of the Red
Cross, stating that 1,646 individuals have been missing since the war in Kosova in
1999. The most well-known person is University of Pristina professor Ukshin Hoti.
Professor Hoti was last seen on 16 May 1999, in Dubrava Prison. He was arrested
by the Serbian regime for political reasons. He had to be released that day after
spending five years as a political prisoner. The guards took him out the cell door,
and he was never seen again. Where is Ukshin Hoti? He was in the hands of Serbian
State institutions. There are 1,645 other people like Professor Hoti. The State and
society of Kosovo has a right to know where Ukshin Hoti is. Where are the 1,646
people of Kosova?
Another tragedy that has pervaded the lives of many Albanian women and
men since the 1999 war is rape. It is a very sensitive issue, and it comes as no
surprise that many of those women and men do not want to be registered or identified
owing to a fear of reliving the horror again. Despite that, there are brave women who
have decided to face their fears and come forward. For instance, in 2013, Ms. Marte
Tunaj was the first woman to openly testify about her rape; she died in May 2016
with a pension of €96. In addition, Ms. Vasfije Krasniqi-Goodman has continued
the sacred mission of Ms. Tunaj by constantly speaking out on this issue that pains
an entire nation. Recently, Ms. Shyhrete Tahiri-Sylejmani also showed unparalleled
strength when she decided to talk about her experience. Today I thank those women
for their courage and for inspiring and encouraging other women and men to seek
justice. Most of the perpetrators were Serbian soldiers or police. Rape is a war crime.
We ask Serbia to identify its soldiers and police officers who raped Albanian women
and men. Justice must be served.
One of the latest unjust actions by the Government in Belgrade is the arrest
of our citizen Mr. Nezir Mehmetaj. He was arrested by the Serbian authorities on
the border between Serbia and the Republic of Kosova on 3 January. Mr. Mehmetaj’s
family has stated that he and his close family have lived in Switzerland for about
30 years. As Mr. Mehmetaj suffers from diabetes, his health has deteriorated
significantly during his detention. I appeal to the Permanent Representatives of
United Nations States Members to use their authority to intervene and call for
Mr. Mehmetaj’s release from Serbian prison.
Our country’s relations with Serbia have remained difficult. The Government
of the Republic of Kosova is convinced that our relations with Serbia can be improved
only through equal, sincere and constructive dialogue. To create such an environment,
on 1 April, our Government decided to lift the 100 per cent tax on goods from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina imposed by the previous Government. At the same
time, we have taken some gradual measures of reciprocity to offset many non-tariff
barriers that Serbia has imposed on our goods. It is our utmost belief that, in order
to have normal relations and to contribute to stability in the region, Serbia should
lower its non-tariff trade barriers, end its de-recognition campaign against Kosova
and stop funding its parallel structures in our country.
Prime Minister Kurti recently sent a letter to the President of the United
States, Mr. Donald Trump, about the dialogue with Serbia. He had a telephone
conversation with German Chancellor Angela Merkel on 23 March, and another with
30/31

20-06190

S/2020/339

French President Emmanuel Macron on 9 April. In all those communications, Prime
Minister Kurti made the position of Kosova clear, namely, that it is aiming for an
equal dialogue that does not undermine the territorial integrity and unitary character
of our State, is designed to improve relations between Kosova and Serbia and ideally
results in mutual recognition.
For reasons of culture, geography and history, Kosova’s future lies within the
European family of democracies. Therefore, we are committed to pursuing the goal
of full membership in the European Union as soon as possible and implementing the
reforms required to that end. Similarly, we are fully committed to joining the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and will take all the steps necessary to reach that goal.
In the area of security, Kosova has declared its commitment to peace and stability
in the region of South-East Europe. The independence of Kosova is a factor of peace
and stability in the region, and we are a part of the international coalition against
terrorism and fundamentalism.
The Republic of Kosova looks forward to working with all the Members of the
United Nations to promote our shared goal of world peace and security.

20-0619031/31
