General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Sadon

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A MAIN COMMI'ITEE

....,.,_
N._
2621 (XXV)

2622 (XXV)
2627 (XXV)
2628 (XXV)
2632 (XXV)

CONTENTS
TIii,

,,,..

Proaramme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Grantins of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoplea (A/8086) ......................................... .
Admiaion of Fiji to membership ln the United Nations (A/L595)

100

12 October 1970
13 October 1970

3

Declaration on the Occuion of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations (A/8103/Add.1, annex, and A/8103/Add.2)

21

24 October 1970

J

The situation in the Middle Bait (A/L602/1lev.2 and R.ev.2/Add.1)

22

4 November 1970

Jlationallzatlon of the procedure, and orsanlzation of the General
Alaembly (A/L601/R.ev.2 and .Rev.2/Add.l) ............. .

92

9 November 1970

'

3 (b)
3 (b)

13 November 1970
14 December 1970

6

91

20 November 1970

6

Credentials of representative, to the twenty-fifth aeuion of the
General Aaembly (A/8142 and Add.1, A/L.608/.Rev.1, A/
L.608/ Add.1)
R.eaolution A ........................................ .
Reaolution B ........................................ .
2642 (XXV) :Representation of China in the United Nations (A/LS99 and
Add.1) ................................................ .

24

1

2636 (XXV)

6

2651 (XXV)

Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uaes of Atomic
Ener1Y (A/L.615) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

3 December 1970

2655 (XXV)
2699 (XXV)

:Report of the International Atomic Eneray Asency (A/L616) . . .
Report of the Security Council (A/L.617) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15
11

4 December 1970
12 December 1970

6
7
7

2708 (XXV)

Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantins of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/L.621 and Add.1 and 2,
A/L.622) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

14 December 1970

7

2728 (XXV)

Report of the Worldns Group on the Flnanclna of the United
Nation, llollef and Workl Aaency for Paleatine R.efupea in the

35

15 December 1970

8

7
8

18 September 1970
18 September 1970

9

10

12 December 1970

9

12

16 December 1970

9

14

12 December 1970

9

21

9
9
10

22

6 October 1970
12 October 1970
12 December 1970
17 December 1970

23
62 (d}

17 December 1970
9 December 1970

10
10

Near Bast (A/8264) . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. . . . .. .. .. .. .. ..

0a1w ueftlon,
Notllcation by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paraaraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations ................... , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheaaenda ..................................................
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Orsanlzatlon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
R.eport of the Economic and Social Council . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Report of the International Court of Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations

The situation in the Middle East ........................................ ..
Appointmenta to fill vacancies in the Special Committee on the Situation with
reaard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ............................ .
Appointment of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia ............... .

2621 (XXV). Programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
• Having decided to hold a special commemorative
session on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the

9

10

Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

Considering that, by arousing world public opinion
and promoting practical action for the speedy liquidation of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations,
the Declaration has played and will continue to play
an important role in assisting the peoples under colonial
I

General Auembly-Twenty-&(th Se11lon

domination in their struggle for freedom and indepen-

dence,
Conscious of the fact that, although many colonial
countries and peoples have achieved freedom and
independence in the last ten years, the system of colonialism continues to exist in many areas of the world,
Reaffirming that all peoples have the right to selfdetermination and independence and that the subjection of the peoples to alien domination constitutes a
serious impediment to the maintenance of international
peace and security and the development of peaceful
relations among nations,
1. Declares the further continuation of colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations a crime which constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and the principles of
international law;
2. Reaffirms the inherent right of colonial peoples
to struggle by all necessary means at their disposal
aaainst colonial Powers which suppress their aspiration
for freedom and independence;
3. Adopts the following programme of action to
assist in the full implementation of the Declaration on
the Orantina of Independence to Colonial Countries

and Peoples:
( 1) Member States shall do their utmost to promote, in the United Nations and the international
institutions and organizations within the United
Nations system, effective measures for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
all Trust Territories, Non-Self-Governing Territories
and other colonial Territories, large and small, including the adoption by the Security Council of
effective measures against Governments and regimes
which engage in any form of repression of colonial
peoples, which would seriously impede the maintenance of international peace and security.
(2) Member States shall render all necessary
moral and material assistance to the peoples of colonial Territories in their struggle to attain freedom
and independence.
( 3) (a) Member States shall intensify their efforts
to promote the implementation of the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to Territories under colonial domination.
(b) In this connexion, the General Assembly
draws the attention of the Security Council to the
need to continue to give special attention to the
problems of southern Africa by adopting measures
to ensure the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
and its own resolutions, and in particular:
(i) To widen the scope of the sanctions a~ainst
the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia by
declaring mandatory all the measures laid
down in Article 41 of the Charter of the
United Nations;
(ii) To give careful consideration to the question
of imposing sanctions upon South Africa and
Portugal, in view of their refusal to carry out
the relevant decisions of the Security Council;
(iii) To give urgent consideration, with a view to
promoting the speedy elimination of colonial-

ism, to the question of imposina fully and
unconditionally, under international supervision, an embargo on arms of all kinds to
the Government of South Africa and the
illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia;
(iv) To consider urgently the adoption of measures to prevent the supply of arms of all
kinds to Portugal, as such arms enable that
country to deny the right of self-determination and independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its domination.
(c) Member States shall also intensify their efforts
to oppose collaboration between the r6gimes of South
Africa and Portugal and the illegal racist r6gime of
Southern Rhodesia for the preservation of colonialism in southern Africa and to end the political, military, economic and other forms of aid received by
the above-mentioned r6gimes, which enables them
to persist in their policy of colonial domination.
( 4) Member States shall wa,e a viaorous and
sustained campaign against activities and practices of
forei~ economic, financial and other interests operating in colonial Territories for the benefit and on
behalf of colonial Powers and their allies, as these
constitute a major obstacle to the achievement of the
goals embodied in resolution 1514 (XV). Member
States shall consider the adoption of necessary 1tep1
to have their nationals and comr,aniea under their
jurisdiction discontinue such activities and practicesj
these steps should also aim at preventlna the 1y1tematic influx of forclan immi,ranta into colonial
Territories, which disrupts the lntearlty and social,
political and cultural unity of the peoples under
colonial domination.
( 5) Member States shall carry out a sustained and
vigorous campai,n against all military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under
their administration, as such activities and arrangements constitute an obstacle to the full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV).
(6) (a) All freedom fighters under detention shall
be treated in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment
of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949.1
( b) The specialized agencies and international
institutions associated with the United Nations shall
intensify their activities relat<' 1 to the implementation
of resolution 1514 (XV).
( c) Representatives of liberation movements shall
be invited, whenever necessary, by the United Nations
and other international organizations within the
United Nations system to participate in an appropriate capacity in the proceedings of those organs
relating to their countries.

(d) Efforts shall be intensified to provide increased
educational opportunities for the inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories. All States shall render
greater assistance in this field, both individually
through programmes in the countries concerned and
collectively by contributions through the United
Nations.
(7) All States shall undertake measures aimed at
enhancing public awareness of the need for active
assistance in the achievement of complete decoloniza1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.

Re1olation1 adopted wlth-t referenee to a Main Committee

tion and, in particular, creating satisfactory conditions
for activities by national and international nongovernmental organizations in support of the peoples
under coloniP' 1omination.
( 8) The t. ...!~.... Nations as well as all States shall
intensify their efforts in the field of public information
in the area of decolonization tbrou$h all media,
including publications, radio and television. Of special
importance will be programmes relating to United
Nations activities on decolonization, the situation in
colonial Territories and the struggle being waged by
colonial peoples and the national liberation move-

ments.
(9) T.ae Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples shall continue to examine the full compliance of all States with the Declaration and with
other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization. The question of territorial size, geographical
isolation and limited resources should in no way
delay the implementation of the Declaration. Where
resolution 1514 (XV) bas not been fully implemented with regard to a given Territory, the General
Assembly shall continue to bear responsibility for
that Territory until such time as the people concerned
has had an opportunity to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration. The Special Committee is
hereby directed:
(a) To continue to assist the General Assembly
in finding the best ways and means for the final
liquidation of colonialism;
(b) To continue to give s~cial consideration to
the views expressed orally or m written communications by representatives of the peoples in the colonial
Territories;
(c) To continue to send visiting missions to the
colonial Territories and to bold meetings at places
where it can best obtain first-hand information on the
situation in colonial Territories, as well as to continue to. hold meetings away fr6m Headquarters as
appropnate;
(d) To assist the General Assembly in making
arrangements, in co-operation with the administering
Powers, for securin~ a United Nations presence in
the colonial Territones to participate in the elaboration of the procedural measures for the implementation of the Declaration and to observe the final
stars of the process of decolonization in the Territoncs;
(e) To prepare draft rules and regulations for
visiting missions for approval by the General Assembly.

1862nd plenary meeting,
12 October 1970.
2622 (XXV). Admission of Fiji to membership
in the United Natiom
The General Assembly,

Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 October 1970 that Fiji should be

"

admitted to membership in the United Nations,2
l Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth

Session, Annexes, agenda item 100, document A/8119.

s

Having considered the application for membership of
Fiji,8
Decides to admit Fiji to membership in the United
Nations.
1863rd plenary meeting,
13 October 1970.
2627 (XXV), Declaration on the Occulon of the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations
The General Assembly
Adopts the following Declaration:
DECLARATION ON THE OCCASION OF THE TwENTYFIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS

We, the representatives of the States Members of
the United Nations, assembled at United Nations Headquarters on 24 October 1970 on the occasion of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the coming into force of the
Charter of the United Nations, now solemnly declare
that:
1. In furtherance of the anniversary objectives of
peace, justice and progress, we reaffirm our dedication to the Charter of the United Nations and our
will to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter.
2. The United Nations, despite its limitatiou,
has, in its role as a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in attaining the purposes mentioned in
Article 1 of the Charter, made an important contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security, to developing friendly relations based on
respect for the prmciple of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples and to achieving international co-operation in economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields. We reaffirm our deep conviction
that the United Nations can provide a most effective
means to strengthen the freedom and independence
of nations.
3. In pursuance of the rurposes of the Charter,
we reaffirm our determination to respect the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States. We will exert
our utmost efforts to develop such relations among
all States, irrespective of tl)eir political, economic
and social s~tems, on the basis of strict observance
of the principles of the Charter, and in particular the
principle of sovereign equality of States, the principle
that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial inte~ty or political independence of any
State, the prmc1ple that they shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means, the duty
not to intervene in matters within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State, the duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with th,:
Charter, and the principle that States shall fulfil in
good faith the obligations assumed by them in
accordance with the Charter. The progressive development and codification of international law, in
which important progi-ess was made during the first
twenty-five years of the United Nations, should be
a A/8118. For the printed text of this document, see Official

R#ord,,,, of the Security

Council, Twenty-fifth Year, Supplen'rlnt for October, November and December 1970, document
S/9951.
