72

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

(e) To study with special atteotioo the eovironmental problems and cooditions of the countries with
coastlines particularly exposed to the risks of marine
pollution;
(f) To promote intemational co-operation in order
to prevent eliminate or at least adequately reduce and
effectively 'control adverse ecological effects resulting
from activities conducted in all spheres, in such a way
that due account will be taken of the interests of a11
States;

6. Urges the States possessing nuclear weapons to
put an end to the testing of those weapons in a11
spheres and, also in the context of measures designed
to improve environmental conditions on a world-wide
basis, stresses the necessity of prohibiting the production and use of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, and of ensuring their early destruction;
7. Further urges Member States, the United Nations
system and other international organizations which deal
with ecological problems to plan international co-operation in the field of the environment, taking into particular account the need far increased technical and
financia} assistance to the developing countries to help
them improve their ecological conditions, both in rural
and urban areas;
8. lndicates the advisability of the rintemational
financial institutions being enabled, without affecting
adversely their operations in other spheres, to consider
favourably the increase in the volume and the softening
of the terms of their economic assistance to the developing countries far the planning aod implementation of
projects which, in the exclusive judgement of those
couotries, might be desirable and which, in their view,
might be justifiable on environmental terms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment after ascertaining the views of Member
States, on a 'scheme of voluntary contributions which
would provide additional financing by the developed
countries to the developing countries far environmental
purposes, beyond the resources already contemplated
in the Interoational Development Strategy;
10. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to prepare a comprehensive study, to be submitted to the
Conference at its third session, on the effects of environmental policies of developed countries which might
adversely affect the present or future development possibilities of developing countries, by meaos of, inter alia:
(a) A decrease in the flow of international development assistance and a deterioration of its terms and
conditions;
( b) A further deterioration in the trading prospects
of developing countries by the creation of additional
obstacles, such as the new non-tariff measures, which
might lead to a new type of protectionism;
11. Reiterates the primacy of independent economic
and social development as the main and paramount
objective of intemational co-operation, in the interests
of the welfare of mankind and of peace and world
security.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2850 (XXVI). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969 and
2657 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 on the preparations
far the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment,
Having noted with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General52 called for in resolution 2657
(XXV),
Having considered chapter XI of the report of the
Economic and Social Council5ª and the relevant summary records, 54
Taking note of the reports of the Preparatory Comrnittee for the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment on its second 55 and third 56 sessions,
Recognizing the important contributions to the
preparations far the Conference made by the intergovemmental working groups on the declaration on the
human environment, marine pollution, soils, monitoring
or surveillance, and conservation,
Taking note with satisfaction of the steps that have
been taken through which the concerns of developing
countries have been increasingly reflected in the preparations for the Conference, such as the meeting of the
Panel of Experts on Development and the Environment,
held at Founex, Switzerland, in June 1971, the faur
regional seminars on development and environment
organized by the Economic Commission far Africa, the
Economic Comrnissdon far Asia and the Far East, the
Economic Commission far Latin America and the
United N ations Ecooomic and Social Office at Beirut,
and the meeting of scientists from developing countries
organized by the Soientific Committee on Problems of
the Environment of the Intemational Council of Scientific Unions at Canberra,
T aking into account the important contribution to
the preparations for the Conference made by the
Symposium on Problems relating to Environment, held
at Prague in May 1971, by the Economic Commission
for Europe,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring that the
global efforts in the field of the human environment be
supplemented and made more effective by agreements
at the regional or subregional levels,
Taking note with appreciation of the assistance Ient
to the preparations for the Conference by Governments,
organizations of the United Nations system, other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including youth organizations,
T aking into account the views expressed during its
twenty-sixth session,
l. Approves the provisional agenda for the United
N ations Conference on the Human Environment as
formulated in the report of the Secretary-General57 on
the basis of the recommendations of the Preparatory
Comrnittee for the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment;
52 A/8509 and Add.1.
53 O/Jicial Records of tlze

General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403).
54 E/AC.24/SR.412-416.
5 5 A/CONF.48/PC/9 and Corr.1, transmitted to the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-first session under the
symbol E/4991.
56 A/CONF.48/PC/13 and Corr.1.
57 A/8509, annex.

73

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

present and future quality of the environment far human
life and well-being;
(e) Such other draft proposals as may be ready far
consideration by the Conference;
(d) Draft proposals for organizational and financia!
arrangements needed to pursue effectively the work of
the United Nations system of organizations in the
environmental field;
7. Requests the Conference to consider the drafts
submitted to it and to take such appropriate action as
it desires;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
results of the Conference to the General Assembly at
its twenty-seventh session and also to transmit bis report
to the Economic and Social Council;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for the work that will have to
be undertaken after the Conference, pending consideration of the recommendations of the Conference by the
General Assembly at ,its twenty-seventh session.

2. Approves the draft rules of procedure far the
Conference submitted by the Preparatory Committee118
and recommends them far adoption by the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States
Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to participate in the Conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite representatives of the specialized agencies and the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency to participate in the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite other
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to be represented by observers at the Conference on
the basis of the criteria recommended by the Preparatory Committee;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to conclude the
preparations far the Conference and to circulate the
fallowing documents in advance of the Conference:
(a) A draft declaration on the human environment;
( b) A draft action plan, constituting a blueprint for
intemational co-operation to protect and enhance the
5 B A/CONF.48/PC/13

2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

and Corr.1, annex IV.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(ltem 12)

At its 2026th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1971, the General Assembly
decided, on the recommendation of the Second Committee, 59 to defer until its
twenty-seventh session further consideration of the draft resolution entitled
"Measures to imprnve the organization of the work of the Council", recommended
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1622 (LI) of 30 July 1971
and the amendments thereto. 60
~o Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item
12, document A/8578/ Add.1, para. 49.
60 /bid., paras. 44-46.
