74

General Auembly-Seventeenth Se11ion

5. Requests the administering Power to make every
effort, including the promotion of harmony and unity
among the political elements of Zanzibar, to bring that
Territory to independence at the earliest date in accordance with the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1812 (XVIl). Question of Kenya
The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation in Kenya,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0,
Having taken note of the statement made by the
delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland on 10 August 1962 at the 99th
meeting of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Bearing in mind the declared policy of the United
Kingdom Government to lead the people of Kenya to
full independence,
Having studied the evidence of the petitioners,
Noting further the negotiations which have taken
place between the political parties concerned and the
administering Power,
1. Affirms the validity, with respect to Kenya, of the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Affirms further the inalienable right of the people
of Kenya to freedom and independence, and urges the
administering Power to make every effort to organize
national elections without further delay on the basis
of universal adult suffrage;
3. Requests the administering Power and all concerned to make every effort, including the promotion
of harmony and unity among the people of Kenya, to
bring the territory to independence at the earliest date
in accordance with the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples ;
4. Expresses the hope that Kenya will become an
independent and sovereign State and join the community of nations in the shortest possible time.
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.

1817 (XVII). Question of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
which it established a Special Committee to examine
the implementation of the Declaration,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 21
relating to the question of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland,

Having heard the petitioners,
Noting that the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, has not yet implemented the Declaration in these Territories and has not taken steps
to transfer all powers to the peoples of Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland,
Noting that the constitutional provisions now contemplated for these Territories and the electoral legislation in force are discriminatory, do not meet the
wishes of the peoples and are not consistent with the
Declaration,
Deploring the particularly alarming economic and
social situation prevailing in Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland after several decades of colonial
rule,
Expressing its profound concern at the declared intention of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa to annex these Territories, and condemning any
attempt to jeopardize the right of the peoples of these
Territories to establish their own independent States,
Taking note of the statement made by the administering Power to the effect that these Territories are
politically completely independent of South Africa
and that the United Kingdom Government adheres to
this policy, and that there is no question of that Government agreeing at this stage to the transfer of these
Territories to the Republic of South Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to selfdetermination and independence ;
2. Invites the administering Power immediately to
suspend the present constitutional provisions and to
proceed without further delay to hold elections in the
three Territories on the basis of direct universal adult
suffrage;
3. Invites further the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
abrogate the present constitutional provisions and to
convene immediately a constitutional conference with
the participation of the democratically elected political
leaders of the three Territories, with a view to setting,
in accordance with their wishes, the date on which
each of the Territories will attain its independence;
4. Considers that a serious effort should be made
to provide economic, financial and technical assistance,
through United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and the specialized agencies, in order to
remedy the deplorable economic and social situation of
the three Territories;
5. Urges the administering Power to take immediate steps to return to the indigenous inhabitants all
the land taken from them, whatever the form of, or
pretext for, such alienation;
6. Declares solemnly that any attempt to annex
Basutoland, Bechuanaland or Swaziland, or to encroach upon their territorial integrity in any way, will
be regarded by the United Nations as an act of aggression violating the Charter of the United Nations.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1818 (XVII). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 embodying the Declaration on the granting of
