UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/3
21 January 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3969th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 January 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its alarm at the serious deterioration
in the political and military situation in Angola. It reaffirms its belief
that lasting peace and national reconciliation cannot be achieved through
military means, and urges the Government of Angola and especially the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) to resume a
constructive dialogue on the basis of the "Acordos de Paz" (S/22609,
annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security
Council resolutions in order to seek a peaceful resolution of the conflict
and spare the Angolan people further war and suffering. In this context,
it reaffirms that the primary cause of the crisis in Angola is the refusal
by UNITA to comply with the basic provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and
reiterates its demand that UNITA comply with its obligations to
demilitarize and to permit the extension of State administration to
territories it controls.
"The Security Council shares the assessment and judgments of the
Secretary-General on the political and military situation in Angola
contained in his report of 17 January 1999 (S/1999/49). It underscores the
contribution of the United Nations to the past four years of relative peace
in Angola. It expresses its deep regret that the present political and
security situation in the country and the lack of cooperation, especially
by UNITA, with the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) have
prevented MONUA from fully carrying out its mandated role.
"The Security Council underlines the great importance it attaches to a
continued multidisciplinary presence of the United Nations under the
direction of a Representative of the Secretary-General in Angola. It
recognizes that such a continued presence depends on the safety of United
Nations personnel and requires the agreement of the Government of Angola
and the cooperation of all concerned. In this context, it appeals to the
Government of Angola to provide such agreement and to UNITA to cooperate
fully. It welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to consult
99-01521 (E)

210199

/...

S/PRST/1999/3
English
Page 2

urgently with the Government of Angola on such a United Nations presence
and to report to the Council in this regard.
"The Security Council again calls upon Member States to support the
peace process in Angola through full and immediate implementation of the
measures against UNITA contained in resolutions 864 (1993) of
15 September 1993, 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of
12 June 1998, and reiterates its readiness to take steps to reinforce the
implementation of these measures on the basis of the recommendations
contained in section IV of the report of the Secretary-General of
17 January 1999.
"The Security Council expresses its profound concern at the
humanitarian impact of the conflict on the Angolan people. It urges the
international community to support the Government of Angola in fulfilling
its primary responsibility for the humanitarian needs of the Angolan people
and, in this regard, urges Member States to fund generously the 1999
Consolidated Humanitarian Appeal for Angola. It calls upon all concerned to
concur and cooperate with United Nations humanitarian assistance activities
on the basis of the principles of neutrality and non-discrimination, to
guarantee the security and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel,
and to ensure necessary, adequate and safe access and logistics by land and
air. It urges all concerned to cooperate with the human rights activities
of the United Nations, which help to lay a basis for lasting peace and
national reconciliation.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
