S/2016/1129

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 29 December 2016 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that your letter dated 27 December 2016
(S/2016/1128) concerning the intended mandate and functions of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) has been brought to t he attention
of the members of the Security Council.
The members of the Security Council concur with the recommendation,
contained in your second report on UNOWAS (S/2016/1072), to extend its mandate,
as set forth in the annex to the present letter, for a further period of three years, from
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2019. The members of the Council request that you
report to the Council every six months on the fulfilment by UNOWAS of its
mandate.
(Signed) Román Oyarzun Marchesi
President of the Security Council

16-23188 (E)

100117

*1623188*

S/2016/1129

Annex
Proposed mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel
Objective 1
Monitor political developments in West Africa and the Sahel and carry out
good offices and special assignments on behalf of the Secretary-General to
assist in peacebuilding, sustaining peace efforts and enhancing subregional
capacities for conflict prevention and mediation in countries of West Africa and
the Sahel.
Function 1.1
Monitor and analyse the situation in West Africa and the Sahel, in particular
emerging threats to peace, and provide the Secretary-General, the Security Council,
regional and subregional organizations and national Governments with early
warning and recommendations for preventive action.
Function 1.2
Perform good offices roles in West African countries to assist in conflict prevention,
sustaining peace and peacebuilding efforts and consolidating political stability.
Function 1.3
Enhance subregional capacities for conflict prevention, conflict management,
mediation and good offices in West Africa and the Sahel, paying particular attention
to the women and peace and security agenda, including providing support to
existing subregional mechanisms.
Function 1.4
Facilitate the implementation of the International Court of Justice ruling of
10 October 2002 on the land and maritime boundary dispute between Cameroon and
Nigeria.
Objective 2
Enhance subregional capacities to address cross-border and cross-cutting
threats to peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel, in particular
election-related instability and challenges related to security sector reform,
transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking, terrorism and violent
extremism as and when conducive to terrorism.
Function 2.1
Raise awareness of and promote integrated subregional and cross -border responses
to potential problems, humanitarian needs and emerging threats to peace, security
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.

2/4

16-23188

S/2016/1129

Function 2.2
Support the development of networks of practitioners and subregional frameworks
and mechanisms to address challenges related to security sector reform,
transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking, terrorism and violent extremism as
and when conducive to terrorism.
Function 2.3
Facilitate systematic and regular linkages in the work of the United Nations system
within the region to promote a coherent and synergetic United Nations approach to
addressing the root causes of instability and conflict in West Africa and the Sahel.
Objective 3
Support the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel and the coordination of international and regional engagements in
the Sahel.
Function 3.1
Provide strategic leadership to the United Nations system for the effective
implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel under its
three strategic goals, namely, governance, security and resilience.
Function 3.2
Contribute to efforts aimed at sustaining international engagement in support of the
Sahel and help coordinate the various Sahel strategies, including by providing
continued support to the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel and its
Technical Secretariat, as well as to the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Function 3.3
Support and promote enhanced regional cooperation for the fulfilment of the
objectives of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Objective 4
Promote good governance and respect for the rule of law, human rights and the
mainstreaming of gender into conflict prevention and management initiatives in
West Africa and the Sahel.
Function 4.1
Facilitate the exchange of information and the sharing of best practices among
national Governments, regional organizations, civil society and other entities for the
promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, gender equality, women’s
participation and leadership and the improvement of electoral processes.

16-23188

3/4

S/2016/1129

Function 4.2
Provide support for the enactment of resolutions and frameworks of action
pertaining to respect for human rights in conflict prevention and conflict
management initiatives in West Africa and the Sahel.
Function 4.3
Provide support to national Governments, regional organizations a nd civil society to
incorporate a gender and youth perspective into conflict prevention and conflict
management initiatives as recognized in resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security as well in resolution 2250 (2015) on
youth, peace and security.

4/4

16-23188
