UNITED NA TIONS

I

NA TIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

842

YEAR

_ll_d_M_EE-c_T_I_N_G_,_'_9_D--,E,.-C_E_M_B_E_"R_1_9_68

_

eme SEANCE: 9 DECEMBRE 1968
TREIZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OI"FICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (SjAgenduj842/Rev. 1)................................

1

Adoption of the agenda... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Admission of new Members to the United Nations:
(a) Letter dated 3 December 1958 from the Ambassador of the Republic of
Glline01 t.o the S'3cretary-General (5/4122, 514131);
(b) Resolution 1144 A (XII) of the General Assembly, adoptee on 25 Oetober 1957: letter dated 8 December 1958 from the representative o[ the

1

United States of America to the President of the Security Council con-

cerning the application for member~hiI) of the Republic of Korea (S/4127,
S/4129/Rev. 1);
(c) Resolution IVIA B (XII) at' the General Assembly, adopted 011 25 October J 957: letter dated 8 Dec€mber 1958 from the representative of the
United States of America to the President of the Security Council concerning the application for membership of Viet-Nam (8/4128, S{4130)....

T ABLE

DES

MA TIERES

Ordre du jour provisoil'e (S/Agenda/842j Rev. 1)...............
, ..
Adoption de l'ordre du jour
Admission de nouveaux Membres a I'Organisation des Nations Dnies :
a) Lettre, en date du 3 decembre J958, adressee au Secretaire general par
l'Ambassadeur de la Republique de Guinee (S/4122, 514131);
b) Resolut.ion 1144 A (XII) de l'Assemblee generale, adoptee le 25 octobl'e 1957 :
lettre, en date du 8 decembre 1958, adressee au President DU Conseil de
securitc par le representant des Etats-Uni.<l d'Am~rique au sujet de la
demande d'admission de la Republique de Coree (8/4127, S/4129jRev. 1);
c) Resolution 1144 B (XII) de l'Assemblee generale, adoptee le 25 octobre 1957 :
lettre, en date du 8 dccernbre 1958, adressee au President du Conseil de
securite par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique an sujet de la
demande d'admission du Viet~Nam (8/4128, 5j4130) ... ,..........

( 20 p.. )

3

1
1

3

S/PV.842

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records 01 the meetings
01 the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

with figures.

•••
Les d()cuments pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans Ies
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publics dans des supplements trimcstriels aux Documents officiels.

Us coles des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se cvmposent de
leitres majuscules et de chttfres. La simple mention d'lme coie duns un texte signifie
qu'll s'agit d'un document de ['Organisation.

,
J

.

,
I

,
,

•

=

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND MEETING

,

Held in New York, on 'ftle8day, 9 December 1958, at 10.30 a.m.

!

HUTI' CENT QUARANTE-DEUXIEME SEANCE
Tenue it New~YorI" le mardi 9 decembre 1958, n 10 h. 30.

.'

"

•

I

,

r
!

!

,.,

Presidenl: Mr. G. JARRING (Sweden).

President: M. G. JARRING (Suede).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Canada, China. CoLombia. France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents : Les reprcselltants des pays suivants .
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France. lrak, Japon, Panama,
Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes sovictiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlandc du
Nord, Et::Jts-Unis d'Ameriqlle.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/842/Rev. 1)

Ordre du jour proviso ire (SjAgeudaj842/Rev. 1)

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

2.

Admission of new Members to the United Nations:

2. Admission de nouveaux Membrcs a l'Organisation
des Nation.~ Unies :
a) Lettre, en date du 3 decembre 1958, adressee
au Secretaire general par l'Ambassatlellr de la
Repub1ique de Guince (Sj4122)j
IJ) Resolution 1144 A (XII) de l'Assemblee generale,
adoptee le 25 oetobre 1957 : lettre, en date dll
8 deeembre 1958. adressee au President du Conscil
de securite par le representant des EtatsMUnis
d'Alnerique all sujet de la demande d'admission de
la Repllblique de Coree (S/4127):
c) Resolution 1144 B (XII) de l' Assemblee genrrale.
adoptee le 25 octobre 1957 : lettre, en date du
8 decembre 1958. adressee an President rlu Conseil
de securite. par le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amcrique au !iujet de la demande d'admission
<Iu Viet-Nam (Sf4128).

(a) Letter dated 3 December 1958 from tlle
Ambassador of the Republic of Guinea to the
Secretary-General (8/4122);
(b) Resolution 1144· A (XII) of the General
Assembly, adopted on 25 October 1957: letter dated
8 December 1958 from the representative of the
United States of America to the President of the
Security Council concerning the application for
membership of the Republic of Korea (Sf4127);
(c) Resolution 1144 B (XII) of the General
Assembly, adopted on 25 October 1%7: letter dated
8 December 1958 from the representative of the
United States of America to the President of the
Security Council concerning the application for
membership of Viet-Nam (5f4128) .

Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

Adoption of the ag('.nda

Adoption de l'ordre du jom

,r

1. The PRESIDENT: The provisionaL agenda for this
meeting is contained in document SfAgendaf842fRev. 1.
The first item is the adoption of the agenda. If I
hear no objection, [ shall declare the agenda adopted.

1. Le PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'anglais) : L'ordre du
jour provisoire de 1'1 presente seance a ete pUbJie SOLlS
la cote SfAgcndaf842fRev. 1. Le premier point est
l'adoption de l'ordre du jem. S'il n'y a pas d'objection,
je declarerai I'ordre dn jour adopte.

•

2. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Rl1s.~ian): The Soviet tleleg<ltion does
not object to the inclusion in the agenda of today's
meeting of item (a) of the provisional agenda, namely,
the question of the admissiOll of the Republic of Guinea
to the United Nations. However, the Soviet delegation
is decidedly opposed to the indusion in the agenda of
items (b) and (c) as proposed by the United States of
America. namely, the question of the admission of
South KOl"ea and of South Viet-Nam to the United
Nations. We object on the following grounds:

2. l\'1. SOBOLEV (Union des Repl1bliqueR socialistes
sevictiql1es) [trad!lil du russe] : La delegation sovietique
ne s'oppose pas a ce que le point a de I'ordre du jour
provisoire, relatif a l'admission de La Republiquc de
Guinee a l'Organisation des Nations Unies, soit inscrit
a I'ordre du jour de la pn3sente seance. En revanche.
elle s'eleve cnergiqnemellt eontre )'inscription des
points b et c, proposes par les Etats-Unis et relatifs a
l'admission de la eeree <Iu Sud et du Viet-Nam du Sud.
Voici les raisons tle notr\! opposition.

1

3. For a whole year, the Security Council uas had
before it the General Assembly resolutions referred
to in the letter of the United States representative, Le"
the resolutions concerning the admission of South
Korea and South Viet~Nam to the United Nations.
Yet throughout this entire year the matter was never
placed on the agenda.. What was lhe reason for the
appearance of Mr. Lodge's letter twelve hours before
the meeting of the Security Council, after the agenda
had been agreed upon and included only the question
of the admission of the Republic of Guinea? Since
Mr, Lodge and the other members of the Security
Council are certainly under no illusions as to the
practical outcome or a discussion of the questions
which he has raised, there is but one explanation: the
questions of the admission of South Korea and South
Viet-Nam have certainly not aplleared on the pro~
visional agenda for good reason but purely for reasons
of propaganda. Clearly this is simply a manoeuvre
in the cold war wj'ich the United States is continuing
to wage and no practical results can be expected from
a discussion of these questions in the Security Council.

3. Pendant une annee entiere, le Conseil de securite
a cte saisi des resolutions de l'AssembleI'. generate que
le representant des Etats-Unis invoque dans sa lettre,
c'est-a-dire des resolutions relatives a l'admission de
la Con~e du Sud et du Viet-Nam du Sud a l'OrganisatiQn
des Nations Unies. DUI'ant toute cette periode, la
question n'a jamais etc inscrite a l'ordre du jour.
Dans ces conditions, pourquoi la lettre de M. Lodge
est-el1e appame 12 heures avant la seance du Conseil,
alors que l'ordre du jour etait arrci6 et ne comprenait
que la question de ['admission de la Republique de
Guinee? La seule explication possible est celle-ci :
M. Lodge, de meme que les autres membres du Comeil
de s~curite, n'a evidemment aucune illusion quant au
resultat pratique de l'examen des questions qu'il a
proposees, et ces questions relatives a )'admission de
la Coree du Sud et du Viet-Nam du Sud ont eM inscrites
a l'ordre du jour provisoire non pas pour des raisons
serieuses, mais a des fms de pure propagande, It est
clair qu'il ne s'agit que d'une simple manceuvre dans
la «guerre froide» que les Etats-Unis s'entetent a
poursuivre, et I'examen de ees questions au Conscil
de secmit6 ne peut donner allcun resultat pratique.

4. On the other hand, consideration of these questions
simultaneously with the consideration of the application
of the Republic of Guinea will, of course, immediately
create tension, lead to a deterioration in the atmosphere
and thus muddy the waters, if I may use the expression.
Having in mind the purely propaganda motives under·
lying the inclusion of these questions - and I would
emphasize that fact - the Soviet delegation does not
consider it appropriate to include them in today's
agenda, by what I would eaU a manoeuvre, though
it would not object to a discussion of them at any
other meeting. It will therefore vote against the
inclusion of items (0) and (c).

4. D'autre part, il va de soi que le hit de d6battre
ces questions en rneme temps que III demande de
la Republique de Guinee cree immediatcment 11lle
situation tendue, envenime l'atmospherc et embrouille
ainsi les choses. Ces questions etant inscrites, je le
repete, a des Hns de pure propagande, la delegation
sovietique ne verrait pas d'objection a Cl'. qu'elles
soient examinees a une autre seance, mais elle estime
inopportune leltr inscription a l'OIdre du jour de la
seance d'aujourd'hui par un moyen que je quaJifierai
de manceuvre. Elle voiera done contre l'inscription
des points b et c,

5. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States does not agree with the stand taken
by the representative of the Soviet Union. The item
on our agenda for today is - and I quote - " Admission
of new Members". The provisional agenda which
contained this item [Sf.4.gendaf842] was circulated on
5 December. The United States is merely asking that
under this item two applications be considered which
ha VI'. been before the Security Council for a number
of years. The Sec\.1rity Council has remained seized
oC these applications, and in our vicw there is nothing
in the rules of procedure to prevent this Council, when
it meets to consider the admission of new Members,
from reconsidering two applications of such long
standing. We do not ask for their consideration
simultaneously with the admission of Guinea, as
r\'lr. St)bolev impliedj we ask merely for their consideration consec'tltively. Our bringing these membership
questions up is not a cold-war gesture; the cold~war
clement is brought in by the determination of tlle
Soviet Union to veto these membership applications.
That is the cold-war responsibility in this matter.

5.

M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [Iraduil de.

f'an{Jlais) : Les Etats-Unis n'admettent pas la th~e

du representant de l'Union sovietique. La question
qui figure a notre ordre du jour est intitulee « Admission
de nO\lveaux Membres a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies". L'ordre du jour provisoire de cette seance
[S/Agendaj842] a ete distribue le 5 decembre. Les
Etats~Unis demandent seulement que, sous le point en
question, le Conseil examine deux demandes d'admis·
sion qui sont pendantes devant lui depuis plusieurs
annees. Le Conseil est toujours saisi de ces demandes
et, a nohe avis, rien dans le n~.glement intcrieur
n'empeche le Conseil. lorsqu'il se rel1nit pour examiner
la question de l'admission de nouveaux Membres, de
reprenctre l'examen de deux demandes pcadantes depuis
si longtemps. Nons ne demnndons pas qu'elles soient
examinees en meme temps que celle de la Guinee,
eamme M. Sabolev l'a donne a entendre. Nous deman~
dons seulement qu'elles soient examinees apres. En
soulevant la question de ces demandes d'admission,
nous ne 1l0US livrons pas a une manamvre de a guerre
froide »j c'est au contraire l'intention qu'a I'UnioD
sovietique d'opposer son veto aces demandes d'admission qui constitue I'eMment de guerre froide, et c'est
I'Union sovietique qui a recours a In guerre froide.

6.

M. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
from Russian): In connexion with the
statement of the representative of the United States,

6. M. SQBOLEV (Union des Repl1bliques sociaJistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : Je voudrais simplement
apporter une precision en reponse a la declaration du

(translated

2

(.

r

(
I,

I

9.
of (

i[:i
~

I should like to supply just one piece of information,
The agreed agenda, issued two days ago, i.ncluded the
question of the admission of new Members. The
only item appearing under that heading was a letter
dated 3 Decembel' 1958 from :Mr. Diatlo Telli, Ambassador of the Republic of Guinea, to the Secretary-General
[S/4122]. This agenda was approved by all the members
of the Security Council. Under the rules of the Council,
the 3ppearanee of new documents, even if under this
same general heading, is in fact admissible. But this
depends on the urgency of the Hem, as Mr. Lodge is
very well aware. The Secnrity Council does admit
such action, i.e., consideration of a question under a
special emergency procedure, only when the question
is in fact of special emergency character. Most often.
these are questions which involve a threat to peace
and security, The question which the United States
delegation is placing on the agenda of the Security
Council today is not of special emergency character
and does not necessitate any change whatever in the
agreed procedure, which was approved by all the
members of tIle Conncil.

representant des Etats-Unis. L'ordre du jour couwou,
qui a ete public it y a deuy. jours, contenait la question
de l'admissiOll de nouveaux Mem1res, et sous eette
rUbriqnc figllrait Ilniqllemellt la lettrc, en date du
3 d6ccmbre 1958, adl'cssce au Sccretaire general par
M. Di:l1l0 Telli, l1mbassadeur de la Republique de
Gllinee [S{4122}. Cet ordrc du jour avait ct6 accepte
par tous les membres du Conseil de securite. 11 est
efledivemcnt possible, ell vertu du reglcment intericur
du Conseil, de faire ngurer de noU\'e..'1.UX documents,
meme SlHlli ce titre gCllel'tll. Mais tout depend de
I'Ul'genre de la qu(,stion, monsieur Lodge, vous le
savez bi~n. Le Conscil de securite admet l'cxamel1
d'une question selon une pl"ocedure urge.ute et extraordinaire lorsqnc lu question est efIeetivcment urgente
et cxtraordinEtire. Le plus sOlivcnt, il s'ugit de questions
relatives a linc menace contrc la paix et la st\curite.
La question que la delegation des Eiats-Unis propose
l'ordre du jour du ConseiJ
d'inscrire aujol.lrd'hlli
n'est oi urgcntc Cli extraordinaire et ne necessite en
uneunc fa«on un challgement de la procedure convenue,
que tous les membres du Conscil ont Qcceptee.

7, The PRESIDENT: As I have heard no {)bjection
to the inclusion of item 2 (a) in the agenda. I consider

7. Le PRESIDENT (Iraduit de l'anglais) : Comrne
l'insc:ripLion So l'ordre du jour de la question faisant
l'objet (le l'alinea It du point 2 u'a pas suscite d'objcc~
tions. je considere que cette question est inseritea
l'ordre du jour.
L'alini!o [l du point 2 e~t adoptt-,

a

the inclusion of tllis item agreed.

I1em 2 (a) was adopted.

8, Le PRJ~SIDENT (tl'aduil de l'anglais) : Le representant de l'Union sovietique est oppose a l'inscription
des questions visees aux alineas b et e du point 2,
Le Con!leil doit done se prononcer par un vote.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has voiced objection to the inclusion of items 2
(b) and 2 (c) in the agenda. The CouncH, therefore,
will vote on these two items.
A vote was taken by show of hands,
In favour: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Against: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

8,

II est procede au vole a main levee.
Volenl pour : Canadn, Chine, Colombie, France,
Japon, Panama, Suede, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Vote contre : Union des Repllbliques socialistes
soviHiques.
$'abslient .' l'Irak.
Par 9 voix contre une, auee une abstention, les alineas b
el c du point 2 sont adopUs,

Abstaining: Iraq.
Items Z (1) and 2 (c) were adopted by 9 voles 10 1,
wilh 1 abstention.

Adm.iallion de nouve&ux Membres a I'OrgllniBation des
NatioDfI Unies :
a) Lettre, en date du 3 dicemhre 1958, adressee au
8ecrelaire general ['Ill l'AmJJaaaadeur de la
Repu}Hque de Guinee (5/4]22; 5/4131);
h) RCBalution 1144· A (XII) de J'Assemblie geueraJc,
adoptee le 25 octobre 195'1 : lettre, en date du
8 decembJ'll 1958, adresste au President du [oBseil
de securite par le repl'ellentant des Etals- Unis
d' Amerique au sujet de la demltllde d 'admi8flion
de la RepuLlique de Cork (5/4127, 5/4129/

Ad.lniMion of new members 10 The Uniled Nations:
(a) Letter dated 3 Docemher 1958 from the Atnbassa.
dor of lhe RepubIk of Guinea 10 the SecretaryGeneral (5/4122, 5/4131);
(b) ReJlolution Il44 A (XlI) of the GeDcral Assembly, adopted on 25 October 195'1: letler daled
8 December 1958 from the representative of the
United States of America 10 the President of
the Security Council concerning the application
for membership of lhe Republic of Korea

(S/4127, S/4129/Rev. I),

Rev. 1) ;

(c) Resolution 1144 B (Xll) oC the General A.8f1cmbly
adopted on 25 October 195'1: letter daled
8 December 1958 from the representative of the
United States of America to the President of the
Security COUlwil concerning the application for
membership of Viet-Nam (S/4.J28, 5/4130)

c) Reflolution 1144 B (XII) de J'.Msemhl€e generale
adoptee le 25 octobl'e 1957 : lettre, en dale du
8 decembre 1958, adrcssee au President du
Couadl de seeurite par le repreaentant des Etate~
Urns d' Amerique an 6ujet de la demande d'admission du Viet-Nam (8/4128, 5/4130).

9.

Le PRESIDENT (lradllil de l'anglais) : La
demande d'admission de la Republique de Guinee a

9. The PRESIDENT: The application of the Republic
of Guinea for admission to membership in the United

3

q1~>

I

I[
lIi
If">

l:

!'

r
"

Nations wns addressed to the Secretary-General by
Mr. Diallo Telli, Ambassador of the Republic of Guinea,
and has been circulated to members of the Security
Council in document S{4122.

l'Organisation des Nations Duies a ete adressee au
Secretaire general par M. Diallo Telli, ambassadeur de
la Republique de Guinee, et a ete distribuee aux
membres du Conseil de securite sous la cote S/4122,

10, Following the practice adopted by the Security
Council in similar cases during recent years, I should
like to suggest that the Council agree, as provided
in rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
consider this application directly without first referring
it for e){aminatioll to the Committee on the Admission
of New :Membe.rs. If there is no oLjection, I shall
take it tllat it is so agreed.
It wa~ so decided.

10, Conformement a la procedure que le Conseil de
securi ~e :l suivie ces dernieres annces clans des cas
similaires, je suggere que le Consen decide, comme
I'article 59 du reglement intcL'icu[' provisoire l'autorise
A le fail'e, d'examiner directement cette dcmande sans
l'envoi au comitc chargt de I'admbsion des 1l0\1veaux
j\Iembres. S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je eOHsidererai
qu'il en est ainsi decide.
II ell esl ainsi decide.

11. The PRESIDENT: In this connexion a draft
resolution has been circulated by the lielegations of
Iraq and Japan [514131], whereby the Security Council
would decide to recommend to the Generlll Assembly
that the Repllblic of Guinea be admitted to membership
of the United Nat.ions.

Le PRESWENT (traduil de l'ang/ais) : Les
de l'frak et du Japon ont depose un projet
de resolution [8/4131] aux tef'llleS duquel le Conseil
de securiLe deciderai~ de I'ecommander a l'AssernbIec
generale d'admettre la Repllblique de Guinee comme
Memure de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

12. Mr. MATSUDAIRA (Japan) (translated from
French): My delegation has the honour and the privilege
of submitting for the Security Council's consideration
a draft resolution [S/4'131J the purpose of whicll is to
recommend to the General Assembly t.hat the Repllblic
of Guinea be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

12. M, MATSUDAIRA (Japon) : Ma delegation a
l'honneur et le privilege de SQumettrc ala c0n51dCl'ation
du Conseil de securHe un projet de resolution [SI4131)
3yal\t pour but. de recommander a l'Assemblee gCOIh'ale
l'admission de la Rcpublique de Gllinee comme Membre
de l'Organisatian des Nations Unies.

13. The very fact that the question is now beforc
us is a tribute to France's long and brilliant tradition
of bringing civilization to others. \Ve like to 1001,
upon it as a task accomplished throllgh unceasing and
praiseworthy efforts very frequently involving tllOll.sands of courageous Frenchmell oE goodwill. We also
see in it a shining monument to France's outstanding
crmtribution in thl': intellectual and spiritual fields.

13. Le fait meme que le probleme se pose I'll cc
moment nst nn hommage ITlHIIl a la longne et bdllante
tradition civilisatrice Lie la ['rance. Nous aimons y
voir une muvre ac(mmpli~ grace aux efforts inccssallts
et louables poursuivis tres souvent par des milHcrs de
vaillants FranQuis U(·. l.lonne volonte. NOllS aimORS y
voir aussi nn monument lumineux d6die au rayonnement tant inte)]~ctuel que spil'itllel tie la Frallce.

Today we are witnessing the admission of the
young, sovereign Repubiic of Guinea to membership
in the United Nations. Nevertheless, we must not
overlook the fact that. this country owes ns status as
au independent nfl.tion to the generosity and realism of
the State in whosc carc it was nntil recently. It is
with a deep feeling of gratitude and admiration that
my delegation wishes on this occasion to do honour to
France. It is also with a deep feeling of hope and
prayer that l should like to address myself to the
young Republic of Guinea. I sincerely hope that its
.future will be prosperous and that it may contribute
to the pear,e of the world and the welfare of mnnkind.

14. Nous sommes temoins aujourd'lllli de l'cntrce (le
la jeune l'epublique souveraine de Guin6e au sein dr:
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Il ne 1aut pourtnnt
pas oubher que cettc nation a I'll gagner SOil statut de
pcuple independant gdlce A la \lation mere d'hier,
Asa gcncl'osit6 et a son rcalismc. C'est avec un sentiment
emu de reconnaissance et d'admiration que mn. delegation desire, en cettc occasion, 11Onorer la France.
C'est egalement avec Uil sentiment profond d'espoir
et de priere que je m'adresse a la jeune rcpublique de
Guinee, et je souhaite ardcmment que le destin de
cette nntion soit favorise et qu'elIe puisse contrilmer
a la paix dn monde et all bien de l'humallitc.

15. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): The Government of Iraq
welcomes with great satisfaction and pleasure the fact
that Guinea has become a sovereign and independent
State and has joined the ranks of thc free African
nations.

15. M. JAWAD (Irak) [lraduit de l'anglaisJ : Le
Gouvel'ncment irakien se felicile vivement de cc que
la Gtlince soit devenue nn Etat sUllverain et ind~­
pendant et qu'clle ait rejoint les rangs des 11:llions
librcs d'Afrique.

16. The last pltllse in the process which led to Guinea's
attainmenl of independence deserves particular mcntion. In fact, Guinea's aclJievemcnt of an indepelHlent.
status is perhaps the first incident of its killd in the
long history of the national struggle for frcedom and
independence. :Miany nations had to fight and endure
material and human sacriflces in order to achieve
their national deliverance from colonial domination.
Guinea's rise to the status of a sovereign and inde~

16. La del'llicre phase clu processus par leqllel la
Guinee est (]evel111C independante merite p<lrticune~
relUent d'ctrc Incntionnee. En fait, la fayon dont In
Guinee est parvenue a I'independance est peu~tre
le seul exemple de cc geme dans la longue llistoire de
la lutte menec par bien des naiioll5 pour conquerir
leur libertc et tellr indepcndanee. Nombreuses sont
cclles qui ant dO: se battrr:: et consentir fa de durs sftcrifICes en hommcs et des sacrifices matericls pOllr se

,

17.

,

11.

deIegation.~

H,

4

pendent 51
the provh
Republic.

i

i

f

r

f

fr
(
r

f

(

,l
I

On 2

that Guinl
a referend
no obslac
people of
declaratiOl
contained
regaTding
rights of
rcignty, a
confirmed
these prin'
of peoplcf
offered tll
future.

18. On
made the'
voted" n
averwllelr
clearly m
to their c
existence,
proclaimc
lican reg
France t,
eratic an,
out of t
family of

19. It ~
Guinea 11
departuf<
territorie
act Franl
history great Fr
thinh:ers
with wh:
their che
will mar
all colon
this way
allies arr:
but also
to many
France's
culture 1

20. Th·
Governn
looked:
There f
that tlH
assume
from th

21. TIt
letter ac
Nations.

,

t
,i
,I

r

I

,

,

,

pendent State was the outcome of a promi.se based on
the provisions of the Constitu:ion of tile French
RellUblic.

soustraire a la domination d'une puissance coJoniale,
L'acccssioll de 1<:. Guinec au statut d'Etat souverBin et
tndcpendant est la consequence d'une promesse fondee
sur les dispositions de la CO:lstitu:ion de la RCpublique
fr(lw;aise.

17. On 25 August 1958, GCllcl'l'..1 de Gaulle declared
that Guinca was free to choose independence through
a referendum and guaranteed that France would place
no obstacle in its path, following tiw wish~.s of the
peo?le of Guinea and their own conditions. This
declaration was no donbt in Hue with tIle conc~pts
contained in the preamble to lite French Constitution
regarding Lhe devuLiou of thc Frcuc]; people to the
rights of man aml to the prind:>les o[ Ilational s·)vereignty, as defined by the Declaration of 1789 and
coIJf!rmed by the Constitution of 1946. By virtue of
these principles and of the right of tlle sclf-detcl'minuLlull
of peoples, most French overseas territories have been
offered the opportunity of charting their own national
future.

17. Le 25 aout 190~, le genera: de Gaulle a lMdar~
que la Guinee etait libre de choisir l'independance
pm' :8. VOlC d'ul1 rtlferendcm, el il a garanti qu~ la
Prance lie ferait pas obstacle a ce que la Guinee suive
comme elle le voudrait, et dans les conditions qu'clle
vOlldrait, la route qU'clle vouclrait, CeUe declaration
etait sans auenn donte cOllforme allX pri!Jcipes enonces
d~ns lp. pr~flmb~lle de 1:1 Constitution frnnl;:llise, DU le
peuplc frall(jt\is prOdllrlC sou at:~lchement aux droits
de l'hOllllne et nux principes de la souvewinete nationale
tels qu'ils ont He dclini~, pur la Declarntion de 1789,
confirIl1ce par la Coestitution de 1945. En vertu (11'
ees principes et de III liLre determination des peuples,
la France a oITert a ln plupnrt de ses tcrritoires d'outremer la possibilite de decider de leur propre avcnir.

18. On 28 September 1958, the p~ople of Guinea
mude their choice. 'i'hcre were 1,13!:i,324 pel's<JllS wllo
voted" no ", and 56,891 who voted .. yes ", By their
overwhelmingly negative vote, the people of Guinea
clearly manifested tteir genuine desire to Pllt an end
to tlleir colonial status and aSSUDe their free national
exhtcncc, Thus, on 2 October 1958, Guinea solennly
proclaimed its national independence under a repUblican regime, and the transfer of sovereignty from
France to Guinea was compleled. Through Q drmocratic antl constitntbnal process, Guinea has stepped
ou t of the French empire into membership in the
family of free nations.

18. Le 28 s(~pLcmbrl' 1958, la population de la GJ:inec
fait son c!loix. 011 a compte 1.1.%.324 ( llOn)) et
56.891 \( aui ». A line ecrasante majoritc, la Guinee a
flinsi clldTi~l11cnt IlwnifC'sl'e son Msir .~incCrp. de l11ilttrc
fln i.t son statut colollilll d de devenir une nation
reconnue et libre. Le 2 octobrc 1958, la Guinee n donc
~oJeJlnellemenl procJnme son indepcndallcc nnLionalc
sous Uti regime republicain, et lc trunsfcrt de souverainete de la France a la Guinee a eu lhl. Par un
process\\s democrHtiqllc et constituticnllcl, la Guinee
s'cst dd.achec de l'empirc culonial frunyais pour dcvenir
membre de la famille des llUUOIlS Jibres.

HI. It should be admitted that the way in which
Guinea has achieved its independence marlts a welcome
departure from France's policy towl'rds its colonial
territories. We wish to express the hope that by this
act France intends to open a new chapter in its colollial
history - a c1mpter to be inspired by the ideals of the
great French Revolution of 1789 u::Jd of its great
thinkers and intellectuals. The wisdom and sagacity
wHo which Fr[l.rJ.ce has QITercd lh~ pf'.opll'. of Guinea
their choice deserves special praise. This, we llOpC,
will mark the begjnning of a policy ';0 be r1pplied to
all colonial peoples under French administration. In
this way, France not only will fmd close friends and
allies among those. people who reject its colonial rule,
but also will extend the field of its amicabl~ relations
to many other countries and nations which appreciate
Frnnce's great contributions to the s~rralll of Immul1
culture and knowledge.

19. 11 faut rrconnaitre que la fa~on dOllt la Guinee
est parvl;;llue i\. l'indepcndunce marque un lIcureux
changemcnt dans la politique suivie pal' la Prance
Vis-a-vis de ses colonies. Nous voulons esperer que,
pal' cel Rete, la France enlenJ ouvrir Ull nouveuu
chapitre dans son histoire colonialc -- un chapitre
inspire des ideaux de la grande revolution fram;:aise
de 1789 et des grands phi/osaplle:> et grands eer'ivains
de ce ]1ays. 11 taut rendre un hommage tout particulier
a la Fra:J.ce pour la sagesse cc la perspicacite dont
elle a bit preuve en offrant au peup[e guinecn la
possibilite d'exercer son choix. Naus esperons que ce
8p·~te marquera le commencement d'une politique qui
sew appliquee a taus les peuples co!oniaux administrcs
par la France. Nan sculer:lcnt la France se fera ainsi
des amis I.'.t des allies pflimi les peupll's qui Se soustraient
D. Sf>. domination coloniale, In::!is elle efendra aussi ses
relations amieales a de nombrellx mitres pays et nations
qui apprecient l'immense contribution que la France a
app0l'tee a la .::ulturc et allX conCk'1issances hmnaines,

20.

The good example set by the United Kingdom
Government in its colonial policy should not be over~
looked by a people as great itS the French peaplc.
There are millions in Africa who have conftdcncc
that the moment has come for the French people to
as.sume a constructive historical role in saving them
from the miseries of war and destruction.

20. Un grand peuple camme le peuple franl;ais ne
doi! pas oublier l'exemple que le Gouvernemcnt du
Royaume-Uni a donne par sa Folitique coloniale. Des
millions d'Afric'ains ~()nt r:ollv£incus que le moment
est wnu pour la France de jouer un role historiqne
eonstructif. en leuT epargnant les miseres de la €luerre
et de la destruction.

22. The delegation of rraq has carefully studied the
letter addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations by the Ambassador of the Republic of Guinea

21. La delegation irakiennc a etudie attcntivement la
lettre que]'Ambassadeur de la Rcpubliql1e de Guinee
a arlressee all Secretaire general de l' Organisation des

a

5

and containing a request for the admission of Guinea
to membership of the United Nations. We have also
studied the proclamation adopted by the TerritoriaL
Assembly of French Guinea at its special session held
on 2 October 1958 [S/4122, annex I]. We have noted
with sati"faetion Guinea's adhesion to the principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and
its determination to fulfil its obligations thereunder.
l\loreover, we have examined the constitutional act
of to November 1958 [ibid., annex Il], which demonstrates democratic features, and we have found it
consistent with the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human RlghbJ.

Nations Unies et dans laquelle il demande ['admission
de la Guinee a l'Organisation des Nations Unil.'.s. Elle a
6galement pris connnissance de la proclamation adoptee
par l'Assembl6e teJ'ritoriale de la Guinec fran~aisc
rounie en seance extraordinaire le 2 octohre 1958
[5/4122, annexe I]. NOlls avons note avec satisfaction
9ue la. Guinee accepte de se con!ormel' nux principcs
enonces dans la Charte des NatIOns Dnies et qu'clle
est resolue a rempHr les obligations qui en d6coulcnt
Nous avons aussi examine la loi constitutionnellc dt;
10 novembre 1958 [ibid., annexe Il], qui a un cal'act~re
democratique, et nous avons const<lte que la Constitution de la Guinee est compaUble a....cc la Chul'te des
Nations Voies et la Declaration univcrsellc des droits
de l'homme.

22. The delegation of Iraq considers that the State
of Guinea satisfies all tire relevant provisions of the
Charter and is therefore well qualified for membership
in tile United Nations.

22. La delegation irakienne considere que la RepubHque de Guinee satisfait a touLes les exigences de la
Charte et qu'elle remplit par consequent les conditions
requises pOUL' ctre admise a l'Organisation des Nations
Vnies.

23.

Furthermore, we note with great satisfaction the
world-wide recognition of the State of Guinea. Onc
ffianth after the announcement of the Constitution of
the new Republic, fifty-seven States, including eight
members of the Security Council, have recognized
Guinea.

2.J. Nou~ notons en outre avec une vive satisfaction
<Iue de nombreux Etats ont reCOllllU la Republique de
Guinee. Un mois apres la proclamation de la Constitution de la nonveLLe repubtique, 57 EtaLs, dont 8 Eta15
mcmbres du Conseil de secunte, ont reconnu la Guil1l?l'.

24. My delegation is particularly happy to welcome
another African State and to support its admission to
the United Nations. I wish on behalf of my Government
to extend our heartiest congratulations to the people
and Government of Guinea on this auspicious occasion
and to wish them a prosperous and peaceful future.

24. La delegation irakienne est particulicrement hellreuse d'accueillir un nouvcl Etat africuin et d'appuycr
sa demunde d'admission a J'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Au nom de mon gcuvernement, j'adresse en
cette heureuse occasion mes ch8leureuses felicitations au
peuple ct au gouvernement guineens, et leur souhnltl1
paix et prosperite.

25. It IS with great pleasure that tne delegation of
Iraq, jointl}· with that of Japan, has sponsored the
draft resolution contained in document S/4131. We
submit tItis draft resolution to the Security Council
and hope Lhat it will receive the Council's unanimous
support.

25. C'est 3vec ULl vii plaisir que III delegation irakiennc,
avec la delegation japonaise, a presente le Pl'ojct de
resolution publie sous la cote S/4131. Nous soumetums
ce projet au Conseil de securite en esperant qu'ill'adoptera a l'unanimite.

26. Sir Pierson DIXQN (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom .." ill gladly vote in favour of the
draft resolution 5ubmiLled by Iraq and Japan, which
recommends the admission of the Republic of Guinea
to the United Nations. The United Kingdom recognized the Republic of Guinea on 1 November, and
Her Majesty's Government h[l.ve already held friendly
discussions in London with tile Amhassador of l[\e
Republic, 1'I'lr. Diallo Telli. We are confident that the
Republic of Guinea is able and witting to carry out
the obligations of the Charter. It is our (irm conviction
that it will make a vaLuable and constrllctive contribution to the activities of the United Nations.

26. Sir Piel'son DIXON (Royaume-Dni) [traduil d~
l'anglais] : Le Hoyaume-Uni sera heureux de voter
pour le projet de resolution presente pur J'Irak et le
Japon, qui recolllmande I'admission de la Rcpuhlique
de Guinee a l'Organisation des Nations Dnies. Le
Hoyaume-Dni a reconnu la Reptlblique de Guinee le
1er novembre, et le Gouvernement de Sa Majes~ a
deja eu des contacts amicaux a Londres avec M. Diallo
Telli, ambassadetlr de la nouvelIe repnhliqne. NClUS
sommes sill'S que la Republique de Guinee est capuble
ct desireuse de s'acquitter des obligations qui dCCOlllent
de la Charte. Nons avons la ferme conviction qu'eUe
3pporter8 uoe conhibution precieuse et constructh'll
flUX nctivites de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

27. I feel that we should not allow this occasion to
pass without paying tribute to the \vise and enlightened
policy of France which, in the absence of any inter~
national complications, enabled the people of Guinea
in free vote to choose the path of indcpendence. The
fact that the independence of Guinea has been achieved
by the peaceful processes of democracy is an excellent
augury for the future. France has laid the foundations
fol' a relationship of confidence and co-operation between
itself and the new republic.

27. .le crois qu'it ne faut pas laisser pusser ceUe
occasion de rendre hommagc a la politique sage cl
eclairee de la France, qui, en evitant toute complicali()n
internationale, a permis au peuple de Guinee de ch()isir
par un vote libre la voie de l'independance. Le fait que
l'independance de la Guinee a ctd rcaliscc por Ics
methodes pacifiques de la democratie est du meilleur
augnre pour l'avenir. La France a jetc les bases de
relations fondees sur la confiance et l[l. cooperation
entre cUe-m~me et la nouvelle republique.

6

21
'\\

b~

T<

al

2

IQ

C

3

s
I

,

~

,t

i
t

I

t

>

i

,>
"

r
,

,,

28. The Council wlU recall that last year another
West African State, Ghana., also achieved independence
by peaceful means, and the CDuncil may r.are to be
reminded that a third State in that area, Nigeria, is
already far advanced along the SUIT.e road.

28.

29. Finally, I would like to express, on behalf of
Her Mnjesty's GovBrnmCtlt in the United Kingdom,
our best wishes for the progress 0: the Republic of
Guinea and of I ts people.

2g. Je vOlldrais ellfin pr~scnter A ]fl Republique de
Guinee et a sa populntion, au nom du GOl1vernement
de Sil Majeste dans If: Roynume-Uni, nos meilleurs
vc:cux de prosperite.

30. Mr. TSIANG (China): My Governmeut has instn:.cted me to vote in ff.vonr of the aumission of the
Republic of Guinea to membersh:p in the United
Nations. My Government intends this fa'liDllralJle vote,
first, to be an expression of the gO<Jdwilt (Jf China
toward Guinea. We wish the people and the Government of the new republic progress and prosperity.

30. M, TSJANG (Chine) [trudllit de l'wl!Jlais] Mon
gouvernemcnt m'a donne pour insLructions de votet'
pour l'admission de la Republique de Guinee l'Organisution des Nations Unies. 11 de,;ir~ tout d'abord que
ce vote hvorable soit la marque des vmux que la
Chine forme
l'egarcl de la Guinee, Nom souhaitons
progres et prosperite au peuple et au gouvernement
de la nouve-lIe repul)liqlle,

Le COllscil se souviendra que, I'annee dcrniere,

UIl llutre Etat ell' l'Afrique occident.ale, le Gllllnn, n
lui Hl1ssi <1cced~ it l'independ:J.Jlcc par des moyens

paciflqllcs, et iI 11'est peut-ctre pas inutile de rappeler
qU'llU troisicme Etat de ecUc region, la Nigerin, est
dejl\ ilUgage tres avant dans la meme voie.

a

a

31. In the second place, by this vote, my Government
intends la express to the Republic oi Guinea our desire
to be helpful - for all States, old and new, have their
problems. The new States probably face more uncertainties than the old States. The. early enjoyment of
what our Charter eloquently calls the sovereign equality
of nations by a new State would fortify it lol' independent life in the family of nations.

31.

En ,,,ond Heo, mon gouvemem,nt veut exp<'imer

u la RepL::blique, dp Gllim!e, par ce vote, Son desir de

l'aider -- car bus les Etats, illlciens et nouvcaux, ont
Jeurs pl'Oblemcs it n~solldre. Les Elats llOllveaLIX se
trouvcnt probablemellt {levant un plus grand nombre
d'incertitudes que les nnciens. Si un nouve] Etat jULLiL
rapidement de ce que nolrc Charte appelle eloquemment
l'egalite souvel'ainc des nations, il sera probablement
mictJx pre.purc a mener line existmce ind~Jl(';nd:mte
dans la. famillc des nations.

k'

;:

C'e.'it done avee plaisir que je v<lterai potu le
projet de resolntion prtJSenll\. par lea d616gations
irakienne et joponaise.

32. For these reasons, 1 will gladly vote for the drafL
resolution proposed by the delegations of Iraq and
Japan.

32.

33. Mr. LODGE (United Stales of America): Once
ngain the United Nations witnesses the process of
peaceful change which has resulted in the birth of
a new member of th(> fre.e world community. We all
extend the hand of friendship to this new African
State. The Republic of Guinea. in attaining sovereignty. has asserted its ability and willingness Lo
corlduct itself according to tne standards Qf international
conduct embodied in the Un;ted Nations Charter.

33. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Am~rique) [lraduii de
l'anglais} : Une fois de plus, rOrganisatiO!l des Natlons
Unies est le b:moin d'une evolution pacifique qui a
ubouti fl la naissallce d'un nouvel Etat libre. NoilS
tendons toU!! la Inain a cc nouvel Etat africllln en lJigne
d'amiti6. En accCdant a la. souverainete. la Republique
la fois capable et
de Guinee a affirme qu'elle itait
desire use de respecter jes normcs du comportement
international qui sont enonClies dans la Charte des
Nations Unies.

34. We are also happy to express our appreciation
for the guidance and assistu!lce extended by France
toward the development of this new nation. The
Republic of Guinea attaim naLionhood possessing
important human and naterial resources. We should
not underestimate, of course, the difHeulties which
any independent natioll fnees, bllt neither should we
lose sight of the promising foundation whicl1 Guinea
possesses for an independent and prosperous eXistence.
Rich <1gricultural lands. ab..mdant resources and a
united people surely justify the belief thaL the Republic
of Guinea faces a great future.

34, Nous sommes 6galcment heureux de dire combien
nollS appredons les conseils ecll\lres et I'assistance qlle
la France a fClUrnis ponr aider
la creation de cette
nouvelle nation. La Republi£/ue dE Guinee est mflin~
tenant line r,ation libr..o qui possede d'jmport~ntes
ressources humaiucs et matlrielles. n ne faut pas,
bicn cnt~ndu, sons-cstimer les di:ncultes anxquelles
tonte nation independante doit {airc face, mais iI ne
faut pas davanlagc perdre de vue quc la Guince possede
les elements indispensal:lles pour vivl'e dans rind~­
pcndanee et la prosperi~.t'.. Dp, riches terres agricoles,
des ressources abondantes et une population unie, voila
qui permet eertes de penser que la Republique de
Guinee se tro\lve au seuil d'un grand nvenir.

35. The United States look8 forward to a close asso-

35. Les Etats-Unis ~e feront un plaisir de travailler
en etroite flS5QciaLioll avec la Republique de Guince,
dans l'csprit de la Charte des Natio[l~ Unies, au l1l<lintie-n de la paix. mor,dinle et R l'ameliora.tion des normes
de vie dans un climat de libertc.

a

a

ciation with the Repuhllc of Guinea as we work together in thc spirit of the Uniled Nations Charter for
the preservation of world peace and for better standards
of life under conditions of human freedom.

,
1!

7
,

•

36. The United States is happy to vote today for the
admission of Guinea to the United Nations, B.nd to
extend to tile Government and people of Guinea our
very best wishes for a bB.ppy and prosperous future.

3(). Les Etats-Unis sout hellreux de voter aujourd'2.tui
pour l'admissioll de la Guinee a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, et d'adresser au gouvernemellt et au
peuple guineens leurs meilleurs vmux dc honheur et
de prospcrite.

37. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated frDm Russian): Our generation is
taking part in and witnessing an important historical
process: the increasingly intense struggle of the peoples
of t.he colonial and dependent countries for their
freedom and independence. Onc after another, the
peoples of Asia and Africa arc throwing oIl the yoke
of colonialism and entering on the path of independent
national development. Only recently, this struggle
was crowned by yet another outstanding success, as a
result of which a new sovereign State, the Republic
or Guinea, has been estahlished on the African conti·
nent.

37. M. SOBOLEV (Union deR Republiljues socialisles
sovietiques) [Iraduit dll russe] : Notre generation
participe et assistc a un processus hislorique impor_
tant : la luth: toujours plus intense des peuples des
pays coloniaux et dependants pour kur Iiberte et
leur independance. L'un apres I'autre, les peuples d'Asie
et d'Afriqllc secouent le joug du colonialisme et
s'engagent dans la voie de leur developpement national
independant. Tout recemment, ceUe lutte s'est soldee
encore une fois par un grand succes. a la suite duque!
un nOlivel Etat sonverain, la Rcpublique de Guin~e,
s'est eree sur le continent africain.

38. The Soviet delegation and the entire Soviet people
warmly welcome the new independent State in Africa
and wish the Government and people of Guiuea success
in building their political system, their economy and
their cultural life. The Soviet delegation is glau to
note that tl1€ Government of the Soviet Union, whlch
is tireless in upholding the right of peoples to selfdetermination ~md which regards the national aspirations of the Guineas as justilled, was one of tlle first
to recognize the Republic of Guinea as an independent
and sovereign State.

38. La delegation soviWque, de meme que tout le
peuple sovictique, sa]ue chaleurensemcnt ce nouvel
Etat illdepcndant d'Afrique, ct souhaite au gouver~
nement et au peuple de la Guinee de mener a bien
I'edific..'ltion de leLlr Etat et le cteveloppement de leur
economic et de lenr culture. La delegation sovietique
est heureuse de signal er que SOll gouverl1em.~nt, qui
a toujours ddendn le droit des peuples a disposa]'
d'enx-memes et qui respectc les aspirations nationales
16gitimes des Guineens. a cte I'un dcs premiers a
reconnaitre la RC[lnbliqnc de Guincc en tant ql1 'Etnt
ind~pcnc1ant et souvernin.

39. The SQviet Governmcllt has expressed its readiness
to establish diplomatic relations and to exehange diplo·
matic representat.ives with the Republic ef Guinea,
since it is convinced that this will contributc to tile
development of friendship and co-operation between
the peoples of the two countries in the interest of
strengthening world peace,

39. Le GOllvernemenL sovietique s'est declare pret it
etablir des relations diplomatiques et a echanger des
repl'csentants diplomatiques awc 1:.1 Republique de
Guince, persuade que cela favorisera Ic developpemcnL
de l'amitie et de la cooperation entre les peuples des
deux pays, dans I'inten~t du rt:'.nforcement de la paix
internationale.

40. All the peace-loving peoples are also on the sidc.
of the young Alricarr Republic, warmly supporting the
first steps of the new State towards the consolidation
of its independence.

40. Du cote de la jeune republique africuille se rungcllt
egalement tous les peuples pacifIques, qui soutienncnt
ehaleureusement les premiers pas du nouvel Etat sur
la voie de l'afTennisscment de son inctependance.

11. It musl bc pointed out, however, Hmt hy no
means everyone is satisfied with the appearance of the
new StaLe. This is particularly true of tIle coloniaJists,
who recognize this as a further blow to their supremacy.
It is common knowledge that reactionary elemen~s in
France, as soon as the results of the referendum became
known, began a campaign of intimidation against
Guinea in order to compel it to foreswear independence,
Tlneats are even being made t.hat eeonomie and political
sanctions will be applied against the Hepublic of
Guinea and that its administration and economy will
be disrupted. The attempt to intimidate the people of
Guinea goes hand in hand with a desire to teach a
lesson to other colonies wllerc the strnggle [01' national
independence is developing with a ncw vigour,

41. Il convient cependant de noter que cerLains sout
loins de se flWciter de l'<lpparition du nOllvel Etat, et
en premier lieu les colonialistes, qui y voient une
110uvelle atteinte a leur suprematie. ChacuJ1 sait qu'en
{{mnce les elements reactionnaires ont lance, aussitOt
apres la publication des resultats du rC(erendum, une
campagne d'intimidation contre la Guinee afin de
I'obligcr a renoncer a l'independance. On menace meme
de prendre des sanctions economiques et politiquos
cuntre la Rcpublique de Guinee, de desorganiser :;on
administration et son economie. Celle volonte d'intimider [e peuple guineen s'accompagne du clCsir de
donner unc lei;'on <lUX antres colonies, oil la lutte pour
l'ind6pcndance natiollaJe redouble de viglleur.

42. This policy of the colonia)isls can of course mak~
it rathel' more difficult for the young Republic to solve
the problems facing it, but it is definitely uot capable
of rettlrning this State and its people to the hated
yoke of colonialism. The States Members of the United
Nati.ons will also be on the alert and will not let the

42. CerLcs, cette politiqul' des colollialistes peut compliquer dalls ll11e certaine mesure la solution des graves
problemes qui se posent a la jeunc repllblique, mais
elle est absolument impuissante a ramener l'Etat et
le peuple guineens SQUS le joug odieux du colonialisme.
Les Etab:; Membres de l'Organisation des Nations

8

reaction
no doul
needed
"

43, In
part in
opportu
fosterinj
tions bl
world.
14, Th
of the u
endorse:
for adm
will vol
been su

45. M,
The Co
draft rf
mends
of GUll'
Natlom
u tribu1
cradle
greetinl
Republ
::--Jationl

,

I

I

I
,

~r
I
r

,

46. M
The rei
to us (
of thc ]
Nation:
,17, T
rcsolut
that il
emcnts
in Art

-18. 11
its ind
the in
This iE
of Gui
which
a tribl

49, l
cQuntJ
as an
when
new I
to rna

ultim=
and

,

50.
that
in th
meml
the ....
Guilll
possi~

L

r~'f1rt onaries carry out their em} designs,
We have
no doubt that the United Nations will extend the
needed help to the Republic of Guinea,

·'wi

l",
ao

0'
res
o.

)1'-

res
ot
sic

0'
Illl

"

10)

!e,

..

),

'01
lr-

,.

'"

uo

iui
cc

cs

•

"

,\
'cs

;,

n'cs

ix

"
""

I

43. E:1 participant aux travaux de l'Organisation, 1:\
Republique de Guince pourra, a son tour, a.pporter sa
contribution 1ft consolidation de la paix et au deveJoppcment de l'dations :tmi~llles entre les pcuples
d'Afriqne ct du monde entier,

1-1. La delegat-ion soviWque, fldele au principe de
l'nniversalite de J'Orgnnisation des Nations Ul1ies,
appuie sall' reserve la demamle d'ac1mission de la
Republique de Guiner. comlne ::\lembre de l'Ol'g:misation et votera pour le pro jet de resulution dont est
saisi le Consejl de securite.

45, Mr. AHAUJO (Colombia) (trallslated from Spanish):
The Colombian delegation will vot.e in favour of the
draft resolution in which the Security Ccuneil recomrnenrls to the General Assembly tlml the Republic
of Guinea be admitted to :nembersh.ip in the United
Nations. In so doing, my Government is hoth paying
a tribute of admintion and gratitude to France as the
cradle of liberty and rcsptcL for hllffilln rights, and
greeting warmly and with deep sympathy the new
Rep·.lblic. which is, as it shollld, el1~ering the United
Nations family.

45. M. ARAUJO (Colombie) [traduit de l'espagnol: :
La delegation colombienne Yotel'a pour le prujeL de
resolution rar lequclle Conseil de securilk recomman::le
a l'Assemblee generale d'admettre la Rcpllblique de
Guinee a !'OrgauIstl.tion des Nations Unics. I\{,)n
gouvernement entend par la, tout en rendant un
hommage <ldmiratif et I'eeonnaissant ;l la Frall\;e,
bercea:l de la lib~rte ~t dn respect des droits de I'holllme,
saluer avcc emotion. et llue profonde sympathie la
1I011velle repuhlique qui entre A juste titre dans la
famillc que constitne notl'e Organisation,

46. Mr. ILLUECA (p:'..uaUL'l) (ttan.~lQlcd from Spanish):
The representatives of Iraq and Japan have submitted
to U3 a dmft resolution recommenrJingUle admission
of the HEpublic of Guinea to membership in the United
Nulions.
47. The P:uHllnanian de.lpgation will support this draft
reso:utio:l and will vote in h.vour of it, since it believes
that tile new RepUblic (If Guinea fu:rils all the requirements for membership in our Organization laid down
in ArLicle 4 of tile Ulliled Nations CharLer.

a

'16.

M. ILLUECA (Panama) [traduit de l'espagnoll :

Les repl'csentants d~ l'Irak et du Japon ant pre~ente
Ill! projeL de n:solL:tion qui reccmnunde d'admcttre
la HcpubHqlle de Guillee a I'Orgnnisa-.;ion des No.tions
Unies.

'b7.

La delegation dll Panama votcra pour ce projet
p!lICe qn'eJJc csti:nc que la nouvelle
IHpubliquc de GninGe remplit toures lcs conditions
qu'e:xige I'Articlc 4 de la Charte des Natiolls Unies
pour I'ndmissiou il notl·c Organisation.
de resolul:Ull

It is a happy occasion when a new nation acquirl~s
its :ndependence by constitutional means and under
Lhe inspiration of principles of culture and freedum.
This is what has happened in tlle case of the Republic
of Guinea thanks to the noble and generous way in
which Frauct has acted. WC] will.h at this tirnp: to pay
a tribute of admiration find respect to France.

C'est till cvenemcnt heurcnx lorsque, par des
voies constitutionnelles et IU s'inspirant de principes
de cultlll'~ ~t rlf': :iberte., tlll nOllvel Etat accede a
1'll1dependance. C'cst r:e qui s'est prcduit dans le cas
de la Republiqlle dc Guinee grftce l\ la procedure noble
et gcncl"cllse qu'a suivie la France, a laqu.clle n,)us
tenons en ce moment it rendre un humnlUge respectueux
et admiratif.

,,

40. In condusion, I should like, on behalf of my
country, to wish -:;he Republic of Guinea every sn:::cess
as an indepEndent State, for we are corLVinced that,
when they bccorr..c Members of our Organization, the
new nations have a fresh and vigorous contribtltion
to make towards the achievement of the United Nations
ultimate aim of establishing economic we!l-being, peace
<mu ::;ecllrity lhroughout tile world.

49. POUl' conclul'e, je tiens a fomuler, au nom de
mOll pays, le- vceu que la RepulJlitlu~ Je GUlnce, qui
vient d'acceder ii l'i:1dcpendance, remporte toutes so:tes
de sucees. Nous sommC'.s convaincus qu'en entrant a
I'Organi~ation les natiof\s jculles !lOllS apportent '.me
participation nCUYe et vigoureuse qui cOntribuera a la
reaJisatilm de I'ideal supreme dc>! Nations Unieg :
faire regner dans III mOllde le bien-et,e economique, la
IJllix et la sccurite.
50,

}

50. Mr. RITCHIE (Cauada): It is with great pleasure
that I take this opportunity to join with my colleagnes
in the Council ill welcoming Guin<:a's upplication for
me:nbership in the United Nations. We also welcom(~
the wi.~e ann generous policy of France which has given
Guinea the free choice wltich makes this application
possible.

,

,

,,

o

NOils &ommes persuades que l'Organisation fournira
I'assistance Ileccssair~ a la R~publiquc de Guillee.

43. In its turn, the Republic of Guinea, by taking
part in the work et the United Nati:Jns, will haVl~ an
opportunity to contribute its share to the work of
fostering peace and the develop:nent of frienuly relations between the peoples of Africa and the entire
world.
·{4. The Soviet delegation, snpporLlug the principle
I)f the un:versality of tIle Ur.ited Nations, unreservedly
endorses tlte application of the Republic of Guinea
for admission to membership in be UnitR.rl. Nations and
'",ilI vote in favour of the draft resolution which has
been submitted.

18.

,"t

,

Dnies scront vigil ants eux amsi et ne permettront pas
aux: rcactilnnair~s de rea~iscr lcurs sombres desseins.

,

II

48.

M. RITGHIE (Canada) [trarlult de l'allglais] :
C'est aver grand pJaisir que je saisis cette (lccll.sior. de
m'associer a ceux de roes collegues du Conseil qui se
sont felicites de la demande d'admisRion de la Guinee
a l'Organisation des Nation3 Unies. Nous rendons
6galcmcllt hOr.1magc a Ill. Fro,llce, qui, par sa politiquf',
S2.ge et gencreuse, a laisse a La Guinee le libre choix
qui lui a permis de faire cctte demande.

I

I

,

•
51. The Canadian Government has already extended
recognition to the recently formed Government of the
Republic of Guinea. Although the legal requirements
fOI" diplomatic recognition are, of course, not necessarily
tlte same as those for admission to the United Nations,
we are of the opinion that Guinea is qualified to share
the r('.sponslhilities and privileges of membership in
this Organization.

51. Le Gouvernement canadien a deja l'econnu le
gouvel'tlement, recemment forme, de la Republique dc.
Guinee, Bien que les conditions juridiques de la recolI_
naissance diplomatique ne soient, bien entendu. pas
necessairement les mcmes que celles de l'admission a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. nous estimons que
la Guinee est qualifiee pour partager les responsabilit6s.
et les privileges des lIembres de l'Organisation.

We note that, by its Proclamation of 2 October
1958, the National Constituent Assembly of tlle Republic of Guinea declared the adhesion of the Republic
to the principles embodied in the United Nations
Charter, and that Ambassador Diallo Telli, in his
letter 013 December to the. Secretary-General [8{4122],
was authorized by his Government to declare that the
Republic of Guinea accepted the obligations contained
ill the United Nations Charter and undertook to
comply with those obligations with effect from the
date of its admission to membershir in the United
Nations.

52. Nous notons que, dans sa, proclamation da
2 octobre 1958, l'AsscmlJlee nationale constituante de

52.

,58.
with
nity
temb
need1
tions

la Republique de Guinee a declare que la nouvelle
rcpublique adherait aux principes inscrits da,ns la
Charte des. Nations Unies; nous notons en onh'e, dans
la leUre que l'Ambassadeur de Guinee, 11, Diano
Telli, a adressee le 3 decembre au Secretairc generlll
[514122J, qu'il a ete autorise par son gouvernement a
declarer que la Republique de Guim!e acceptait li's
obligations contenues dans la Charte des Nations Unies
et s'engageait ii remplir ces obligations a partir de la
date de son admission ii l'Organisation.

53. W~, much regret if the timing of this application
has raised any difficulties for France anJ its associfltes,
and it might have been desirable to clarify more
precisely Guinea's relationship with its neighbours and
its friends, For one thing, we understand that the
Constitution of the French Community does not permit
formal recognition of the independence of Guinea by
members of the Community until the Council of the
Community has legaliz('.d this recognition. We reel,
however, that Guinea's admission at this time is
eonsistent with our concept!! both o( the universality
of the United Nations and also of the peaceful evolution
of the AfriClm peoples,

59.

ihe
-day
thnt
llad
ti Oc
,Jenc
has c

ngreE

Nous regrettons beau coup que le moment choisi
pour cette demande d'admission ait pu soulever des
difflCultes quelconques pour la France et scs associes,
ct il aurait peut-etre ete souhaitablc que les liens entre
la Guince et ses voisins et amis fussent micux de.flllis,
Nous croyons comprendre par exemple que la Constitution de la Comrnl1naute fran~aise ne permet pas que
l'independance de la Guinee soit formellement reconlllle
par les membres de cette commUllaute tant que le
Conseil de la Communaute ne s'est pas prononce en
Ce sens. Nous estimons toulefois que l'admission de
la Guinee en ce moment est conforme aux principcs
que nous appliquons en ce qui concerne tant l'universaUte de l'Organisation des Nations Unies que l'evohLlton pacifique des populations africaines.
53.

M.
'shorl
Hdop
an a-

U"

ncce:

nnd,

the
tirst
done
tD d,
£1.

with
solVE
coun
comi

54. Nous sommes heureux, par consequent, de tendre

54. We are, therefore, glad to extend the hand of
friendship and co~operation in the United Nations to
the Republic of Guinea and we shall vote for the draft
resolution introduced today by the delegations of
Japan and Iraq.

la main a la Republique de Guince pour lui manifester
notre amitie et notre desir de cooperer avec elle dans
le cadre des Nations Unies. Nous voterons en faveur du
projet de resolution pn!sente aujourd'hui par les delegations irakienne et japonaise.

55. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): I should like to thank those deiegations which,
in the course of this debate, have paid a tribute to
France's policy and have shown their understanding
of its role. I shall not reply to Mr. Sobolev'lt statement,
because every member of the Council knows how it
should be interpreted.

55, M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Je remercie les
delegations qui, au cours de ce debat, ant reridu hommage a la politique de la France et qui ont bien compris
son rOle. J e ne reponds pas a !"interventiOn de M. Sobo-lev, car chacun des membres du Conseil sait ce qu'll
faut ell penser.

56.

5u.

The application for admission which is before the
Council today concerns the United Nations community
but also, and first and foremost, the French Government
whose particular interest in the subject I think no one
will question. My Government has the special obliw
gation of all the members of the Council with regard
to the admission of a new Member State but, in the
case of Guinea. it has special responsibilities towards
all the Members of the United Nations as the Power
which made the first move towards the addition of a
new State to the community of nations.

La demande d'admission dont le Conseil est
aujourd'hui saisi interesse la communaute des Nations
Unies, mais aussi et au premier chef le Gouvemement
franr;ais, dont personne. je pense, ne contestera l'int6r~t
particlilier ell cetLe matii~re. En eITet, mon gouvernement a, en cc: qui concerne l'ndmission d'un nlluvel
Etat Membre, le devoir particulier de tous les membres
du Conseil, mais iI a, dans le cas de la Guinee, des
ri';sponsabilites speciales a l'egard de tous les Membres
de l'Organisation des Notions Unies en qualite de
puissance ayant ete a J'origine de l'accession d'un
nouvel Etat a la communaute des nations.

The members of the Council are aware of the
exceptional circumstances in which all the overseas

57.

57,

peapl
upon
,cllvis
pend
the

Les membres du Conseil connaissent les conditions
exceptionnelles dans lesqueIles I'ensemble des popu-

10

in n

and
cleat
62.

i

I
(
,

r

Tau:
rela1
the·
the

~inc,

63.
COll

of (
the
imp
of t
Con:
tile

,,'
is t

Nat

not

ren:

64.
we,
een

peoples forming part of the Frendl Republic were caJ.led
upon to express their wisll to join the Community
,envisaged by the new Constitution or to opt for independence Witll or without association with France or
the Communit::'.

lations d'outre-mer faisant partie de lE Republique
franltaise a ete appele a manifester Sa volonte d'adherer
a la Communante prevue par l.a nonvelle Constitution
ou a optcr pour l'independance flvec ou sans accession
avec la France ou avec la Communaute.

.58.

It is on the latter alternative - independence
with or without association with France 01' the community - that the people of Guinea decided on 28 Sep~
!.ember 1958. This result would prove, if proof were
needed, that the consultation was carried out in conditions uf complete freedom.

58. C'est a ee dernier choix - independance avcc ou
sans association avec la Prance Oll avec la Commu·
nautc - que g'est arretee la population de la Guinee
le 28 septembre dernier. Ce resultat prouverait, s'i!
en etait b~soin, que la consultation a ere efJectuee
dans des cl1nditiD~ de liherte tot1\I~.

59. So that no doubt might remain in anyone's mind,
the Government of the French Republic, on the very
'day following the referendum, took note of the fact
that a new situation, with international implications,
had arisen as a result of Guine.'l's negative vote. On
€ October, after Guinea had proclaimed it!> indepen~
,dence, the French Government made it clear that it
has decided not to stand in the way of the arrangementg
,agreed upon at Conakry.

59. Afin qu'ancun doute ne puisse sub sister dans les
esprits. le Gouvernement de la Repuhlique, le lendcmain
mbne du referendum, [I pris acte du fait qU'une circonstance nouvelJe, ayant des consequences inter·
nationales. existait a la sllite du vote negatif emis par
la Guinee. Le 6 octobre, aprlls que la Guinee ent
proclame son independance, le GOllvcrnement francais a
precise qu'il etait deeide a ne pas faice obstacle aux
dispositions adoptlies a Conakry,

DO. Since then, many thingg have happened. In this
·short period of time the Govel'llment of Guinea has
.adopted a Constitution and set lip a Government antl
~m administration which, althclttgh not complete, none
the less passesses a certain number of the element:>
necessary for its growUl. A bndget has been drawn up
aud cerl.aiu lIleans of financing will undoubtedly enable
the conntry to meet its immediate obligatiom. These
lirst results, incidentally, bear witness to the work
'clanc by l:<'rallce in the preceding years to enable Guinea
to develop B national consciousness.

60. Depuis lors, de nombrcux evenements se sont
produits. En ce court laps de temps, le Gouvernemcnt
guineen g'est donne tllIe constitution, un gouvernement. et une administration qui, ponr n'etre pas
complete, n'en possMe pas moins un certain nombre
d'clements necessaires a son MvelGppement. Un budget
tl He etabli, et certains moyen.'l de financement permettrout sans doute de fake face aux engagements
immediats. Ces premiers resultats portent d'ailleurs
t6moignage de I'<euvre accomplie par la France au
cours des annees precedentes pOttr permettre a la
Guinee de prendre conscience de sa personnalite,

-61.

Does llLis mean lhat all the problems connected
with Guinea'g accession to independence are now
solved? I am bound to answer in the negative. No
country, particularly a. newcomer to the international
'community, could remain in isolation, and its status
in relation to the other IllelJlbers uf this cOlllmuni~y,
and morc particularly those surrounding it., mnst he
dearly defIned.

61. Est·ce a dice pour nutant que taus les problemes
relatifs a l'accession de la Guinee il l'independanee
soient mamtenA:nt resoIus? Je suis tenu de repondre
par la negative. Nul pays, surtout nouveau venu dans
la cornmunaute internationale, ne pourrait demeurer
isole, ~t son Sta.tllt par rapport auy. ~l1tres. membres de
eette communaute, et plus specialement par rapport a
ceux qui l'entourent, doit etre nettement determine.

62. The Fren ch Government informed Mr. Sekou
Toure that, if' Guinea wished to establish a special
relationship with Frimc~, France was ready to disCll~,~
the question, subject to the nec.essary consultation with
the (lrgans of the Community. It has not been possible
siuce then to clarify the situation further.

62. Le Gonvemement franltais a hit savoir a M. Sekou
Toure que si la Guinee souhaitait nouer avec la France
des liens particuliecs, celle~ci etait pr~te a en discuter
avec eUe, sous reserve de la consultation necessaire
des organes de la Communaure. II u'a pas eM possible
depuis lors de preciser davantage la situation.

63. We were surprised to Jearnthe result of the
conversations between the HeAd~ of the Governments
of Ghana and Guinea. What is the exact nature of
the union which is planned? What are its international
implications? Lastly, what is the exact signiileanee
of the reference to future relations with the French
Community on the one hand and the Commonwealtllon
the other? If Guinea and Ghann establish n "union ",
as they have announced their intention of doing, it
is that union which shQuld be admitted to the United
Nations. As long as the Constitution of this union is
not known, Guinea's status as an independent State
remains uncletermined.
54. All this will, we are sure, hecome clear later, but
we, for our part, feel that too many questions still
remain unanswered regarding Guinea's future status

63. Nous avons ete, par ailleurs, 5urpris d'apprendre
le resultat des conversations entre les chefs des Gouvernements du Ghana et de la tiuinee. QueUe est la
nature exacte de l'union projetee? QueUes ~ont ses
consequences dans le domainc international? QueIle
est, enfin. la portee exacte de la mention relative aux
relations futures avec la Communaute fran~aise, d'une
part. le Commonwealth, d'autre part? Si la Guinee
et le Ghana creent, eomme ils l'ont annonce, une
« union ll, c'est celle~ci qui devrait sieger it l'Organisation des Nations Umes. Taut que la constitution de
cette union n'est pas eonnuc, le caractere d'Etat independant de la Guinee resLe en suspenso

11

64. Tout cela. nous en sommes certalns, sera precise
dans la suite, mais nous estimons pour notre part que
trop de questions demeurent ellcore sans reponse

•

&
COllcernant le statut futur de la Guinee par rapport a
ta France et il la Communaute, par rapport aussi a
d'autres pays africains, pour que le Conseil puisse des
maintenant prendre une decision formelle.

J tion to France and th~ ClJmmunity and in

,

III rea
. f tl C
ill
I tion to otlIer African countries or le aune '0

rea
"
h ere an d now.
be able to adopt a flOal d
eClSlOD

65. Many other African territories have recently
attained independence or arc about to do so, but such
a cllange in status has always been carefully ~hought
out. Only recenUy, the General Assembly dlscuss~d
the iuture of Togolnnd and t~e C.ameroo~s und, while
t11l, leaders in these two TerritOrIes admlttedly asked
that a date should be fixed, they also asked that
sllfficicnt time should be allowed to ensure tl~a~ the
transition from trusteeship under French admnl1stra~
tion to complete. independence was effected smoothly
in the best interests of the peoples concerned and for
the sake of international stability.

'1'

"[11

W'

7S·

S1.l- }:>~

65. De nombreux autres territoires africains ont
recemment accede a l'independanee ou vont y acceder
prochainement; mais une telle transformation a toujonrs
etc soigneusement consideree. Tout recemment encore,
l'Assemhlee generale a discute de I'avenir du Toga et
du Cameroun, et les responsables eux-memes de ces
deux tcrritoires ant demande qu'une date soit I1xce,
ceries, mais aussi que les dClais necessaires soilOnt respectcs pour que le passage de la tutelle sous administration frangaise a l'independance complete se
poursuive sans heurts pour le plus grand bien dC5
poplllations interessees et pour la stabilit~ de la camrnunaute internationale.

sO "e.

00).'
[ 0 et"

74.

Gc I1
T={.el
iJJ- t
re9-1

[l'e s ,

75.

66. A IUllSC of time, while it should of C(lurse be of
shorter duration, is no less necessary in the case of
Guinea. The circumstancl':s were different there and
they led to a quiclcer d~cisiol1 on principle; but the
hmd facts remain and you cfllmot force the pace
without running llw risk of creating a statl': of disorder
and confusion which would be detrimental to everyone.

66. DC's delais, mains etendus, certes, n'en sont pas
moins necessaires pOllr la Guinee. Les circonstances
ont etc difierentes; elles ant amene une decisiOn de
principe plus rapide; rnais les faits demeurent tes
maitres, et rien ne sert de les brusquer si l'on ne veut
courir le danger d'un dcsordre et d'une confusion
prejndiciables a tOllS.

coP

67. In tllcse circumstances, and without wishing La
close 'the door on any possibility in the future, 'Llle
French delegatiou will abstain when the vote is taken.

67. Dans ces conditions, et sans vouloir rejeter aucunc
perspective pour l'avenir, la delegation fran/taise s'<lbsLiendra an moment du vote.

re-t-:

The PRESIDENT: I shall llOW speak in my
capacity as reprc~entative of S\,vEDEN.

68. Le PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'al1glais) .. Je
voudmis prendre maintenant la parole en ma qualitc
de representant de la SUEDE.

Na
I<:o

69. The Swedish delegation is prepared to support
the draft resolution [S{4131] submitted by lraq and
Japan, recommending the admission of the Hepublie
of Gu.inea to membership "ill the United Nations.

69. La dekgation suedoise est disposec & appuyer
le projet de resolution de l'Irak et dn Japan [Sj4131].
qui rl':Commande l'admission de la Republique de
Guinee A l'Organisalion des Nations Unies.

70. We have carefully shLdied the text of the Consti~
tlltion of the Republic of Guinea, as contained in
document S/4122, and we have taken note of the
decla11ltion of 3 December 1958 by Mr. Diallo TeW,
Ambassador of the RepUblic of Guinea. In our view,
the principles which underlie and imbue them justify
recommendation by the Council that the new State
should be admitted to membership,

70. Nons avons etudi6 avec sain le texte de la Constitution de la Hepubliqllc de Guinee, qui fignre dans le
document 5/4122, et nOllS avow; pris note de la decla
ration de .M. Diallo Tellt, ambassadcllr de la Rcpublique
de Guinee, en date du 3 decembre 1958. A notre Rvis,
les principe~ <lout ees textes s'inspirent justificnt unc
l'ccommand:ltion dll Conseil de securite en vue de
l'admission du nouveI ELat parmi les Memhres de
I'Organisation.

71. The Swedish delegation welcomes the accession
of the Republic of Guinea to independence, and desires
to express its best wishes for the fature of the new
State. It is our conviction that it will make a valuable
and constructive contribution to the activities of the
United Nations.

71. LfI delegation suedoise se feIicite de l'accessioll
de la rtepubliquc de Guinee a l'independance et tient
a formuler les vamx les plus sinccrcs en ce qui COllcerne
I'avcuir du nouvel Etat. Nous somffies persuades que
ce dernier apportera une contribution precieusc et
constructive aux activites des Nations Unies.

72. Speaking as the PRESIDENT, I shall ask you

72.

68.

M

Parlant en tant que PHESIDENT, j'annonce que
nOllS allons mointenant passer au vote sur le projet de
resolution pr<lSente par l'Irak et le Japon [8f":131J.

to proceed to vote on tlle joint draft resolution submitted by Iraq and Japan [5{41311.

A vole Was taken by show of hands.

Il est proced6 au vole a main lel'~e.

In favour; Canada, China, Colombia, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Un~ted Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Umted States of America.

Votent pour: Canada, Chine, Colombie, Irak, Japotl,
Panama, Su~de, Union des Republiqlles sociaJistes
sovletiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'IrIande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

A bslaining: France,

S'abslient .. la France.

12

reg;

NU 1

cIHj

UJ1 C

I~e]

sta

su:f

Rc'

cIa:

thl:

II
I

r
~

rr

r,

ob.=;

7Q.
in
C::("c

£re

cat

nn,
""i!
str

co,

77
fiv
pr
se,
on
de
fo

N,
7~

10

,

8)0

('

:N

I

'f
1,
,

I

:si:
~

a,
j 1.:

7,
s,

p

Th.e drufl I'esolwion was adopted by 10 voles to WlIle,
with 1 abstention.

Par 10 voix con/re zero, avec ,me a.b.~lmlirm, le pr()jet
de resolution est ad.(JpltJ.

73. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed (.U
sub-item (b) of the agenda. A draft resolution sponl>ored by France, Japan, the- 'United Kingdom and the
United States [S/4129jRev. 1], has been circulated to
members of the Council.
.

73. Le PRESIDENT (Iraduit de l'anglais) : Now,
passons main-tenant a l'alinea b du point 2 de l'ordre
du jOllr. Un projet de resolution presente par les
Etats-"Cl1is d'Amerique, la France, le JaJlolL ~t le
Royaume·Uni (S/41ZrJ/Rw. 1J a He distribuc aux
memhrf>!'l clu Conseil.

Mr. LODGE (United States of America); The
General Assembly has repeateilly asserted that Lhe
Republic of Korea should be admitted to membership
in tl)l> United Nations. 111is decision was most rece:1tly
reafnrmed by the Assembly on 25 October 1957
lresalufion 1144 A (XlI/I.

74.

i

74.

,

r
'I"
:'

I,

I,

M. LODGE (Etats-Uni<; d'Ameriqllc) [iraduit de

l'atlglaisJ ; L'Asscmblcc generale a maintes foi~ reptl.t.e

que la Republiqc.e de Caree devrait ctre admisc ~
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Elle l'a encore reaftlrme le 25 octobre 1957 [resol:J.lion 1144 A (XJJ)].

7G. We have asked the Security Council again to
consider the Republic: of Korea's application, and to
register it.., view that Korc<l should become a United
Nations Member. The RepUblic of Korea has a special
claim to membership in the Ur:ited Nations. It was
under the auspices of the United Nations that the
Re?ublic of Korea was established as an independent
Stllte, und it was the Cnited N::l'Lbns as~:stan('.e and
support which made it possible for the Republic to
retain its independence. The relationship of the
Hepublic of Korea with the United Nations is. very
close. Through the Uniteil Natio:ls Conmlission for
tllC Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, the Ur.ited
Nations is represented in the Republic of Korea. The
Korean Government, in turn, mair:tains a permanent
observer nt Ulliled NntiDlls Heanf(uacters.

75. Nous avans demande de llouveau nu COllseil de
securite d'examiner la candidature de la Republique
de Coree et d'indiquer clairement qu'a son avis la Coree
devrait devenir Membre de l'Organisation. La Republique de Coree a des titres par~iculiers a cette quaUte
de membre. C'est sous :ns auspices de l'Organi58tion
des Nations Unies qu'elb a eM cn:!ee en tant qu'Etat
indeper.dant, et c'e.st grace a l'flssistance et a l'appal
de l'Organisation qu'elle a pu cunserver son ind~­
pendance. Les relations entre la Republique de Caree
et l'Org::tniRation des Nations Unies soot tres etroite6.
Par I'cntremise de la Commission des Nations Ullies
pOUf l'uniflcation et le relevement de la Core-e, I'Organi:;utlol1 est repr6entco dans tu Re:puhlilJlH': de Coree.
Le Gouvernemen~ coreen, de :lon cote, a un observatllur pennancnt au siegc de l'Organhah)ll.

76< The growth of free alld democratic government
in the Republic of J{orea is reviewed annually by the
General Asse:nbly on the bas:s of reports received
from the United Nations Commission for the Cnifi~
cation and RehabilitatioJ: of Kon~v.. Econumic ptogre:;s
and development have been discussed in connexion
with the rC[1Dlts of the United Nations Ko;ean Reconstruction Agency, which earlier this year officially
completed iC!l wode with a record of solid achievement.

76.

Chaquc annee, l'Assemblee generale, se fondant

.<;ur Ies rapports regus de la Commission des Nations

Vnies pour l'unifLcation ct le relevement r:l.e la Coree,
suit les eta pes franchiC3 par un gouvernement Iibre
et dcmocratique clans :::J. Rr.p:Jblique de Coree. Les
progres economiqllcs de ce pays et son devcloppemer.t
ont cte discutes a l'oc.casion de l'examen des rapports
de l'Agence des Nations Unies pour le relevemellt Of'
la Coree. qui, il y a quelques mois. a ofiiciellement
acl1eve sa tflche avec lU1 hil:m dc rCalisations concretes.

77. Remarkable progress has been made during the
five years since the I:md of Lhe Korean War. Wc arc
proud of Korea's record and of l{ol'ea's eagerness to
se.cure that this progress will continue. It has been
on the basis of a record of great accomplishment
despite grim adversity that the General As~enbly has
found thc Republic of Korea fully qualified for U:Jited
Nations me.mbel'3hip.

77. Des progl'es rem<lrquables ont ete fa.its pendant
les r,jnq .'lnnees qui se sont ecouJees depuis la fm de la
gUCfl"C de Con~c. Nous sommcs fiers des realisations
de la Coree e.t du vif Msir qu'a ce pays de faire en
sorLe que ces progr&l se poursuivent. C:'e<.t cm tenant
compte de la grande CBwre accomplie en depit d'apres
difficulMs que l'Asscmulee gencrale a juge la RCP'lblique de Coree pleincment qualifiee ]Jour devcnir
Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Lnies.

78. We havc an opportunity hcre today to right a
long-standing wrong in which Lle United Nations, and
spt'.cificuIJy the Security Council, has a clear responsibility - that is, to 2.pprove the application of the
Bepublir. of Korea for membership in the United
Nations. The United States will votc for its approval
and will persevere in its determination to worri: for
ju~Lic~ for KOfl!U.

78. L'occasiol1 nom est donnec aUjou~d'hui Lk reparer
Hnc injustice de longue date dont I'Organisation des
Nations Unies, et not.amment le Conseil de securite.
supporte la responsabilite, en approuvant la demunde
d'admission de la Republique de Coree a l'Orgunisation.
Les EtaLs-Unis voteront pour l'approbntion de cette
demande et resteront resolus a travailler pour que
justice soit rendue 11 la Coree.

79. Mr. TSIANG (China): My del~gation warmly
supports the }Jint draft rc~olution subrnittto? by
France, Japan, the United Kingdom ane. the united

79.

M. TSIANG (Chine) [iraduit de l'anglais] : :rvIa
delegation appuie chalmreuse:nent le projet de reso·
llltion pn~sente par les Etats-Unis, la France, le Japan

13

i:

I
I,
I

I

-

•

et le Royaume-Uni [S/4129/Rev. 1] en vue de l'admission
de la Repull!ique de Coree a l'Organisation des NationsUnies,

StaLes [S/4UB/Rcf}, 11 for ,the admi~sion of t,he Republic
of Korea to memhership III the UOlted NatlOns.

80
f'

·di....

for

ad-

80. La Chine et la Coree sont de proches voisins.
Nous sommes certains que la Corce est qualifi8e A
tous egards pour devenir Membre de I'Organisation. Le
fait que la Coree s'est vu refuser un siege it l'Organisation des Nations Unies constitue une injustice a
laquelle il faut absoIument porter remMe.

Chjn~ and Korea are close neighbours.

We know
rtai~ that Korea is in every way qualified for

or C~ershiP in this OrganizatioI'.. 'TIle fact that Korea
rnem een denied membersh"Ip IS a wrong Wh
c l ]s
le ' hemam
Ijag b
correction.

81. Korea is no doubt qualified [o~ ~embersh~p. '!'he
people of Korea constitute a dIstmct natLO~ahty.
Korea has great traditions and achIevements In tht'".
fields of culture, and it is now emb~rked on mOd,;-rn
economic and political development. III both of WhlCh
fields it has made remarkable progress.

81. IJ ne fait aucun doute que la Colic remplit les
conditions necessaircs pour etre IVlembre de I'Organisation. La population de la Con~e forme une nation
distinete. EIJe a ;l son actif de nobles traditions et de
grandes realisatiolls dans le domaine culturel; e1lc
s'est maintenant engagee dans la voie du developpement economique et politiquc, et elle a fait des progres
remarquahles dans ces deux domaines.

82. As wc all lmow, there is a complication. It is
that the northern part of Korea has been subjected
to the aggression of internation~l communis~:
I
submit that tllis complication constitutes an additiOnal
reason why the United Nations should be detel"mined
to confer on the Republic of Korea the privileges and
rights of membership. It is a reason for admission
and not a reason to delay it"

82. Comme nomi le savons taus, il y a une difliculte.
Cette dimculte, c'est que la partie septentrionale de
la Coree a ete J'objet de I'agression du communisme
international. J e pense que cette circonstance mo.lheureuse est une raison de plus pOUf que I'Organis3.tion
des Nations Unies soit resolu it donner it la Republique
de Con~e les privileges et les droits qui s'attachent n
la quaJit6 de Membre de I'Organisation. C'est uno
raison pour que ce pays. soit admis it I'Organisation,
et non pour que son admis~ion soit retardee,

83. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): My dele~
gation is glad to join in sponsoring the draft resolution
before the Council which recommends the admission
of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations

83.

[S/4129jR", 1J,

Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [lraduit de
l'anglais] : Ma delegation est heureuse d'Hre parmi
les auteurs du projet de resolution dont le Conseil
est saisi et qui recommande I'admission de la
Republique de Coree a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
[SI4129/Rev, I),

84. The affairs of Korea must always be of particular
interest to the United Nations, and the absence of
Korea from the list of Members of the United Nations
is an anomaly which has already lasted too long.

84. Les affaires de Coree devront toujours retenir
l'attention toute particuliere de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies, et l'absence de ce pays de In listc des
Membres de I'Organisation est uno anomalic qui n'a
que trop dnre.

85. The United Kingdom recognizes the Government
of the Republic of Korea as the legitimate government
of Korea. We have consistently supported its claim
to membership of the United Nations because we are
convinced that it is fully qUfllified under the Charter
and has a valuable contribution to make to the work
of our Organization. It is my hope that on this occasion
the obstruction which has $0 often been placed in the
way of the membership of Korea in the United Nations
will be removed and that the draft resolution hefore
us will receive the unanimous support of the Council.

85. Le Royaume-Uni reconnatt le Gouvernemenl de
la RepubJique de Coree comme le gouvernement
Mgitime de cc pays. Nous avons eonstamment appuye
sa demande d'admission it I'Organisation, paree que
nous sommes persuades que la Coree remplit touies
les conditions prescrites par la Charte et a une pr6cieuse
contribution a apporter all."( activites de notre Organisation. J'ai I'espoir qu'aujourd'hui l'obstacle qui a si
SOlLvent empecM l'admission de la Con~e a l'Organisation des Nations Dnies sera leve et que le projet
de resolution dont nous sommes saisis recueHlera I'appui
unanime des membres du Conseil de securite.

~6,

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubhes) (franslaied from Russian): To save the time of
the members of the Council I slHlll deal with both
of the i terns remaining on the agenda. The years of
discussion on the admission of Viet-Nam and Korea
to the United Nations have clearly revealed two
opposite tendencies, two mutually exclusive approaches
to the settlement of this problem.

86. M. SQBOLEV (Union des Republiqucs socia1istc~
sovietiques) [lraduil du russe] : Pour gagner du temps,
je traiterai la {ois des deux questions qui restent
notre ordre du jour. L'examen de la question de I'udmission du Viet-Nam et de la COfl~e " l'Organisntion des
Nations Unies, qui dure depuis de nombreuses annees,
a nettement fait apparaitrc deux tendances opposees,
deux formules incompatibles.

87. On the one band, a considerable number of
Member States of tbe United Nations have recognized
the actual situation arising ouL of the continuing

87. D'une part, un nombre important d'Etats Mcmbres
de 1'0rg:misation, tenant compte de la situation reelle
qui resulte de la division persistante du Viet-Nam et

14

a

a

rC'

'V"
se!:

m'

th:

rc'

tb'

N'

sol

88

W

st,
th
n'

in.
pc

pr

·dl.:

of

-8~

w
v;
er
F

!

I

I
f

a'
m
A

t,

a,

f'
9
0
0

"e

I

e

r

<
I

f

l'
0

l
(

,

r

,

,

r
\

/

1
I

j

,

1

1

I

<
J

T
division of Viet-Nam and Korea gnd the vital need

de la Coree et considerant la necessite vitnle de les

for their early reunification, and are insisting on the

I unifler au pllls tM, insistent pour que soient priscs des-

adoption of measures lilmly to promote the peaceful
reunUication of those countries. That point of view
was most clearly expressed in a decision of the ter.th
session of the General Assembly, during which the
majori~y of United Nations Members clearly stated
that, In the case of divided States, their peaceful
reunification should be given [lrst priority and that
the admission of such reunifled States to United
Nations membership was the most appropriate way of
·solving the problem.
.

mesures propre.s a favoriser l'unification paciflque des
deux pays. CeUe tendance s'est cx:primes de la fUQon
la plus neUe dans une decision prise a la dixieme 5e.~sion
de l'Assemblee generale; la majorite des Membres de
l'Organisation fl. alors inrJique sans amIJagcs qu'en ce
qui concerne Ics Etats dhd.ses il convennit tout d'abord
de resoudre le probleme de l'unifLcation pacifique, et
que l'admission a l'Organisation de pays ainsi unifies
serait la meilleure solution.

88. On the other hand, the United States and the
Western Powers supporting it have for years been
striving to achieve the opposite result and to perpetuate
the division of those countries by encouraging the
ruling circles of South Korea and South Viet-Nam
in their policy of sabotaging all efforts towards the
peaceful unification of those countries. That was the
precise aim of the United States' repeated efforts to
draw the United Nations into considering the admission
of South Korea and South Viet~Nam to its membership.

88. D'autre part, les Etats~Unis et les puissance..~
occidentales qui les souLiennent cherchent depuis des
annees it obtenir le contra ire, leur but etant de perpetuer
la division de ces pays en encourageant Ies milieux
dirigeants de la Coree du Sud et du Viet-Nam du Sud
a saboter tautes les mesures tendant a l'unifieation
pacifique des deux pays. Tel est precisement l'objet
des nombreuscs tentatives que font les Etats~Unis
pour amener t'OrganisatiOll des Nations Unies a examiner la question de I'admission de la Coree du Sud et
du Viet-Nam du Sud,

89. Like every other cOllntry, the United States is
well aware that the peaceful unification of Korea is
vitally important for the relaxation of tension and
creation of a healthier political atmosphere in the
Far East and is an essential prerequisite for Korea's
admission to the United Nations. Any initiative or
measure which aims at implementing the Armistice
Agreement and bringing the two parts of Korea closer
together serves the vital interests of the Korean people,
and has the support nnd approval of peace-loving
forces in Asia and throllghout the world.

89. Les Etats-Unh savent aussi bien que tous les
autres Etats que pour attenuer la tension et assainir
la situation polltique en Extreme-Orient, il importc
au plus haut point de n!soudre le probleme de l'unifi~
cation pncifiquc de la Coree, condition prealable au
reglement de la question de l'admission 0. l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Toute mesure, toute action,
tendant a assurer l'application de la Convention
d'armisti<:e et i\ rapprocher les deux parties de la
Coree repond aux interets vitaux du peuplc coreen et
rencontre l'appui et l'approbation des forces pacifiques
de !'A.sie et du monde entier.

'90. Such measures are, however, being taken by only
one side, namely, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, whose Government has systematically implemented the Armistice Agreement and is constantly
endeavouring to find means to promote the peaceful
reunification of the country. The most important
of those measures were the completion of the evacuation
of the Chinese People's Volunteers from Korea and the
demand of tlle Governments of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of Cllina
that all foreign troops should be wiLhdrawn from
Korean territory. That measure will undoubtedly help
to ease international tension, build up confidence
between States and strengthen peace in the Far East.
That peace move of the Governments of the Demo~
cratic People'~ Republic of Korea and the Peoplc's
Republic of China has the support of all Asian peOI)les.

90. Cepcndant, une seule des parties prend de relies
mesures, a savoir la Republique populaire dimocratique
de Coree, dont le gottvernement applique fldeIement
la Convention d'armistice et rccllerche inlassablement
le moyen d'assurer I'unification pacifique du pays. Les
plus importantes de Ce.'! mesures ant ete l'evacllution
de toutes lcs unites de yolontaires du peuple chinois
qui se trouvaient en Coree et la demande Iormulee
par les Gouvernements de la Republiquc populaire
democratique de Coree et de la Republique populaire
de Chine concernant le retrait de tontes les troupes
etrangeres clu territoire conJen. Cette mestlre contribue
celtainemcnt a attenu(,;f la tension internEltionale, a
renforcer la confiance entre les Etats et :i consolider
la paix en Extrem€~Orient. Cette initiative pacifiquc
des GOllvernements de la Republique populaire demo~
cratique de Coree et de la Republique popuJaire de
Chine est appuyce par tous les peuples asiaLiqup,$.

91. Any further strengthening of peace in Korea, as
in the Far East as a ''''1101e, primarily depends on
whethcr the Unitcd States Government will withdraw
its troops from South Korea. If United States troops
Ilre withdrawn from Korea forthwith, tllere can be
no doubt that the Koreans of both parts of the country
will, aU the sooner, reach agreement among themselves
on their country'5 unification on a peaceful and demo~
cratic basis. The country's unification on that basis
is, I repeat, an essential prerequisite for the solution

91.

TQut nouveau progres vers la paix en Corr.e et en
depend en premier de la question dc
savoir si le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Ameriquc
retirera ses troupes de la Coree, du Sud. Si lcs troupes
americaines evacuent immediatcment la Con~e, it n'est
pas doutcux que les Coreens des deux parties du pays
s'cntendront plus rapidement sur I'unification de leur
patrie conrormement aux principes paci~ques et
democratiques. L'unHieation du paJ:s. a par~r de tels
principes est, je le repete, la condltlOn prealable au
Extreme~Orient

15

i

!
t

I

~
reglement de la question de l'admission a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

of the problem of Korea'::; 8dmission to tIle United
Nations.

92. The solution of the problem of the country's
.c".,"on so vital to the Korean people, therefore
UIlIII ,u ,
. .
r
U ·ted St t
depends only on the WlUmgn.e~s 0 the m . • a cs
d the South Korean ullthonbes to meet the mterests
:~d demllnds of the pe~ple. However 't ;~e ,Sou]th
Korean Government continues to preven w!e Imp cmentation of the Armistice Agreement ~nd ,IS uph?ld
in this by the United States,. a fa~t WhH?h l8. causI~g
justifiable alarm in peace-Iovmg elrcles In h.orea, III
other Asian countries and throughout the world.

92. La realisation de la tache la plus importante
pour le peuple coreco, l'unification du pays, ne depend
done que du desir des Etats-Unis et des auto rites de
la Cor6e du Slid de satisfaire aux vceux du peuple
coreen et d'agir conforrnernent a ses inter~ts. Cependant, le gouvernement de la Coree du Sud continue de
mettre obstacle a l'application de la Convention
d'armistice et rel,toit a cette fin l'appui des Etats-Unis,
ce qui inquiete a juste titre toutes les forces pacifiqucs
tant en Conie que dans les autres pays d'Asie et du
monde entier.

The peoples have further cause for alarm in the

93. Il est un autre fait qui ne peut manquer d'inquieter
les peuples : le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, loin de
retirer ses troupes de la Con~e du Sud, les renforce,
notamment en envoyant dans le pays de:! armes
atomiques et des armes a l'hydrogene. Vonlant conserver It tout prix la Corce du Sud comme base militairc,
les Etats-Unis encouragent par tOllS les moyells Syngman Rhee a poursuivre une politique agressive et
antipopulaire de provocations militaires contre la
Republique populairc democratique de Coree. Pour
le prouver, la deh~gation sovietique a dte de nombreux
faits lors de la discussion de la question de Coree a la
Premiere Commission de l'As5embIee generale. Ces
faits sont bien connus de tous les representants, y
compris celui des Etats-Unis.

93.

fact that the United States Government,. far from
withdrawing its forces from South Korea, IS actually
rl'.inforcing them, particularly by shipping a~mic a~d
hydrogen weapona Into South Korea. In Its deSIre
to preserve South Korea as a military bridgehead at
all 'costs, the United States is doing its utmost to encourage Syngman Rhee !~ maintain hi~ anti-~ational.
aggres~ivr:: policy of mlhtarJo: provocatIon a~amst t,he
Democratic People's RepnbliC 01 Korea. 1 he SOVIet
delegation has cited many facts in support o.f this
during the discussion 01 the Korean problem m the
First Committee of the General Assembly. All the
representatives lJllrE'., including the representative of
the United States, are well acquainted with those facts.

Dans ces conditions, seuls peuvent recommander
l'admission d'une partie de la Coree a I'Organisation
des Nations Uuies les adversaires de I'unification
pacifique du pnys, qui cherchent a imposer par la force
le regime fantoche de la Coree du Sud a l'ensemble
du peuple coreen. Il va de soi que la delegation de
l'Union sovietique s'c]eve contre toute decision qui
empecherait le peuple coreen de retablir l'unite natio~
nale du pays et aggraverait la situation en Coree, qui
n'est deja que trop tendue. La meilleurc solution
consiste a realiser l'unification pacifique du pays et
a admettre a l'Organisation des Nations Unles une
Coree unie.

"3

95. J-lowever, as the Western Powers arc insisting
on the admission of South Korea to the United Nations,
the problem could be solved by the simultaneous
admission of both the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and Sollt1J Korea, thus placing the two
States on an eqnal footing and helping to create
favourable conditions for a rapproc.hement and negotiations between the two parts of the country and the
country's ultimate peaceful unification on a democratic basis.

95. Cependant, puisque les puissances occidentales
insistent pour que la Coree du Sud soit adrnise a I'Organisation, on ponrrait regler la difficulte en admettant
en meme temps la Repuhlique populaire d6mocratique
de Coree et la Coree du Sud, ee qui placerait les deux
Etats sur un pied d'egalite et aiderait EL cn~er des
conditions favorables a un rapprochement dllS deux
parties du pays, it mener a hiCH les negociations, et a,
assurer enfin I'unification paciflque du pays sur des
bases dcmocratiques.

96. In the lig}!t of these considerations, the Soviet
delegation proposes the following amendments [S/4132]
to the draft resolution submitted by the United States
deJeglltion and supported by certain other members
of the Security Council {SJ4129/Reu. 1]:
/j "1. Delete the first preambular paragraph of
J the draft resolution.
t ...
" 2 l n,
l h e seco~d ~l'eambular paragraph, replace
the ~ord apphcailon by the word' applications'
and In.sert the words 'the Democratic People's
RepubliC of Korea and' before the words 'the
Republic of Korea',

96, En consCqlience, la delegation sovietique propose
les I\m",ndements suivants [8/4132] au projet de resolution presente par les Etats-Unis et a.ppuye par
quelques autres membres du Conseil de securite
[S/412D/Rw. 1] ,
111.
Supprimer le premier considerant du projet
de resolution.
112.
An deuxieme considerant, rem placer les mots
~ la demande I) par les mats «les deJllD.ndes )), et
ajouter lcs mots (( de la Republique populaire demo~
cratiq\1e de Coree et» avant les mats 11 de la Republiql1'" de Coree )),

A! ' '

16

e for .

~ord

:flJ"itte
Tl

,

i
I

91 iJ.01d

uf' -t.ion,
N~l SUJ
WIlcgat

-the
to pUbI

de

Re

T

95' the
0(1

VI

HIe cefl

,

,

I,

II

pe£1..

t}l.J"oug

ag:reen:
o f the
.

N"8.-t;.IOI1

99-

li

c~se 0

regard

basis 1
eo pclu

es1:.abli

to tha

se curi

94,

94, In the circumstances, admission to the United
Nations of Olle part of Korea could be recommended
only hy those who are opposed to the country's peaceful
unification and wish to impose the South Korean
puppet Government by force on the whole (Jf the
Korean people. The Soviet delegation naturally
OppOSH tile adoption 01 a measure whicll would prevent
the Korean people from reunifying their country and
would aggravate the already tense situation in Korea.
The correct solution to the problem lies in the country's
peaceful reuniflcation and the admission of a unified
Korea to the United Nations.

""he

I

II

sio:Il- t(

no1:. se

has co

the re

u:n.ific~

I

unful!

I

authc

I

100.
of Vi
Viet-I
the

,

as w,
at tb

of thl

King

101.
Obvic

I,

I
I

\,
I,
\

I

agree

appn

from
C~ne

i:\rrni:
i::n..ste
)::) e.ac.(

to

s

Sout
1:' Or i
1 (}2.

~Qm:

"'la
10<:> ,

.q~re

1
I

"

.. 3.

In the operative paragraph insert the words

• the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and "

before the words •the Republic of Korea' and the
word 'simultaneously' after the words • be adw
mitted '."

S~elegation

97. The
hopes that all those who
uphold the principle of univers31ity of the United
Nations and favour the peaceful unification of Korea
will support the amendments submitted by the Soviet
deJegation and recommend the simultaneous admission
to the United Nations of the Democratic People's
Republic uf Korea anu South Korea.

98.

The discriminatory policy of the Western Powers

on the question of the admission of new r-,'lembers to

the United Nations and their unwillingness to seek

,\
,I

pea(:eful solutions to ontstanding intcrnationat problems
through negotiation and the execution of existing
agreements are also major obstacles to the solution
of the problem of Viet-NaC1's admission to the United
Nation.!!.

~ 3, Au dispm,itif, ajouter les mots u en mtme
temps ia Republique populaire democratique de
Con!e et II apres les mots (( d'admettrt ll. 1)

La dele.ga~on sovietique exprime l'espoir que
clefe.ndent vraiment le principe de l'uni.
versalite de l'Organisation des Nations tJnics et qui
sont partisans de l'unifIcation paciflque de I~ Corer
appuieront ces amenderncnts et recommandcront I'admission simultanee de 101 Repl1hlique populaire democratique de CoreI.' et £le la Core€'_ du Slld.
97.

tOllS ceux qlll

98, La politique discriminatoire pratiquee par les
puissances occidentales an sujet de l'admis~ion de
nouveaux Membres a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
et lellr refus de rechercher un reglement pacifique des
problemes intcrnationaux pendants en procedant a
des negoeiations et en appIiquant les decisions anterieurcs constitoent aossi le principal oblltacle it une
entente sur l'admi~sion du Viet-Nam it rOrganisation.

99.

It should be specially emphasized that, in the
case of Viet~Nam, there is an international agreement
regarding that country's unification on a democratic
basis through general elections. That agreement was
concluded at the 1954 Geneva Conference on the
establishment of peace in IlHlo-China. The parties
to that agreement were the permanent member~ of the
Security Council, who undertook to support the admission to the United Nations of a unified Viet-Nam, and
not separate p..·lrt~ of it. The United States, however,
bas completely disregarded the Geneva agreement with
the result that the vitally important provision for the
uniflcation of Viet-Nam through free elections remains
unfUlfilled.

99. n cUllvicnt de souligner pnrticulicrcment qu'il
existe, en cc qUi conccrnc le Viet-Nam, un accord
internatiollal relatif a l'uniflcation de ce pays sur des
bases democratiques par voie d'eJections generales. Cet
accord a ete conclu a la conference ql1( s'est tenue a
Genevc en 1'954 sur la question clu retablisscment d\)
la paix ell Indochine, Les parties a eet accord sont
les membre5 permanents du Conseil de securite, qui ant
pris l'engagement d'npPtiyer i'admission a l'Organisation des Nations Unies du Viet-Nam unifle, et nOll
pas de ses deux patties, Ccpendant, lell Etats-Unis
ne tiennent aUCUn compte de l'accord de Genevc, de
sorte que cette disposition cssentielle, qui prevoit
l'unificatioll du Viet~Nam par vQie d'6Jections Iibres,
est restee eUe aussi lettre matte,

100. The Government of thl;'. Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam has repeatedly appealed to the South
Viet~Namese authorities to implement the decisions of
the Geneva Conference. The Soutll Viet--:-:lamese
authorities, however, stubbornly :gnored these appeals,
as well as the recommendations of the two Chairmen
at the Geneva negotiations - the Foreign Minister
of the USSR and the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingrlom - prepared in London in May 1956.

100. Le Gouvernement de la Rcpublique dcmocrntique
du Viet-Nam a demande it plusieuT8 reprises aux:
autorites du Viet-Nam du Sud de metLre en muvre
les decisions de la Conference ne Geneve, TouteCoi3,
les autorilfti du Viet-Num du Sud s'obstinent It me.r.onnaitre tea demar:des, de meme que les recommandatiolls elaborees a Londres en mui Hl56 par les deux
presjrlents de la Conference de Genl!ve, le Ministre des
afTaires etrangere~ de l'URSS et le Secretaire d'Etat
aux afIaires 6lraLgeres du Royo.ume-Uni.

101. The South Viet-Namese authorities would
obviously not have dared to flout this international
agreement if their ohstructive tactics had not been
approved and supported by the United States, which
from the very outset has endeavoured to wreck the
Geneva ag~eement. After the conclusion of the
armistice agreement for Yiet-Nam, the United States,
instead of promoting its observance and the country's
peaceful unification, immediately directed its efforts
to strengthening £nd extending its own position in
South Viet-Nam, ill an attempt to turn it into a base
for it.<; own interests in that pMt of A;ia.

101. De touie evidence, les autorttes du Viet·Na:n
du Sud n'oseraient pas d6daigner eet accord international s'its ne beneflciaient pas, dans leurs manceuvres,
de I'approhation et de I'appui des Etat'l-Unis d'Amcrique, qui, des le debut, se sont employes a contrarier
l'execution de I'accord de Geneve. Cne fois eonelue
la convention d'armistiee. les Etats-Unis, au lieu de
contrihuer a son application et de favoriser l'unUl~
cation pllcifique du pays, se sont immediatement
efforces de consolider et d'etendre leurs positions au
Viet-Nam du SUd, essayant d'en faire un instrume:lt
de leurs jnten~ts dalls cette region d'Asie.

102. In the eircmml.nnces. consideration of the
admission of South Viet-Nam to the United Nations
can only encourage the South Viet-Namese autllOrities
to £ontinue their policy of sahotaging the Geneva
agreement OIl the country's unification.

102. Dans ces ~onditions, l'examen de la question
de l'admiBslon du Viet-Nam du Sud 9. I'Organisation
des Nations Unies ne ~ut qu'encourager ies autorites
du Viet-Nam du Sud it poursuivre leur politique tendanl
a faire eehouer I'accord de Gcnl!ve concernant I'unification du pays.

I

103. Le Conscil de secm'He, et 5urtoUt ses membres
permanents qui ont pris des engagements a eet egard,
se doivent d'user de leur autoriiC et de leur influence
pour acdMrer l'application de I'nccordde GenevCl ct
pour parvenir a l'unification du Viet-Nam prevue dans
cet accord. La mise en reuvre des decisions prises a la
Conference de Geneve en ce qui concerne le Viet-Nam
est une condition neccssaire du reglement de la questkm
de l'admission de ce pays, unifie, a l'Organisati6n des
Nations Unies,
104. En consequence, la delegation sovietique votera
contre la proposition des Etats·Unis, qui n'envisage
que I'admission du Viet-Nam du Sud.

103, It is the. duty of the Security Council, and
particularly of its permanent memlJers, who have
assumed obligations in this matter, to use their autho·
rity and influence to hasten the imp~elltation of the
Geneva agreement and the unilieatl{)rI of Viet-Nam,
as envisaged in that agreement. Ft:lfihnent of tile
decisi<lIl.s of the Geneva Conference concerning Viet-Nam
is an essential condition for the admission of that
country, once it is unified, to the United Nations.

j

104. Guided by these considerations, the Soviet delegation will vote against the United States proPOSll.\
lor the admission of South Viet-Nam alone to the
United Stations.
105. The Soviet delegation feels obliged to draw the
attention of the Security Council to tlte fact that, in
the matter of the admission of new Members to the
UniLed Nations, some members of tlte Council, and
more particularly the United States, Imrsue a policy
wllich is directly contrary to the interests of the United
Nations snd the development of international cow
operation. Instead of settling problems connected with
the admission of States to the United Nations ~trictly in
accordance with the requirements of tIle Cltarter and
Wi,(;ll tIte generally accepted principe of the univerfialiL}'
of the United NatiolB, the United States and its henchmen persist in their discriminatory policy towards certain
countries because of their social and pol.itical systems.
106. The moslllagrant manifestation ofthis intolerable
and long condemned policy 01 discrimination is tlle
attitude to the application of the Mongolian People's
Republic for admi-;sion to the Ul'~ited Nations.
Although the majority of the members of the General
Assembly, at tlte tenth session, favoured the admission
of tIle Mongolian People's Republic togeGher witll other
countries, the adoption 0: a decision on its admission
was prevented by t11C United States, The refusal 01
the United States Ilnd ib henchmen tu decide in favour
of the admission of the Mongolian People's Republic
to the United Nations, despite the lact that at one
time they supported its applic.atioll, proves simply
that these countries arc .)pposed to the principles of
equal rights of peoples and the universality of the
United Nations.

105. La delegation sovietique se doit de signaler au
Conscil de securite que, en ce qui Concerne l'admission
de nouveaux ~lembres a l'OrgRnisation des Nations
Unies. un certain llombre d'Etats membres du Conseil,
et ell premier lieu les Etats-Unis. defendent une position
radicalement cDnt~aire aux inten~ts de l'Organisation
et au dewloppement de la coopertltion intcrnationale.
All lieu d'aborder In question de l'admis3ion de tel ou
t.el Etat conformement aux dispositions de la Charte
et en respectant. le principe generalemcnt reconnu lie
l'universalite de I'OrganisatlOn, les Etats-Ullis d'Amerique et leurs compliees s'obstin~nt a pmtiquer une
politique de discrimination a regard d'un certain nombrc d'Etats en raison de Leur regime poHtique et social.
106. La manifestation la plus impudente de cette
politique de discrimination inadmissible et condamnee
depuis longtemps est I'attitude adopt6e au sujet de
la demande d'admission de la fiepllhlique populaire
de Mongolie. Bien que la majorite des membres de
l'AssemhJee gtl.nerale se soit pl'ononec{', a la dixieme
session, en laveur de l'admission de plusieun:, pays,
dont la Republique populaire de Mongolie, les EtatsUnis ant empeche l'adoption d'une decision en la
matiere, Le refus des Etats-t"nis et de leurs comp1ices
de regler de fat;on positive la question de l'admission
de la Republique populaire de Mongolie a l'Organisatinn des Nations Dnios, biCln gu'Ds se soieJlt anterleurement prononces en faveur de la demande de ce
pays, ne prouve qU'llne seuIe chose : ces Etats solit
opposes aux principes de l'egalite de droit-<; r1I\S peuples
et de j'universalite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
107, 'l'be CDlonial policy of di5.cri'nination and conw 107. La politique colonialiste de discrimination et de
tempt towards small nations should be strongly con~ mepris a l'egard des petits peuples mcrite d\Hre f'.on_
rlemuecl by all those who are sincerely interesteu in darnn.ee categoriquement par ceux qui souhaitent
enhancing the prestige of the United Nntions, In sincerement rehllusser l'antorite de J'Organisation des
discussing the admi.'ision of new Members to the United Nations Unies. Puisque nous nom, occupons aujourd'hui
Nations today, the Soviet delegalion ca~not overlook de J'admission de no~\veaux Mcmbres it l'Organisation
the flagrant and unprincipled disregard for the Charter des Nations Unies, la delegation sovielique ne pent
in the case 01 the r-rlongolian PeoIlle's Republic, It passer ~ous silence l'exemple cl'injustice criante et de
is time to put an end to the discriminawry policy of mepris pour la Charte que constitn~ le cas de la Reputhe Western Powers in r~~pect of the Mungolian Peo;Jle's blique populaire de Mong"olie. Le moment est venu
Repnblic, and to find a pos~tive solution to the pl'olllem de mettre fln il la polilique de discrimination des
of its lldmission to th.~ United Nations.
puissances occidentales a l'egard de la Republique
populairc dt illongolie et de regter de fa~on positive
la question de son admission a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
The meelin.q rose at 1 p.m.
La seance; est levee a 1 J !leures.

18
Printed in France

Price $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or eq\lival~nt in other cWTcncies)

17872-Mareh 1'J60-1,675

,

I'
I
I
I

~':
1,1 )

[:

k=
, I

: I

'I ,i
,

,i
