S/PV.8810

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8810th meeting

Tuesday, 29 June 2021, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Farrey
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-17210 (E)
*2117210*

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Lecoq, Officer-in-Charge, Europe and Central Asia
Division, Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lecoq.
Mr. Lecoq: I thank you for this opportunity to brief
the Council on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While there has been progress in certain areas,
we remain concerned at the overall situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina with regard to the consolidation of
peace and reconciliation. Above all, we continue to
witness practices that, far from dealing with the scars
of the past, contribute to polarization and hinder the
prospect of prosperity and stability, not only for Bosnia
and Herzegovina but also for the region. These include
persistent instances of revisionist narratives, divisive
rhetoric, denial of genocide and war crimes, glorification
of convicted war criminals and hate speech.
During her 10-day visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina
earlier this month, the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Wairimu
Nderitu, expressed concern about that trend and called
for an increased commitment to trust-building and
reconciliation, starting with mutual understanding
and respect for the grief of all victims as a basis for
constructive dialogue on moving the country forward.
While on the ground, the Special Adviser
highlighted the important role of all those in
leadership positions in bringing people together,
fostering mutual understanding and trust, and working
towards reconciliation.
2/14

29/06/2021

She also paid tribute to the important work of local
peace champions across the country, who are working
to build trust within their communities, including in
the field of education. Their work in bringing people
together in their immediate community constitutes
hope for the future and merits full recognition and
support from the authorities, the media and the
international community.
As the Secretary-General said in December last
year, political, religious and community leaders,
educators, civil society, the media and all the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a critical role to play
in moving forward together from a difficult past and
towards a brighter future.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like the rest of the world,
continues to face the unprecedented coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its consequences.
Now is the time to come together and work jointly and
at all levels to overcome this health crisis and build back
better. The United Nations will continue to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina in its COVID-19 response and
socioeconomic recovery.
The implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals continues to drive the work of the United Nations
on the ground, in support of the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the people of Bosnia. Under the
new five-year United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework, signed in May, the United
Nations committed to supporting the Government and
all people in Bosnia and Herzegovina to live longer,
healthier, more prosperous and secure lives. As agreed
with the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, our
support over the next five years will focus on sustainable,
resilient and inclusive growth; quality, accessible
and inclusive education, health and social protection;
people-centred governance and the rule of law; and
citizen and community engagement for social cohesion.
In all those areas, we continue to work closely with our
partners, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union.
Amid divisions and lack of consensus, progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has proved challenging over
the past period. More needs to be done to advance
much-needed reforms, including in the area of the rule
of law and electoral reform.
Over the past years, many people — including
youth — have been leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina to
search for a better future elsewhere. Young people have
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

an important role to play in shaping the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Their voices must be heard. The
United Nations has been working with the Government,
municipalities and civil-society organizations in
support of the empowerment of women and youth. The
United Nations has also been supporting the work of
the Tirana-based Regional Youth Cooperation Office,
which aims to enhance regional cooperation and foster
reconciliation among young people in the region,
including in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to recent developments in the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board in Sarajevo
related to the appointment of a new High Representative,
the United Nations is not a member of the Steering
Board and therefore did not participate in the process.
Let me also add, for the sake of clarity, that the United
Nations was not a signatory to either the Dayton Peace
Agreement or its annex 10.
The United Nations remains committed to
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path towards
sustainable peace and development and looks forward
to continuing its work with all stakeholders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina as well as regional and international
partners towards the achievement of peace and stability
in the country and the wider region.
The President: I thank Mr. Lecoq for his briefing.
I should like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Hervé Lecoq for today’s
briefing. We welcome the participation in this meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ms. Bisera Turković.
We have gathered here at our initiative in order to
discuss the letter circulated in the Security Council
stating that on 27 May Christian Schmidt, a citizen
of the Federal Republic of Germany, was supposedly
appointed to the post of High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Russian Federation, as a member
of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina, would like

S/PV. 8810

to categorically disagree with the confirmation of
that appointment.
It is well known that the procedure for the
appointment of High Representatives that has
developed over the years is quite logical, transparent
and democratic. Candidates are confirmed by the
Steering Board with the consent of the Bosnian sides
and then approved by the Security Council, usually in
the form of an adopted resolution.
However, nothing of the sort happened in the
case of Mr. Schmidt, not even close. Today we see a
completely different picture. The name of the only
candidate, who appeared out of nowhere, was confirmed
by the Steering Board right away without any kind of
discussion. The Board also chose to ignore the views of
not only the Russian Federation but of all the Bosnian
sides. A logical question has therefore emerged: can
we begin work on national reconciliation by provoking
an inevitable conflict that threatens to compound the
existing differences among the various entities?
Fuel to the fire was also added by manoeuvres
by some of our colleagues in the Security Council,
who, for some reason, decided to bypass the matter
in the Council. The letter of 3 June by the current
High Representative Valentin Inzko was sent to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Council,
stating that he would be replaced as of 1 August by
Christian Schmidt, but, for some reason, this letter was
not circulated. It was circulated only after we raised
the matter and insisted on it. For three weeks, it was as
if this letter did not exist even though everyone knew
about it. Such occurrences serve only to strengthen the
overall unpleasant sensation on this matter.
Russia seeks to support the 1995 General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina — the
Dayton Peace Agreement — because this issue cannot
be examined without historical perspective. As is
well known, at the beginning of the 1990s, Bosnia
and Herzegovina was torn apart by a bloody war that
affected all of its society. Many lost loved ones, their
homes and their work. In 1995, the Dayton Peace
Agreement put an end to this terrible tragedy. It was
signed by the parties as well as by guarantor States. The
Agreement remains the foundation for peace in Bosnia.
Our duty as members of the Security Council is to
do everything possible to keep this fragile achievement
from being destroyed. This is precisely why we have
put forward the initiative to hold today’s meeting.

21-172103/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Our position on the High Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina — the procedure for creating this
post — was in fact clearly defined in annex 10 of the
Dayton Agreement and is well known. We should not
forget that it is the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
who hold the country’s sovereignty. The fate of the
country and its development path should be determined
by the people rather than a High Representative or any
external force.
We are always ready to engage in honest discussions
on the most important issues with our colleagues in the
Security Council. Indeed, an exchange of views and
an attempt to find compromise is one of the goals of
the Security Council. Only in this way can we find a
solution to problems. But in this specific case, we are
seeing a completely different picture: an attempt to
avoid the discussion of the candidature of the High
Representative or to assess the activity that of the Office
of the High Representative in general. The question
then can therefore be asked: why try to deceive and play
hide and seek when it is not necessary?
It is clear that any candidate for the position who
does not have the support of the Security Council and
the Bosnian sides will lack not only legitimacy, but
also the political support needed to truly contribute to
promoting a peaceful settlement. Quite to the contrary,
that candidate’s actions will lead only to greater chaos,
compound existing differences and ultimately destroy
all the positives that have been achieved over the past
quarter century. Is this the scenario that we wanted to
see when we signed the Dayton Agreement?
The President: At this moment I will possibly
abuse my privilege as President of the Council to
respond once again to the allegation that we heard just
now that the letter in question was not distributed to
Council members. As I explained the last time when we
met on this topic, the letter had been addressed to the
Secretary-General. We talked to the Office for Legal
Affairs in the Secretariat and had the strong feeling
that as the Secretary-General was the addressee of the
letter, it was up to him to circulate it. When it took such
a long time for him to do so, we decided that we could
perhaps do it informally. But no ill intention was behind
our adopting this approach.
Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
thanks The Officer-in-Charge of the Europe and
Central Asia Division of the Departments of Political
4/14

29/06/2021

and Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Hervé Lecoq, for
his briefing. We also recognize the presence of
Ms. Turković, Deputy Chairperson of the Council of
Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We begin by expressing our appreciation to the
outgoing High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his work and contribution to the security and stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as for promoting
the political process and the full implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement. The Agreement remains
a fundamental pillar to peace and stability, including
through the creation of an environment conducive
to the voluntary return and integration of refugees
into communities.
We take note of the recent decision of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board to appoint
Mr. Christian Schmidt as the new High Representative.
We also take note of the difficulties the Office of the
High Representative has had in fulfilling its mandate,
and we hope that a climate can be created for all parties
to work together and overcome these problems. We
recognize and cannot understate the significant role
that the members of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council have played and will continue
to play in contributing to ensuring international support
for the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The value of the work of the Security Council to the
stability and long-term security of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina also cannot be overstated. We have
seen the value of our united and coordinated efforts
over the past 25 years. This work is needed now more
than ever, as the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are trying to recover from the massive socioeconomic
disruption caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In this regard, my delegation encourages the members
of the Peace Implementation Council to work in a spirit
of mutual collaboration and coordination and engage
in constructive dialogue with all parties. Consensus in
decision-making is desirable and should be our aim.
Given the critical role the Security Council plays in
the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it would have
been prudent to consult the Council on this most recent
matter. At the same time, we fully appreciate that lack
of consensus should not derail progress and that the
legal requirements for the appointment of the new High
Representative have been met. We hope that all parties
can move past the differences surrounding the recent
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

appointment of the newly selected High Representative
and work together.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our full support for
the stability, political independence and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the role of the
Office of the High Representative. It is crucial for all
parties to work together to fully implement the Peace
Agreement, as this represents the path towards stability
in the region.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the representative of the Secretariat for his
briefing. China takes note of Mr. Inzko’s letter to the
Secretary-General on the selection of the next High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Dayton Peace Agreement has outlined the role
of the Security Council in the appointment of High
Representatives. In practice, the Security Council
endorses the appointment either through a resolution
or in the form of a letter from the President. This
has become an established practice, and this practice
should continue to be respected when appointing the
next High Representative.
The High Representative assumes the important
responsibilities of supervising the implementation
of the Dayton Accords. The High Representative’s
work affects the fundamental interests of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its people and has an important impact
on the situation in the country.
On the issue of the appointment of the High
Representative, the international community must
take into full account the views of all Bosnia and
Herzegovina parties. China takes note of the differences
with regard to the procedures for the appointment of
the next High Representative. China encourages all the
parties concerned to fully engage in consultations in
that regard in order to find a reasonable and feasible
solution, help the High Representative to perform his
duties, uphold the authority of the Security Council and
contribute to maintaining peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the wider Western Balkans region.
In March this year, the Parliament of the Republika
Srpska adopted a resolution calling for the immediate
closure of the Office of the High Representative. That
resolution should be taken seriously. Since the signing of
the Dayton Peace Agreement 25 years ago, the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has significantly changed.
The international community should reassess the role

S/PV. 8810

and the mandate of the High Representative in order to
ensure that the Office adapts to the current reality and
the needs of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. At
the same time, the rights of all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be ensured.
China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the choice of its people
with regard to the country’s future. China encourages
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to continuously
enhance mutual political trust, promote national
harmony and advance nation-building. China is willing
to continue to work with other countries to provide
support and assistance to that end.
The peace and reconciliation process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has always benefited from the attention and
assistance of the international community, especially
the Security Council, and it would not have been
possible without the sustained concern and support of
other countries. We hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, engage in foreign relations in
a spirit of friendship and goodwill, genuinely respect
the sovereignty of other countries and refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking the Officer-in-Charge of the Europe and
Central Asia Division of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Hervé Lecoq, for
his briefing on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
acknowledge the presence of the Honourable Foreign
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina at today’s meeting.
The Dayton Peace Agreement remains important
to building enduring peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To this day, the Agreement continues
to define the framework for finding solutions related
to interethnic conflict settlement through dialogue
between parties on the basis of equality, mutual respect,
compromise and consensus.
The Office of the High Representative (OHR), as
an ad hoc international institution mechanism, has been
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Agreement. We believe that it is incumbent on
the OHR to continue to work with all parties in an
objective manner in order to build trust to overcome all
impediments. The expeditious implementation of the
5+2 agenda should remain the top priority.

21-172105/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We take note of the recent appointment of
Mr. Christian Schmidt as the next High Representative.
We hope that the incoming High Representative will
act to build cohesion among all parties.
It is unfortunate that the new appointment has
brought to the fore differences among the constituent
entities of the confederation. We are of the view that
disagreement among members of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council over the appointment
of the new High Representative needs to be resolved
through consensus, in line with the Peace Agreement.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way in
building a multi-ethnic, multilingual, multicultural and
multireligious society. The problems that the country
faces are similar to those encountered on the path
to building a nation comprising people of different
faiths, ethnicities and languages. We hope that the
Bosnian parties will continue their engagement in
a spirit of compromise and maturity to address all
outstanding issues.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Hervé Lecoq for his briefing. We also welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina among us today.
The biannual meetings of the Security Council show
that, while Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress
in its stabilization over the past 25 years, the situation
remains fragile. There are worrisome dynamics at play.
Intercommunal tensions remain high. Some leaders are
calling for secession, thereby challenging the territorial
integrity of the country, which is contrary to the Dayton
Peace Agreement.
The Dayton Peace Agreement, which France
witnessed, established the position of High
Representative to facilitate the implementation of
the civilian component of the Agreement. The High
Representative is not intended to continue beyond the
necessary point. The objective, defined by the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council in 2008,
is the closure of his Office, which will indicate the
normalization of the country’s functioning. But that
closure will be beneficial to Bosnia and Herzegovina
only if it meets the conditions and objectives set out in
the so-called 5+2 agenda in 2008. The Security Council
has consistently endorsed that agenda. However,
it is clear that all those conditions have not yet been
met, as affirmed by the periodic reports of the High
Representative to the Security Council. In particular, the
6/14

29/06/2021

political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
too fragile for the Office of the High Representative to
be closed.
Twelve years since he was appointed to the post,
Mr. Valentin Inzko has asked to step down. We thank
him warmly for his tireless commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. On 27 May, the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council decided to
appoint Mr. Christian Schmidt as his successor. The
appointment procedures were followed. Mr. Schmidt
will take up his duties on 1 August.
France remains determined to continue to work with
its partners, particularly Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
signatories and all witnesses to the Dayton Agreement,
the members of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board and regional partners in support of
the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
its economic and social development on the path to
European integration.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Mr. Hervé Lecoq for
his briefing. I welcome the Foreign Minister of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to our meeting this afternoon.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
continued to show a complex picture. The divisive
rhetoric, political instability and disagreement among
entities and communities pose a serious challenge to the
sustainable peace, unity and prosperity of the country
and all its people. The terrible coronavirus disease
pandemic has further increased existing tensions. It
is therefore important that Bosnia and Herzegovina
step up its efforts to address the ongoing challenges,
stabilize the sociopolitical situation, promote economic
development and improve the well-being and livelihood
of the people.
In doing so, we believe that all parties need to engage
in a constructive dialogue and confidence-building
measures. Trust and confidence can pave the way for
overcoming difficulties, narrowing differences and
strengthening national reconciliation. The international
community should continue to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its constructive and meaningful
manner, in accordance with international law and
the aspirations of the country and its people. In that
regard, we reiterate the importance of respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Viet Nam strongly promotes respect for international
law, including the implementation of international
treaties. We have consistently supported the role played
by the regional arrangement, as well as an international
and a regional agreement, in contributing to the
maintenance of regional peace and security and, at the
same time, in order to build sustainably, the regional
issues and the positions and views of the countries
directly concerned must be taken into consideration.
It is also our position to support the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. Mediation is an important and
effective means; yet it can be very challenging and
complex. It requires not only personal capacity but also
trust, good relations and cooperation with all sides.
On the question at hand, we consider that the
Dayton Peace Agreement and past practices, including
Security Council resolutions and decisions, are an
important basis for the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in addressing emerging issues.
We hope that all sides will commit to reaching
an agreement for long-lasting peace, stability and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
whole region.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Mr. Lecoq for his briefing. We
recognize the presence at this meeting of the Deputy
Chairperson of the Council of Ministers and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The information provided by Mr. Lecoq is genuinely
valuable and timely. We would appreciate more
detailed background information, as well as any other
information considered relevant to Security Council
members, including the distribution of documents by
the President in due time and form.
Mexico recognizes the importance of the work of
the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. From the
information shared at the most recent meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/2021/436), it is clear that progress
on the 5+2 agenda has been limited. Progress on that
agenda is fundamental and a requirement for both
the European integration project and for the eventual
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

S/PV. 8810

Mexico insists that dialogue is the only way
to resolve any disagreement and reiterates its
willingness to continue working for a peaceful Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Hervé Lecoq, Officer-in-Charge of
the Europe and Central Asia Division, for his excellent
briefing. I also welcome the participation in this
meeting of Ms. Bisera Turković, Deputy Chairperson
of the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation followed with interest the process
leading to the appointment of Mr. Christian Schmidt as
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
hope that, in accordance with his mandate under the
civilian aspects of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Schmidt will work with the various parties to
promote lasting peace and stability and to achieve the
5+2 agenda.
The post-election period in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is an opportunity to carry out the constitutional and
electoral reforms necessary to ensure not only the
effectiveness of the rule of law but also the transparency
and inclusiveness of the electoral system. Furthermore,
as the international community mobilizes for
vaccination against the coronavirus disease pandemic,
we urge the various levels of Government to increase
their cooperation and coordination to advance the
vaccination programmes and strengthen the healthcare system.
In addition, we call on all parties to demonstrate
a constructive political commitment to finalize the
formation of a Government and appointments at all
levels of authority, which would make it possible to
avoid a potential institutional paralysis.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is of
the utmost importance. Therefore, we call on actors
at all levels to work for a sociopolitical climate that is
favourable to the voluntary return of refugees and their
integration into their communities.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses its support
for the appointment of Mr. Christian Schmidt as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
it is appropriate to point out the relevance of the
established practice of the Security Council on the
matter, which consists of endorsing that appointment

21-172107/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

through a Security Council resolution, which the
Council has always done by consensus in the past.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Hervé Lecoq for his valuable
briefing on the developments in the situation of Bosnia
Herzegovina. I also welcome the participation in this
meeting of Ms. Bisera Turković, Deputy Chairperson
of the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My country’s delegation welcomes once again
the various positive developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which we discussed during the previous
Security Council meeting on this subject in May (see
S/2021/436). We reiterate our support for all efforts
made to strengthen stability and build peace in the
country. In that regard, we call on all political parties
to refrain from divisive rhetoric that exacerbates
ethnic tensions and dangerously jeopardizes the entire
peacebuilding process. We also call on all the political
leaders to prioritize the national interests of all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to pave the way for the
younger generations to build a better future based on
ethnic and cultural unity.
My country’s delegation reiterates our support for
the efforts of the Office of the High Representative
in accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as
the efforts of the European Union military operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina pursuant to its mandate.
We call on all parties to redouble their efforts in order
to implement the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation has taken note of the letter addressed
to the Secretary-General from the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning the nomination
of Mr. Schmidt, who will succeed him starting
1 August. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Mr. Inzko for his efforts
throughout his 12 years in office. In that regard, my
delegation encourages all parties to abide by their
obligations to ensure the full self-independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning the implementation
of 5+2 agenda, the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and an end to international supervision.
In conclusion, I would like to express Tunisia’s
support for all the efforts to bring stability to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina and establish reconciliation among its
various ethnic groups. We are ready to work with all
8/14

29/06/2021

partners to support lasting peace and security as well
as sustainable development, with a view to meeting
the aspirations of all the citizens of the country for a
better future.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Mr. Lecoq for his
useful briefing. We also appreciate the presence at the
meeting of Ms. Bisera Turković, Deputy Chairperson
of the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me start by reiterating what we said when we
discussed Bosnia and Herzegovina less than two months
ago (see S/2021/436). Norway fully supports the Office
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its ongoing work. It is important that the High
Representative can continue the task of overseeing the
implementation of civilian aspects of the 1995 Dayton
Peace Agreement.
We also use this opportunity to thank Mr. Inzko for
his commitment and hard work over many years in his
role as High Representative.
The Security Council has repeatedly stated its
commitment to the principles of the 5+2 agenda as
the condition for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, most recently in November last
year in resolution 2549 (2020), which was adopted
unanimously. Norway gave its support to those
principles in its statement at the Council meeting on
Bosnia Herzegovina held in May (S/2021/436, annex
X). The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina must
take the necessary steps to complete the 5+2 agenda.
Again, prior to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, the well-established requirements from
2008 need to be met.
As elaborated in May, we call for continued reforms
to secure stability and the welfare of all the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. All parties must prioritize the
implementation of comprehensive reforms in a manner
benefiting all citizens. That requires political will and
leadership. We also encourage the Government to make
further efforts to improve the rule of law to ensure that
Bosnia and Herzegovina develops as a State based on
that fundamental principle. That includes abiding by
its international commitments on human rights and
implementing decisions by the European Court of
Human Rights.
Norway welcomes the continued work of the
European Union military operation in Bosnia
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and Herzegovina. Its contribution to maintaining
stability and a safe and secure environment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is important.
Let me end by once again confirming that we
fully support the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
fundamental structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a single, sovereign State comprising two entities. On
the procedure for appointing the High Representative,
it is our understanding of the Dayton Accords that such
decisions rest with the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Lecoq for his briefing, especially on such
short notice.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently at peace, but
its stability cannot be taken for granted. The country has
yet to realize its full potential, as we heard from
Mr. Lecoq, especially in strengthening its economy,
the rule of law and democratic institutions. The Office
of the High Representative plays an essential role in
monitoring and supporting the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Accords, and the Office
has been critical to the stability we have seen over the
past 25 years. The Office is needed to guide Bosnia
and Herzegovina towards its own self-identified goals.
A secure, stable and forward-looking Bosnia and
Herzegovina, undergoing continued work towards unity
and reconciliation, is in the best interests of the citizens
of that country, as well as the international community.
As the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board established, and many other Security Council
members before me have affirmed, Bosnia and
Herzegovina must meet specific criteria — and agenda
of five objectives and two conditions — in order to
graduate from international supervision. I note, in
that regard, that Russia agreed to that agenda in 2008.
In contradiction to the 5+2 agenda it has previously
supported, Russia now appears to maintain that the
Office of the High Representative should be closed.
Russia’s opposition to the new High Representative is
not based in law, but it is because Moscow does not agree
with the appointment of a new High Representative as a
matter of principle. Let us therefore be clear on why we
are here today: Russia seeks the immediate closure of
the Office and is using some spurious legal arguments
to advance that goal.
On 27 May, the Peace Implementation Council
appointed Christian Schmidt as the next High

S/PV. 8810

Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. With
the sole exception of Russia, all Steering Board
members — Canada, France, Germany, the European
Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
represented by Turkey, the United States and
Japan — agreed to his appointment. Decisions of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board do
not require unanimity. Based on the conclusions of
the 1996 Peace Implementation Conference, there is
no determinative role for the Security Council in the
appointment process. There is no requirement that the
Security Council take action to confirm Mr. Schmidt’s
designation. High Representative-designate Schmidt
has the support of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, barring only Russia. Therefore, his
appointment as High Representative is a closed matter.
The United States opposes any effort to negotiate
a change to the 5+2 agenda or a time line for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The conditions of the agenda include urgent reforms
for a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina. As was made
abundantly clear to the Council from the briefers that
Russia itself selected for the informal Arria Formula
meeting discussion last November to commemorate
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the conclusion of the
Dayton Accords, nationalistic rhetoric continues to
divide the country and inhibit real progress on reform.
The United States remains committed to the principles
of the Dayton Peace Accords. There is no future for
either of the entities outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Peaceful dissolution is not an option. The redrawing of
borders in the Western Balkans is not on the table.
Let me respond, if I may, to some of the earlier
remarks by other delegations. The United States view
is that no one is trying to undermine the Council’s
authority or to circumvent its procedures here. We
welcome the Council’s support for the appointment
of the High Representative, and we look forward to a
productive relationship, we hope, between the High
Representative and the Council. However, the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board, not the
Security Council, appoints the High Representative.
The letter from Representative Inzko has now been
shared with the Council. In the past, as some have
indicated, there was consensus in the Security Council
on the appointment of the High Representative, and
the Security Council chose to explicitly welcome
and support the appointment. However, that was
not required.

21-172109/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Let me end by saying that the United States
affirms our unwavering support for a Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is democratic, multi-ethnic
and sovereign and for an independent State with
unquestioned territorial integrity, destined for fuller
integration into the Euro-Atlantic community.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to thank
Mr. Lecoq for his briefing and to recognize the presence
of Ms. Turković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We would like to reiterate our earlier call for
constructive and open dialogue among all the
communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We encourage
them to continue making efforts, through mutual
understanding and compromise, to build bridges of
reconciliation and promote solutions that lead to social
cohesion and nation-building.
Kenya urges Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
to make efforts towards the fulfilment of the five
objectives and two conditions established by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board.
We encourage all parties to exercise restraint and
refrain from provocative, divisive and nationalistic
rhetoric, which could undermine the sovereignty and
territorial Integrity of the State.
We call on all the parties to work together and
recommit to effectively implementing the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We encourage members of the Security
Council to work together in a consensual manner with
regard to the Office of the High Representative, whose
role my delegation supports.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I would like to thank our
briefer, Mr. Lecoq, from the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, and welcome Minister for
Foreign Affairs Turković to the Security Council.
Ireland supports the Office of the High
Representative and believes that its role remains
vital to the work of building a stable and prosperous
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina. That stability is
important in the reform process required for European
Union accession.
We therefore welcome the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board decision on the appointment of
Mr. Christian Schmidt as High Representative and look
forward to working with him.
10/14

29/06/2021

We note the past practice whereby the Security
Council has marked the appointment of each new High
Representative. We view that expression of political
support as an important step but not legally necessary
for the decision of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board to appoint a new High Representative
to take effect.
We recall that the report transmitted by the
Secretary-General’s on 27 April (S/2021/409) noted that,
aside from the encouraging trend in Brčko district, the
authorities had made no progress in implementing the
5+2 agenda, the completion of which is a prerequisite for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative. We
note that, last November in resolution 2549 (2020), the
Council reiterated its calls on the competent authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the necessary
steps to complete the 5+2 agenda. The requirements
that need to be met by the Bosnian authorities for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative were
agreed by the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board — the five objectives and two conditions.
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Inzko for his many
years of distinguished service as High Representative.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): I thank Mr Lecoq
for his briefing and welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The role of the High Representative remains vital
and has the United Kingdom’s full support. The five
objectives and two conditions for the close of the Office
of the High Representative have not been met. Those
objectives and conditions were agreed by all Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board members, are
recognized by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
and supported repeatedly by the Security Council, most
recently in resolution 2549 (2020), adopted unanimously
in November last year.
The absence of a High Representative at this stage
would encourage further instability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, thereby emboldening actors who wish to
perpetuate divisions and slowing the implementation of
much-needed reforms. It would have a negative impact
on Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region and hinder
the continued implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The Security Council should maintain its
focus on achieving sustainable peace and security and
supporting the Office of the High Representative until
the conditions mentioned for closing the Office have
been met.
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

As stated in Mr. Inzko’s letter to the Security
Council dated 3 June, subsequently circulated to
Security Council members on 24 June, Mr. Christian
Schmidt has already been appointed by the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council as the new
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. He
will take up his duties on 1 August.
As a member of the Steering Board, we attended
the meeting on 27 May, where he was appointed. The
appointment was supported by all members of the
Steering Board, except for Russia. The decisions of
the Steering Board do not require unanimity. On the
basis that there was sufficient political support in the
Steering Board for Mr. Schmidt, it was announced on
27 May that it had formally appointed him as the new
High Representative. Legal advisers in the Office of
the High Representative have confirmed that that is the
correct procedure.
It is not the case that the endorsement of the
Security Council is required in order to finalize the
appointment of Mr. Schmidt. Pursuant to annex 10 of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace and Peace
Implementation Conference conclusions, specifically
the 1996 conclusions, which state that, in the event of a
vacancy, following consultations with members of the
Peace Implementation Council, the Steering Board will
designate a High Representative. The decision on the
appointment of a new High Representative rests with the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board. There
is no determinative role for the Secretary-General or
the Security Council in the appointment process and no
legal requirement that the Security Council take action
to confirm Mr. Schmidt’s designation. He will take up
his duties as High Representative on 1 August, whether
or not the Council welcomes the appointment, as it has
done in the past, via resolution or an exchange of letters.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
Before I do that, I would like to again make it clear
that it was not a letter from Mr. Inzko addressed to
the Security Council; it was a letter addressed to the
Secretary-General. That is important given the issue of
distribution being addressed here.
I thank the Officer-in-Charge of the Europe and
Central Asia Division of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Hervé Lecoq, for the
briefing. I welcome the participation of the Foreign
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina in today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8810

I would like to start by reiterating Estonia’s full
support for a robust and effective Office of the High
Representative, as it is a strong contributor to the
country’s efforts in maintaining a safe and secure
environment. Estonia strongly supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
are certain that its future is adjoined with the EuroAtlantic path. Although the country has made progress
in several areas over 25 years, it is unfortunately now
divided by political tensions. Republika Srpska should
stop advocating secession and refrain from any actions
or policies that could destabilize the country. It is high
time to put aside differences and focus on lowering
political tensions and promoting reconciliation.
The Security Council has several times expressed
its support for the 5+2 agenda in the debate on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Given that urgent reforms are needed
and nationalistic and divisive rhetoric is on the rise in
the country, it is clear that the conditions laid out in
2008 in the 5+2 agenda for closing the Office of the
High Representative have not yet been achieved. That
has also been confirmed by the regular reports to the
Secretary-General by the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The ongoing position of the High
Representative is therefore essential to the efforts for
peace and stability in the country until the conditions
of the 5+2 agenda are met.
We thank the current High Representative,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his commitment and efforts
in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina for so many years.
Mr. Christian Schmidt of Germany was appointed by
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 27 May as the new High Representative in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It was decided that he would take up
office on 1 August. There is no requirement that the
Security Council take action to confirm Mr. Schmidt’s
designation. The decision on the appointment of a new
High Representative rests with the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council. As my colleagues
from France and the United States stressed before,
those nomination rules must be respected, and there is
no need for consensus in the Steering Board.
Lastly, we urge the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to engage in dialogue and foster an
environment conducive to unity, consensus and
constructive engagement in the interest of citizens.
We encourage the Presidency leaders to continue the
country’s path towards European integration.

21-1721011/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Bisera
Turković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ms. Turković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for so successfully presiding over the Security Council
during the month of June.
I would like to assure all members here today that
Bosnia and Herzegovina looks forward to the day when
we can close the Office of the High Representative in
our country. Unfortunately, that day has not yet arrived.
As members know, and as a few members mentioned,
the 5+2 agenda was agreed in 2008. It set out the
requirements that need to be met by the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina prior to the closure of Office
of the High Representative. While progress has been
made in some areas, there is still much work to be done
before we can consider the requirements fulfilled.
We simply cannot stress enough the importance
of the role of the High Representative in the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The process of transferring
responsibility to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s elected
officials is an important one but it must be done at the
right time, when all agreed preconditions have been
met. The political situation in the country, in particular
over the past six months, including deplorable actions
and statements by certain political actors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, illustrates the need for the Office of the
High Representative to continue its important work.
Last year, we marked the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the conclusion of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Dayton and its signing in Paris. While an
immense amount of progress has been achieved, we
need to continue strengthening State-level institutions
and their competencies, in line with the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Some politicians have found
it quite beneficial to resist and oppose either the High
Representative himself or the work of his Office, and
that is unfortunate. Instead, our focus needs to be on
continuing to create an Administration that can meet
the needs of its citizens, as well as being able to face
the challenges ahead.
As members will recall, on 27 May the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council formally
12/14

29/06/2021

appointed the new High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, consistent with relevant Security council
resolutions. The newly appointed High Representative
is to take up his duties on 1 August. I invite all members
of the Peace Implementation Council to continue to
provide support to the High Representative in his
important work.
It is of the utmost importance that the Office of
the High Representative and the High Representative
himself continue their work with the people and
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as with
the international community, to ensure Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s continued progress towards becoming a
prosperous and effective democracy set firmly on the
path towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
Allow me to conclude my statement by using the
medical terminology we have become accustomed to
over the past 18 months. The collective immunization of
the Bosnian political and legal system has not yet been
completed. If the procedures we have diligently been
following for the past 25 years were to be interrupted
or suspended, we would expose ourselves to a high risk
of reinfection and a potentially dangerous surge that we
would not be able to contain alone, meaning that all
our efforts to stop the spread of the virus would go to
complete waste.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to put a question to Minister
Turković. I hope she will not take the question
personally, but it is a matter on which we require
some clarification.
The question is as follows: Does the statement that
she made today reflect the position of all of constituent
entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina? Has her position
been coordinated with the Presidency of the country,
and if so how was that done? I ask because we received
a letter from the Chair of the Presidency, Mr. Milorad
Dodik, stating that she does not have the legal right to
make a statement before the Security Council due to
the fact that her statement was not agreed with all the
entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we understand it, the provisions of the Dayton
Peace Agreement assume that issues of foreign policy
are the shared responsibility of all the entities of
21-17210

29/06/2021

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8810

Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why such programme
statements must be coordinated with all the entities. If
that is not the case, then it seems we must draw the
conclusion that everything Minister Turković said
today should be considered her own personal views.
Obviously, she has every right to make her personal
views known; however, it appears that they do not
reflect the position of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Despite the fact that those who dislike Bosnia
and Herzegovina — and who are making concerted
efforts to prevent it from being functional — would not
agree with me, the majority certainly do. The strategic
documents were created and adopted by all three
constituent peoples and other citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who would certainly support my position
and expect me to represent all views, as I am doing.

We are convinced that it is very important to
adhere to the principle of respect for the interests of
the two entities and three constituent peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to maintain a balanced stance.
Otherwise, instead of resolving the situation, we can
only provoke further antagonism between the parties.

The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

We have heard in many statements today that
all the legal requirements for the appointment of the
High Representative were complied with and that the
Security Council plays no role in the matter, which
is now closed. That is quite surprising, as when we
appointed High Representatives in the past, consensus
was required in the Steering Board and no one cast any
doubt on the role of the Security Council.
As we mentioned earlier, the same unacceptable
games are still being played here. The views of the
members of the Steering Board and the entities that
make up the country are not being heeded, and decisions
are being pushed through. I can say now that it does
not add any authority to the allegedly appointed High
Representative Schmidt.
The President: The Deputy Chairperson of the
Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Turković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to ask the representative of the Russian Federation
whether he has been granted the authority by his
own Foreign Minister, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, to ask the
question he posed to me. Obviously, if he does not have
the permission of Mr. Lavrov, his question constituted
a personal expression, to which I am not willing to
provide an answer. However, if he can prove that such
a question comes with the authority of his Foreign
Minister, then I would tell him that everything I have
said is based on strategic foreign policy documents
adopted in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which serve as
guiding documents for all that I have done, all that I am
doing and all that I am going to do.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will gladly answer Minister Turković’s
question. I can assure her that I am fully authorized to
speak on behalf of the Russian Government. I have been
authorized by the President of the country, Mr. Vladimir
Putin. I have submitted my credentials to the SecretaryGeneral. She can be absolutely certain that everything I
say in the Chamber is an official statement on behalf of
the Russian Federation.
I do not know whether she wants written
confirmation from Mr. Lavrov. I know she does not have
such a letter, whereas we do — it is signed by the Chair
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
letter, which does exist, states that Minister Turković is
not authorized to speak on behalf of the country on the
present issue, or to express her position as representing
the interests of all the constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is my answer to her question.
The President: The Deputy Chairperson of the
Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Turković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I do
not want to enter into a debate, but I would just like
to remind my esteemed colleague that there are three
members of the Presidency and, in order to deliver such
a statement, it is necessary to have confirmation from
all three of them, or at least from the majority of the
members of the Presidency.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to ask how I am supposed to
interpret what Minister Turković just said. Therefore,
in order to speak on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina,

21-1721013/14

S/PV.8810

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

just as within the Steering Board, consensus is
not necessary and a majority is sufficient? Is my
understanding correct?
The President: The Deputy Chairperson of the
Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Turković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country does not
need the approval of any member of the Presidency to
address this audience. However, if somebody wanted to
set limitations, then they would have to be raised within
the Presidency and agreed by all. I do not believe that
this is a fruitful discussion, and I am truly not willing
to continue to waste the time of the representative of
Russia’s colleagues.
The President: Actually, as President of the
Council, I agree with that statement.

14/14

29/06/2021

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I agree with you, Mr. President. I also have no
desire to continue this discussion. I just want to point
out the fact that we are in an open meeting and that the
parties concerned will be able to watch it. I therefore
do not believe that it is up to me to determine the extent
of the Minister’s authority, the capacity in which she is
supposed to represent Bosnia and Herzegovina at this
meeting or the statements she is and is not authorized
to make here. I believe that the matter is for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to decide. I am sure that this meeting
will be carefully watched there. Let them decide for
themselves whether or not Ms. Turković was or was not
authorized to make the statement she delivered.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

21-17210
