MEETING:

21 SEPT
.

CONTENTS
Pug&!

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 168)
Adoption of the agenda .*L.m..~m.m.....*.e.*.m”..“.m.*e...”....mme.emmem
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 14 September 1979 from the: Permanent Rep~ntativc
of Liberia to the
United Nations addressed to the Pnrsident of the Security Council (S/13542) .
*mm~*me**mo**~~mm~mmmm~emee~~emmeem~me~

1

1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicat= a reference ta a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Cayncil (symbol Sk..) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Ofldal Records of the Securiry Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it ‘is $ven.
T!ye resoXutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1.964, are published in yearly volumes of Resnlutims and Lkcisiom of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

?

0

t; Mr. Paul J. F. L

e Security Council condemns the proclamation of

A (Zambia).

the SosaIled ‘independence’ of Vencia and declares it

Pment:
The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, CzechosIovakia. France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, “United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
visioual agenda (S/Agenda/2168)

totally invalid. This action by the South African r&ime.
following similar proclamations in the case of the Transkei and Bophuthatwana, denounced by the intemational community. is designed to divide and dispossess
the African people and establish client States under its
’ domination in order to pl=rpetuate aprtheid. It further
aggravates the situation in the region and hinders international enorts for just and lasting solutions.

.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

P

‘The Sccuritt Council calls upon all Governments to
deny an_vform-of recognition to the so-called ‘indcpendent’ bantustans, to refrain from anv dealings with them
and to reject trawl documents issuei by them, and urges
Governments of Member States to take effmtive measures to prohibit all individuals. corporations and other
institutions under their jurisdiction from having any
dealings with the so-called ‘independent’ bantustans.”

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 14 September 1979 from the Permanent
Repkntative
of Liberia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13542)
1314meeting was calied to order at 10.35 a.m.

2. The representative of the United States has asked to
speak and I now call on him.

Adoption of the agenda
Tibe agendu was adopted.

3, Mr, REIS (United States of America): Mr. Resident,
the United Stateswould like to commend you for catling the

The question of South Africa:
’
Letter dated 14 September 1979 from
Repnsentative of Lib&a to the United N
to the Resident of the Security
Council (S/13542)
L

attention

to the international

community

to this l~cst

attempt by South Africa to grant a fraudulent independence
to andther of the tribal homelands.

1. The PRESIDENT:
As a result of consultations held
among members of the Security Council, I have been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the
Council [S/135#~:
‘*The Securitv Council notes thar:, on 13 September
1979, the Sot& African regime proclaimed Venda. an
integral part of South African territory. a so-called
‘independent‘ state, in pursuance of its apavrheid and
bantustanization . policy.

4. We wish to affirm that the policy of the United Statesis
to withhold recognition and all for-msof oHicia1relations
from the so-called“‘independent” homelandsof the Transkei and Bophuthatswana alrcadv created bv South Africa.
We shall applee the same strict &icy to V&da.

5. My countrv fully supports the spirit and thrust of‘vour
statement. Mr.kesihent.
We take its main point rtobe-that
there is no such entity as Vcnda and that the territory which
South AfYica chwscs to call Venda isin fact an integral pafl.
of South Africa. We agree with that position. Wcshall treat
Venda exactlyI as we treat South Africa.

“The Security Council recalls its resolution 417 ( 1977).
” in which it demanded that the racist regime of South
* Africa should abolish the policy of bantustanization. It
also recalls its resolutions 402 ( 1976) and 407 ( 1977). in
which it endorsed General Assembly resolution 31/6A

6, The PRESIDEhT:
There being no further speakers;
the Councif hasconcluded the presentstage elfits consideration of the item on its agenda.

of 26 October 1976 on this matter. The Council further
takes note of General Assembly resolution 32/105N of

71reIlteetiug rose at 10.40 am.

14 December 1977 on the question of bantustans.

1

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
NatJonr
pubiicrtions
throul;hout
the world. mnrruit
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCTt’R~

LAM publications

Litho in United

Nations,

New

dea Nations
cntier.

dlipitairer

du man&

A

Unier.

York

Nationsi

Section

dea

PCBXJCATIONS

mry
be drrtrined
your baokrtort!

from bwkrtonrrr
and dirtributon
01 write to: United
Nation.
hWea

NATJONS

LES Pt’BLlCAT’IONS

DES

Uniea writ
Informcx-vous

en venti
rupr&s

danls Ier libnririea
et 10s agences
de votre libraire m adrtmex-vows

uentsr,

Y&k

New

611 Chnihve.
*

UNIES
