S/PV.8500

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8500th meeting

Tuesday, 2 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Maas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Le Drian
Mrs. Marsudi
Sheikh Al Sabah
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Ms. Thompson

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Supporting the Non-proliferation Treaty ahead of the 2020 Review Conference

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09521 (E)
*1909521*

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Supporting the Non-proliferation Treaty ahead
of the 2020 Review Conference
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I shall now make several remarks in my national
capacity.
Today’s meeting is a timely opportunity to take
stock of the achievements made under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and lay
the ground for future progress. As we move towards the
2020 Review Conference against a challenging security
background, the Security Council can, and should,
make its contribution to its successful outcome in 2020.
I would like to highlight that the Council is made up
not only of the five nuclear-weapon States recognized
by the NPT, including all three depositary States, but
also 10 non-nuclear-weapon States that are firmly
committed to the goals of the NPT; some of them are also
dedicated members of different nuclear-weapon-free
zones. That composition underlines the responsibility
of the Security Council for the NPT and the relevance
of the exchange that we are having today. Advancing
the goals of the NPT across its three pillars — nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses
of nuclear applications — is at the core of members’
assignments. We are grateful for their presence, and we
look forward to hearing their statements.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
2/24

02/04/2019

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I congratulate the German
presidency for convening today’s briefing. The possible
use of nuclear weapons, either intentionally, by accident
or through miscalculation, is one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security. The potential
consequences of a nuclear war would be global and
affect all Member States. Therefore, it is entirely
appropriate that the Security Council discuss measures
related to preventing such a catastrophic outcome,
and in particular the one instrument that has perhaps
played the greatest role in doing so. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has
been an enduring feature of the international security
landscape for nearly 50 years. The NPT is widely
acknowledged as the cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation regime and the essential foundation
of nuclear disarmament. Its role as a pillar of our
collective security is likewise an accepted fact.
There are four key elements to the success of the
Treaty. First, it includes verifiable non-proliferation
obligations in the form of safeguards on peaceful
nuclear activities. Secondly, it is the only treaty that
includes legally binding commitments to pursue nuclear
disarmament. Thirdly, the Treaty establishes a strategic
balance across the three pillars of nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and access to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in ways that seek to maximize
their benefits for all States parties. Fourthly, its near
universality provides clear authority and ensures
almost global subscription to its normative framework.
Throughout its long history, the NPT has provided
tangible security benefits not just for its States parties but
for all States. That President Kennedy’s dire prediction
that there would be between 10 and 20 nuclear-armed
States by the 1970s did not come true can largely
be attributed to the NPT. That, there are only four
States with nuclear-weapon capabilities, or suspected
capabilities, outside the Treaty in 2019 remains one of
the greatest success stories of multilateral diplomacy.
We can all agree that the spread of nuclear weapons
to a greater number of States equates with a greater
possibility of their use. That that has not happened is
because of the value States parties continue to place in
their membership of the NPT and the non-proliferation
benefits it provides.
We must today reconfirm that the security
benefits that have been derived from the
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

implementation of article VI — those related to
nuclear disarmament — have been equally important.
Under the leadership of the nuclear-weapon States,
States parties’ efforts to implement article VI helped
ease global tension, reduced great Power conflict and
built confidence among nuclear-armed competitors.
Reductions in nuclear arsenals, frameworks to reduce
nuclear risk and efforts to drive forward multilateral
nuclear disarmament are all effective measures under
article VI, and every one of them helped to create
an environment conducive to broader international
cooperation for various global challenges of our
time, from peace and security to development and
climate change.
Two pillars of the NPT — disarmament and
non-proliferation — are two sides of the same coin.
Backward movement on one will result in backward
movement on the other. The implementation of
commitments made under both strengthens mutual trust
and advances the cause of a world free of nuclear weapons.
As the Secretary-General has stressed, disarmament
and non-proliferation are important mechanisms that
help make the world safer and more secure. They are
measures to help prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict,
and can and should be pursued in tandem with other
peacemaking and security processes.
The NPT has proven to be remarkably durable.
However, that durability should not be taken for
granted. Today, we find ourselves in an international
environment defined by competition over cooperation,
and the acquisition of arms prioritized over the pursuit
of diplomacy. The disarmament success of the postCold War era has come to a halt. In its place, there is
dangerous rhetoric about the utility of nuclear weapons
and an increased reliance on these weapons in security
doctrines. Expensive modernization programmes that
will make nuclear weapons faster, stealthier and more
accurate have effectively announced the arrival of a
qualitative nuclear arms race. Rapid technological
developments will begin to impact our international
security environment in many different ways, including
by potentially lowering barriers to the acquisition of
nuclear weapons. Last but not least, regional conflicts
might heighten proliferation drivers.
The disarmament and arms control framework
upon which the gains of the post-Cold War era were
made is eroding, but we have nothing else yet with
which to replace it. As a result, the prospect of the
use of nuclear weapons is higher than it has been in

S/PV. 8500

generations. Together, these developments are placing
the NPT under increasing stress and are exacerbating
the fault lines that have been clearly evident between
States parties for some time now. In this context, the
2020 Review Conference will be a defining moment.
I do not believe that the failure to achieve consensus
in 2020 necessarily signals the demise of the Treaty,
but it would set a poor precedent and it would further
highlight divisions between States parties. It would
raise questions about the willingness of States to seek
collective security for all, rather than narrow, shortterm and eventually unsustainable security benefits
for individual States. I believe that we should avoid
this situation.
The year 2020 — the fiftieth anniversary of the
NPT’s entry into force and the twenty-fifth anniversary
of its indefinite extension — presents a golden
opportunity to make the practical gains that will ensure
the Treaty’s continued viability. A strong, political-level
re-affirmation by all to the Treaty will be important. In
the short time remaining between now and 2020, I hope
that States parties will consider four things.
First, there is a need for demonstrated
implementation by all States parties of commitments
made during previous review cycles. Past commitments
cannot be arbitrarily abrogated or else they become no
more valuable than the paper on which they are written.
The failure of implementation undermines potential
future gains across all three of the Treaty’s pillars.
Secondly, we need genuine dialogue about our
current predicament in international security and how
the NPT can be a vehicle to reduce nuclear risk and
enhance stability in ways that also take concrete steps
towards nuclear disarmament.
Thirdly, there is a need to ensure the strategic
balance between the pillars. The NPT is often described
as a grand bargain. I see it more as a series of bargains
or, rather, commitments made. It is important to
recognize that they are all mutually reinforcing.
Fourthly, we need creative thinking about what a
successful outcome in 2020 will look like.
Since 1995, review conferences have produced
decisions, action plans, practical steps and measures
to improve the effectiveness of the review process
itself. In 2020, States parties will need to consider what
possible outcome can both ensure success and drive
forward implementation of the Treaty.

19-095213/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

The security benefits provided by the NPT have
been manifest in times of relative stability. They should
be even more so in an era of international turbulence.
The NPT should be a mechanism through which to help
create a safer and more secure world. It should be a
basis on which to build trust and confidence, to address
emerging threats and challenges, and to lay the ground
for future gains in the pursuit of our collective goal
of a world free of nuclear weapons. Whatever a new
arms control and disarmament approach in the twentyfirst century might look like, one thing is clear — the
NPT will still be at the centre of our collective security
mechanism. It will have to stay fit for purpose.
I remain convinced the 2020 Review Conference
will be an opportunity to make headway on all of these
goals and to make sure that this linchpin of international
security remains fit for purpose through the next 25 or
even 50 years.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Amano.
Mr. Amano: Let me begin by thanking you, Sir,
for taking the initiative to host this important meeting
on strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
As Council members know, the most recent NPT
Review Conference in 2015 did not reach consensus
on a final document. The previous final document, in
2010, recognized that,
“IAEA safeguards are a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, play an
indispensable role in the implementation of the
Treaty and help to create an environment conducive
to nuclear cooperation” (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.
I), Part I, para. 11).
It also underlined the role of the Agency in assisting
developing countries in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
With our atoms for peace and development
mandate, the Agency has supported the United Nations
in all NPT review conferences. I believe that our dual
role of nuclear verification and assisting with peaceful
uses is highly relevant to States parties to the NPT.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
now implements safeguards in 182 countries, 179 of
which are NPT States parties. Non-nuclear-weapon
4/24

02/04/2019

States are required under the NPT to conclude a
comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA
They must declare all nuclear material in peaceful
nuclear activities.
The safeguards conclusions drawn by the Agency,
which are based on our independent verification and
findings, provide credible assurance to the international
community that States are abiding by their safeguards
obligations. In 1997, the IAEA Board of Governors
approved the model additional protocol. This is a
powerful verification tool that gives the Agency broader
access to information about all parts of a State’s nuclear
fuel cycle. It also gives our inspectors greater access to
sites and locations, in some cases with as little as two
hours’ notice.
In 2009, when I became IAEA Director General,
only 94 countries were implementing the additional
protocols; today 134 countries have brought them
into force, which is very encouraging. However, the
combination of comprehensive safeguards agreements
and additional protocols needs to become universal.
I encourage States parties to the NPT without
comprehensive safeguards agreements in force to bring
such agreements into force without delay. I also ask all
countries that have not yet done so to bring into force
and implement additional protocols.
The steady increase in the amount of nuclear
material and the number of nuclear facilities under
IAEA safeguards, along with continuing pressure
on our regular budget, are among the key challenges
facing the Agency today. Under the IAEA Statute,
inspections must be financed through the regular
budget. For some years, our regular budget has had
close to zero increases — this year it has actually been
cut. If our regular budget continues to suffer cuts in
the coming years, it could seriously affect our nuclearverification activities.
The nuclear programmes of Iran and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remain among the top
items on the Agency’s agenda. The IAEA has focused
on Iran’s nuclear activities since 2002. I presented
a final assessment on past and present outstanding
issues regarding Iran’s nuclear programme to the IAEA
Board of Governors in December 2015. I stated that
Iran had conducted a range of activities relevant to the
development of a nuclear-explosive device before the
end of 2003. However, those activities did not advance
beyond feasibility and scientific studies and the
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

acquisition of certain relevant technical competences
and capabilities. I also stated that we had no credible
indications of activities in Iran relevant to the
development of a nuclear-explosive device after 2009.
The Agency has been verifying and monitoring
Iran’s
implementation
of
its
nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) since January 2016. I have stated in my
regular reports to the Board that Iran is implementing
those commitments. It is essential that Iran continue to
fully implement them. Our inspectors have had access
to all the sites and locations in Iran that they needed to
visit. The Agency continues to verify the non-diversion
of nuclear material declared by Iran under its NPT
Safeguards Agreement. Evaluations regarding the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities
in Iran continue. The implementation in Iran of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, the Additional
Protocol and additional transparency measures under
the JCPOA amounts to the most robust verification
system in existence anywhere in the world.
It is almost 10 years since IAEA inspectors were
required to leave North Korea. The Agency continues
to monitor the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme and evaluate all safeguards-relevant
information available to it, including open-source
information and satellite imagery. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme has
significantly expanded over the past 10 years. The
country announced in 2009 that it would start uranium
enrichment and build a light-water reactor. It announced
in 2013 that it would take measures to readjust and
restart all the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon.
The Agency has since then observed indications of
the operation of the 5-megawatt reactor and reprocessing
plant, the extension of the building housing the reported
centrifuge enrichment facility, and the construction of
the light-water reactor. Since 2009, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has announced on five
separate occasions that it had conducted a nuclear test,
in addition to the one announced in 2006. Activities at
some facilities continued or developed further over the
past year, while some other facilities appeared not to
be operating. I report regularly to our Board on those
activities. Without access, however, the Agency cannot
confirm the nature and purpose of those activities.
The IAEA closely follows international developments
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear

S/PV. 8500

issue. We hope that these processes will lead to an
agreement and to the implementation of concrete
denuclearization measures. The Agency does not have
a role in political negotiations among the countries
concerned. However, it is very important that any
agreement on denuclearization be accompanied by an
effective and sustainable verification mechanism. With
its long experience and well-established practices, the
IAEA is the only international organization that can
verify and monitor denuclearization in an impartial,
independent and objective manner. That would help to
make the implementation of any agreement sustainable.
It would also contribute to the denuclearization of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, as required by
numerous resolutions of the Security Council.
Since 2017, the Agency has intensified its efforts
to monitor the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nuclear programme and enhanced its readiness to
undertake verification and monitoring activities in the
country if a political agreement is reached among the
countries concerned. Subject to the approval of our
Board of Governors, we could respond within weeks to
any request to send inspectors back to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Let me note briefly that the IAEA makes an
important contribution to the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons in a number of ways. We
assist States in creating nuclear-weapon-free zones,
which already cover vast regions of the world. In
2012, for example, the Agency provided background
documentation to the facilitator for the United Nations
conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. It described the work undertaken by the
IAEA and the experience gained concerning modalities
for a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East. If
requested by Member States, the IAEA can play a role
in nuclear disarmament by sharing its experience in the
implementation of verification.
The IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is
the main vehicle for the transfer of nuclear technology,
based on the Agency’s Statute and on requests from
Member States. While the focus of our technical
cooperation work is on developing countries, we
provide assistance to all IAEA member States. The
Agency helps to improve the health and prosperity
of millions of people by making nuclear science and

19-095215/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

technology available in the areas of health care, food
and agriculture, industry and many others.
An extensive modernization of our nuclear
applications laboratories at Seibersdorf, near Vienna,
is nearly complete, thanks to generous contributions
from many Member States. That will enable us to
deliver improved services to member States to make
food safer, improve control of harmful insect pests and
maximize the benefits of new radiation technology for
cancer treatment, to name just a few examples. Helping
countries to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) by using relevant nuclear technology is
an important part of our work. In fact, the IAEA helps
countries to use nuclear science and technology to meet
at least 9 of the 17 SDGs directly.
The IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative, which was
launched in 2010, provides additional funds for our
technical cooperation activities. It has helped to raise
over €140 million for around 300 projects that benefit
more than 150 countries. I am grateful to all the
countries that support that valuable initiative.
Nuclear power can help address the twin challenges
of ensuring reliable energy supplies and curbing
greenhouse gas emissions. Today, nuclear power
produces 10 per cent of the world’s electricity, but
when it comes to low-carbon electricity, nuclear power
generates almost one-third of the global total.
The Agency’s latest annual projections show that
nuclear power will continue to play a key role in the
world’s low-carbon energy mix. However, without
significant progress on using the full potential of
nuclear power, it will be difficult for the world to secure
sufficient energy to achieve sustainable development
and mitigate climate change.
Utmost attention to safety and security is essential
in all uses of nuclear and radiation technologies. Nuclear
safety and security are national responsibilities, but
the IAEA plays the central role in helping countries
to cooperate effectively in those areas. We continue to
assess the effectiveness of the Agency’s peer reviews and
advisory services in nuclear safety and security so that
they can better support Member States in the application
of IAEA safety standards and security guidance.
Our work in nuclear security is one of our highpriority issues. By helping prevent nuclear and other
radioactive material from falling into the hands of
terrorists or other criminals, the Agency makes an
6/24

02/04/2019

additional important contribution to international
security. The next IAEA international conference on
nuclear security will take place at the ministerial level
in Vienna, in February 2020.
By undertaking the activities that I have outlined,
the IAEA delivers concrete results for the benefit of our
171 member States. Effective and efficient management
has been the driving force behind the many achievements
in which we take pride. I am working hard to increase
the representation of women, especially at senior levels,
with a view to further strengthening our capability.
I am confident that the States parties to the NPT,
most of whom are also IAEA member States, will
continue to derive great benefit from the work of the
Agency. I hope that the 2020 NPT review conference
will be a success and make an important contribution to
strengthening international peace and security.
The President: I thank Mr. Amano for his briefing.
Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Amano have illustrated
the extent to which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has contributed to peace
and security since its entry into force. They have also
highlighted the efforts that are needed to add more
chapters to the success story of the NPT.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
There is a saying that one never really misses
something until it is gone. But there are some things that
we cannot afford to lose. One such item is the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Let us imagine for a minute that the NPT had never
existed. Far more States would have nuclear weapons.
There would have been nothing to put the brakes on
the nuclear programmes still running after the Cold
War. Mutual distrust would be much higher. In short,
our world would be far less safe. The NPT is a good
example that illustrates what Finnish diplomat Martti
Koskenniemi means when he describes international
law as the gentle civilizer of nations.
Another such civilizer is the International Atomic
Energy Agency. Let us just think what the world would
be like without the Agency. We would not have such
high universal safeguarding standards. We would
not have civilian reactor technology, which, in most
countries, runs without highly enriched uranium.
Three hundred safeguards agreements reached, 1,500
cameras installed, 3,000 on-site inspections conducted
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8500

and more than 1 million documents evaluated — none
of that would have happened.

a disarmament verification exercise in September, to
which members of the Council are all invited.

The International Atomic Energy Agency also
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is a
milestone in non-proliferation diplomacy. That is why
we have to do everything possible to ensure that the
Agency can continue its work in an independent and
neutral manner. That applies to the case of North
Korea, for instance, where we need the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s verification capabilities. It
is simply unacceptable for North Korea to become the
first country to establish itself as a nuclear Power by
openly violating the NPT. The proliferation risk would
be immense, it would add fuel to the fire of rearmament
and, finally, it would reward the bad behaviour of a
country that has repeatedly ignored Security Council
resolutions. North Korea needs to embark on a credible
process of denuclearization; that is what we expect, not
least as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).

Thirdly, we must strengthen and develop the
architecture of nuclear arms control. We have been
biding our time for far too long. Let us start negotiations
on a fissile material cut-off treaty. Different views on
certain aspects should be clarified during negotiations;
they should not hinder the start of negotiations. And
let us finally get the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty into force. Nuclear tests should be a thing of
the past.

If we want to maintain the NPT and its universality,
we need to preserve the balance at its heart — the
balance among nuclear non-proliferation, the peaceful
use of nuclear technology and the nuclear disarmament
imperative. In concrete terms, the 2020 NPT review
conference needs to make it clear that article VI of the
Treaty still applies. The recognized nuclear-weapon
States need to disarm too; that is their duty, and we
expect them to fulfil it. Also, it is high time to ensure the
appointment of the President of the review conference
in order to make progress. We need a road map that will
get us back on track with nuclear disarmament. I would
like to outline three specific elements here.
First, we need to take tangible steps towards strategic
risk reduction. We need more transparency on nuclear
arsenals, crisis-proof channels of communication and a
revived dialogue among the permanent five members
of the Security Council, which carry particular
nuclear responsibility.
Secondly, we have to lay the technical groundwork
for a world free of nuclear weapons. Perhaps the most
important part of that is credible verification. For
instance, how can non-nuclear-weapon States verify
the proper dismantling of a nuclear warhead without
gaining access to its blueprints? Seeking answers to
that question, Germany and France will jointly host

Whether in Europe, Asia or anywhere else,
we cannot afford any more shocks to our security
and stability. We must also preserve crucial and
effective treaties like the New START Treaty, which
not only contributes to security between the United
States and Russia, but is also a pillar of security in
Europe and of the global nuclear order, and fulfils an
obligation that arises directly out of the NPT. I firmly
believe that further reductions are possible — without
any loss of security. The United States and Russia could
and should continue to cut the number of warheads and
delivery systems.
Especially in times of increasingly divergent
positions, we must preserve our achievements. The
NPT is a universal achievement and a gentle civilizer
of nations, and we must safeguard its future in 2020.
That job will require energy and commitment from all
of us. Our shared security and peace around the world
are surely worth it.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the other Council members who
wish to make statements.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): The very existence of
nuclear weapons is threatening the world’s existence.
Their total elimination is the only guarantee of
avoiding a global catastrophe. Indonesia is therefore
a strong and consistent supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), whose
objectives can be achieved only through a balanced,
comprehensive and non-discriminatory implementation
of its three pillars. In that regard, I wish to emphasize
three points.

19-095217/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

First, Indonesia continues to make nuclear
disarmament its highest priority. That is our longstanding position both at the national level and as a
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Yet, despite the successful outcome of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT, the disarmament
pillar is the least implemented. I repeat — the
disarmament pillar is the least implemented. We should
not forget that non-proliferation earns its legitimacy
from the larger objective of nuclear disarmament.
When non-nuclear-weapon States give up their rights
to such weapons, nuclear-weapon States have to
disarm. Furthermore, treaties on nuclear-weapon-free
zones, including the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and Mongolia’s nuclearweapon-free status, are crucial to global disarmament
and non-proliferation. Indonesia therefore calls upon all
nuclear-weapon States to ratify the relevant protocols
to all treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones,
withdraw any reservations or interpretative declarations
that are incompatible with their object and purpose, and
respect the denuclearization status of those zones.
My second point is that we must ensure the right of
all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The NPT enjoys wide support, despite barring
proliferation, because it guarantees the right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, Indonesia
would like to affirm that nuclear non-proliferation
should not bar peaceful use, that preferential treatment
should be given to non-nuclear-weapon States for the
promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that
all parties should continue to support the International
Atomic Energy Agency in discharging its safeguards
and verification mandate.
Thirdly, we must focus on the ultimate objective
of the NPT. All parties must support the NPT
process. As such, the intention to dismantle existing
disarmament arrangements is damaging to our spirit
and commitments, and therefore must be prevented.
With great power comes great responsibility. We urge
the nuclear-weapon States to set a positive example that
better reflects their responsibilities.
We regret that the 2015 Review Conference of
the States Parties to the NPT was unable to produce
an outcome. Nevertheless, we must remain committed
to the 2020 review conference and beyond, and make
every effort to avoid another failure. This time, we must
ensure that any outcome of the 2020 review conference
should be no less ambitious than or backtrack from
8/24

02/04/2019

the commitments of the previous outcomes. That
will require genuine political will and flexibility on
the part of the nuclear-weapon States. Indonesia also
believes that once the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons enters into force, it will contribute
to furthering the objective of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons, as enshrined in article VI of the NPT.
Finally, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
once underlined that a world free of nuclear weapons
would be safer and more prosperous. Therefore, let
us all affirm our commitment to the NPT and make
nuclear weapons a thing of the past. Indonesia stands
ready to engage constructively with everyone in the
NPT process.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Nuclear affairs are
back on top of the agenda of international politics and
every day brings news on nuclear issues. Politicians
attach the utmost importance to topics like the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the further implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the erosion
of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty.
They have dominated international political discourse
in recent months. In the past year alone, the President of
Poland has twice had the occasion to speak on nuclear
non-proliferation in this forum (see S/PV.8160 and
S/PV.8362).
There is no doubt that the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has been
a fundamental document and remains the only global,
legally binding instrument that commits the nuclearweapon States to continuing negotiations towards
nuclear disarmament. It also requires all its States
parties to pursue general and complete disarmament
and to refrain from acquiring nuclear weapons. Since
its adoption, the NPT has become an important part of
international law and a universal standard. Over the
years, the NPT has proved its value in containing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, setting standards of
responsible behaviour in that domain and providing
a platform for cooperation between nuclear- and
non-nuclear-weapon States.
The NPT has adapted successfully to the changing
circumstances. That has been possible thanks to the
existing instruments that have enabled consistent
improvements, in the form of the preparatory
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

committees and the review conferences, which have
made it possible to air ideas and to test various solutions.
Next year, we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
NPT’s entry into force.
The NPT regime has unfolded along three main
pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. All are mutually
enabling, reinforcing and balancing elements. The first
two aspects could be described as a work in progress,
at best. Despite the achievements in reducing nuclear
warheads and their means of delivery, further progress
remains a serious challenge. The main reason for that
is a very complicated and unpredictable international
security environment, which is not conducive to
pursuing further disarmament efforts.
Non-compliance is the most serious challenge that
the NPT is facing today. The failure of some States to
comply with the NPT’s provisions and their safeguards
obligations — the case in point was the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea — erodes confidence and
undermines the goals of the Treaty.
The last pillar — the peaceful use of nuclear
energy — has, however, been the least controversial
and largely successful. Under the auspices of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, technical support
has been created. It offers a wide array of programmes
to support nuclear-related research and development,
national legislative frameworks, and international
cooperative efforts.
The NPT’s efficiency must be strengthened, in our
opinion. It is the only comprehensive instrument aimed
at stopping the proliferation of nuclear weapons, while
preserving the right of States to pursue civil nuclear
energy. Thanks to the NPT regime, transparency has
immensely increased. The verification instruments are
becoming more and more effective. That would not be
possible without the consistent support of institutions,
including the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
We should focus on closing the gaps in the NPT
system. That includes working towards the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the
commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons
or other explosive devices — the fissile material cut-off
treaty — and the establishment of a robust and credible
verification regime of nuclear disarmament measures.

S/PV. 8500

In that regard, we welcome the work of the International
Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification and
the Group of Governmental Experts to consider the role
of verification in advancing nuclear disarmament, in
which Poland is actively engaged.
Let me address the challenges to the NPT regime
arising from East Asia, the Middle East and Europe.
First, the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea still presents a challenge to
the NPT. Despite encouraging diplomatic developments
on the Korean peninsula, a lasting peace will not be
achieved without the denuclearization of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner, in accordance with several
Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, it is in our common interest to stabilize
the situation in the Middle East, reduce tensions in the
region and, most importantly, to prevent the further
proliferation of nuclear weapons. In order to address
those concerns, Poland, together with the United States,
organized in Warsaw the Ministerial Conference to
Promote a Future of Peace and Security in the Middle
East. One of its deliverables was the decision to establish
a working group on curbing missile development
and proliferation.
Thirdly, we are firm in our conviction that Iran
must continue to fulfil all of its nuclear-related
commitments under the NPT, as well as the JCPOA.
In that regard, we welcome the International Atomic
Energy Agency’s efforts to strictly monitor and verify
Iran’s commitments. We should find a way forward
on the operationalization of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. New, creative
ideas based on a realistic evaluation of regional needs
are needed.
Fourthly, in Europe, a return to full compliance
by the Russian Federation is the only way to save the
INF Treaty. Unless the Russian Federation destroys
in a verifiable way all of its 9M729 missile systems,
it will bear the sole responsibility for the end of the
INF Treaty. That will have a significant impact on the
strategic stability of Europe and, as such, on the current
NPT review cycle.
Upholding the rules-based order reflects the
long-term objectives of the Polish security policy. My
country has been a committed and pragmatic supporter
of strengthening non-proliferation norms. Our

19-095219/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

priorities focus on securing widespread and credible
verification mechanisms, better implementation of
safeguards, stronger risk-reduction measures and
tighter international cooperation in nuclear safety and
security. During Poland’s chairmanship last year of the
second session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 NPT review conference, we outlined paths to a
successful outcome of the upcoming review conference
by presenting the Chair’s summary and reflection on
the state of the NPT. We hope they will constitute a
point of departure for our successors in upholding the
integrity and credibility of the NPT and securing its
effective implementation.
Close cooperation between the Polish and Dutch
Chairs of the Preparatory Committees remains
fundamental in that respect. New mechanisms of
cooperation among the consecutive Chairs have
contributed to strengthening the review cycle. They
include regular consultations, an exchange of knowhow, the organization of regional conferences and
experts’ support.
The NPT is not a perfect instrument, nor has its
implementation been perfect. However, without the
NPT, the world would have been much less stable and
secure. It is our collective duty to ensure its viability
in the years to come. The 2020 review conference must
be a collective success. To that end, we must focus on
common interests, build bridges where differences
persist and take bold steps where we see opportunities
for deeper and wider cooperation. Only then can we
live up to our common obligations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene this important
debate. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Amano for their very enlightening briefings at the
beginning of our meeting.
As the international security environment continues
to deteriorate and the nuclear threat is making a forceful
reappearance, it is crucial to preserve the integrity of
existing non-proliferation norms and to consolidate
a multilateral, rules-based order. As President of the
Republic Emmanuel Macron recalled in this Chamber
last September (see S/PV.8362), it is important to
reaffirm unambiguously the essential nature of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
10/24

02/04/2019

(NPT) for international security. The NPT remains the
cornerstone of global strategic stability. It represents
an irreplaceable bulwark against the risk of nuclear
proliferation. Fifty years after its signing, the Treaty is
an undeniable success for three reasons.
First, since 1968 the NPT has led a number of States
in Europe, Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Pacific
to abandon their nuclear weapons. Only a few States
have developed arsenals outside the NPT. Secondly,
the NPT has enabled the peaceful development of
nuclear energy under the auspices of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Today, nuclear energy
is an important source of low-carbon electricity for
some 50 States. Non-energy applications of nuclear
technology are even more widespread. Finally, the NPT
has led to drastic reductions — on the order of 80 per
cent — in nuclear arsenals from the levels seen during
the Cold War.
That success has not been achieved without crises
along the way. Clandestine nuclear facilities and
activities, which were not declared to the IAEA, were
discovered first in Iraq and then in North Korea, Libya,
Iran and Syria. Non-state clandestine networks, in
particular the Abdul Qadeer Khan Network, played an
important role in that series of crises. The involvement
of the Security Council, the perseverance of its
members, the determination of everyone and the work
of the IAEA made it possible to overcome them, with
the notable exception of that of North Korea, despite
the recent decrease in tensions. In most cases, those
results were achieved diplomatically. The NPT has
survived despite that succession of shocks because its
States parties have remained determined to preserve it.
Accordingly, despite a risky environment,
safeguarding the NPT is more essential than ever. It is
more essential than ever because the threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery has not disappeared. It is essential
because the reduction in the American and Russian
arsenals, by far the most massive, remains in place.
The expectation for nuclear disarmament remains
high in international opinion, which has led some to
favour an exclusively declaratory approach by seeking
a ban on nuclear weapons, while disarmament cannot
be decreed. Only concrete actions count. Finally,
safeguarding the NPT is essential because energy
needs are constantly increasing all over the world and
the fight against carbon dioxide (CO²) emissions also
involves nuclear energy, which has made it possible for
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

France, for example, to be below the world average for
carbon dioxide CO² production per capita.
How, then, can we consolidate the NPT, and
what should our collective road map be? Above all,
the balance of the three pillars of the NPT must be
respected. As mentioned by several speakers, it is a
legitimate expectation of everyone. First, we must adopt
a firm and united response to nuclear proliferation,
with the highest priority necessarily being resolving
the North Korean crisis. The North Korean nuclear and
ballistic threat remains intolerable. NPT States parties
must make clear their expectations of North Korea.
The latter must implement the complete, verifiable
and irreversible dismantling of its nuclear and ballistic
programmes in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council. At that point, the sanctions can be lifted.
With regard to Iran, our objective in the nuclear
field is twofold: preserve the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and come to an agreement on how to oversee
Iran’s nuclear programme for the long term. There is
no way we will accept Iran acquiring nuclear weapons.
I would add that agreement will have to be reached to
reduce the threat of Iran’s missile programme, which is
only growing despite the Security Council’s calls.
Beyond crises, we will continue to rely on the
IAEA. France hopes that States that have not yet done
so will be able to accede to the additional protocol. And
because the threat of nuclear or radiological terrorism is
real, all measures in support of resolution 1540 (2004)
must be strengthened.
Moreover, for the future, we must promote
progressive nuclear disarmament. The NPT was
conceived 50 years ago when the role of nuclear
deterrence was recognized — a role that remains in
several regions of the world. Yet France wants all States
to commit themselves to creating the conditions for a
world without nuclear weapons, with undiminished
security for all. That is also consistent with the goal of
general and complete disarmament set out in article VI
of the Treaty.
Accordingly, in terms of concrete actions, we can
propose several. First, the United States and Russia,
which still hold nearly 90 per cent of the nuclear
arsenals, must continue their concerted efforts to reduce
them. Secondly, the negotiation in the Conference
on Disarmament of a treaty banning the production
of fissile material is essential to exclude the risk of a
resumption of the arms race. It is an essential step on

S/PV. 8500

the road to a world without nuclear weapons. Thirdly,
the early entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty remains essential. It is the necessary
key to preventing new weapons from being designed.
We call on all the States concerned to sign and ratify this
instrument and to support the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization. Fourthly, work on the
verification of nuclear disarmament is also important
for confidence-building, and it is worth extending.
Fifthly, the reduction of strategic risks associated
with nuclear weapons is based on the transparency
of nuclear doctrines, dialogue between political and
military leaders, crisis communication instruments and
reassurance measures. Much has been done since the
birth of deterrence; those efforts must continue.
In conclusion, let me say a few words on civil
nuclear power, which must be pursued in the best
conditions of safety and security. Through numerous
partnerships, France supports countries that wish to
embark on this path or develop it. France’s voluntary
contribution to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund
will be maintained in this regard.
As Council members will have understood,
France will continue to work to ensure that the main
equilibrium of our nuclear non-proliferation system is
maintained and that we are able to strengthen it with
new binding measures. We are at the disposal of all
those who wish to embark on this path in good faith.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): To
begin with, I would like to commend the initiative of
your country’s delegation, Mr. President, to convene
this formal public meeting under the agenda item
“Non-proliferation”. This meeting is being held before
the convening of the next Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), to be held in May 2020. I would like
to extend my thanks to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), and Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for their informative briefings.
Over the past months, the issue of nuclear
non-proliferation has seen a momentum that is not
witnessed since the high-level meeting of the Security
Council in 2009 at which resolution 1887 (2009) was

19-0952111/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

adopted (see S/PV.6191). The resolution reaffirms
that the NPT remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the main pillar in efforts
aimed at denuclearization and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. That momentum continued through the
2010 NPT Review Conference, where an agreement
was reached that led to the Action Plan that gave the
peoples of the world a glimpse of hope that concrete
measures would be achieved in terms of ridding
the world of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction.
We are meeting again at a high-level after few
months of participating in the Security Council’s highlevel meeting in September 2018 (see S/PV.8362),
to reaffirm the threat of nuclear proliferation, stress
the high priority given by the Council to the NPT
and address this menace to humankind, based on
the Council’s responsibility to prevent conflict and
maintain international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to reiterate the principled and firm
position of the State of Kuwait regarding NPT issues.
We condemn the use of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction at any time, any place and
by whomsoever. We consider such use to be a serious
violation of international law. We also reiterate our
steadfast commitment to the NPT and the achievement
of its universality, in order to preserve and promote the
international NPT regime. We recall the outcomes of
previous Review Conferences, including the outcome
documents of those held in 1995 and 2000, as well as
the 2010 Action Plan.
Notwithstanding our commitment and the commitment
of all States parties in supporting the Treaty, its regime
continues to face great challenges in achieving the
Treaty’s objectives. Forty-nine years after the Treaty’s
entry into force, the world continues to face the threat
of nuclear weapons and their proliferation. The peoples
of our region are still awaiting the implementation
of resolution NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I), annex,
on establishing a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction,
adopted at the 1995 Review Conference, which led to
the indefinite extension of the NPT.
The State of Kuwait and all other Arab countries
reaffirm that the 1995 resolution shall remain valid and
in force until its objectives have been achieved. The
responsibility for its implementation rests with all States
parties to the NPT, in particular the nuclear-weapon
States, including the three co-sponsoring ones. At the
12/24

02/04/2019

same time, we emphasize that Israel must join the NPT
and subject all its nuclear facilities to the monitoring
and inspection of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) given that Israel is the only country in
the Middle East that has not yet joined the NPT.
Today’s discussion on the NPT is not limited to the
threat posed by nuclear weapons. It also includes one of
the key pillars of the Treaty, namely, the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. The State of Kuwait underlines that
all States parties have the right to carry out research
and studies as well as to possess and use nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes. That inherent right
is completely in line with the legal obligations of States
and agreements concluded with the IAEA.
The State of Kuwait firmly believes in
multilateralism under the United Nations umbrella, as
well as the principles and obligations agreed upon in the
Charter. Preserving the NPT is the responsibility of all
States. In May 2020 the international community will
meet in New York to take part in the upcoming Review
Conference. That requires stepping up our efforts and
working together as of today, showing the sincere
political will to ensure the success of the Conference by
demonstrating maximum flexibility in our positions to
reach an agreement on measures that will contribute to
achieving our goals of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Germany for convening today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Amaro, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, for their briefings.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is the cornerstone of the international
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Since its adoption 50 years ago, the Treaty
has provided an important institutional guarantee for
avoiding nuclear war, preventing nuclear proliferation
and promoting nuclear energy for the benefit of
humankind. It has played an important role in
maintaining international peace and security.
The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to
the NPT will be held in 2020 on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty’s entry into force and
the twenty-fifth anniversary of its indefinite extension.
Security Council members recall the achievements of
the Treaty and reaffirm their strong support for it at
this historic moment of great importance in terms of
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

safeguarding the NPT regime and promoting global
security governance.
The tenth round of the Treaty review process has now
reached a critical stage. However, the overall situation
does not give reason for much optimism. Differences
in the area of nuclear disarmament are heightened.
Unilateralism and double standards with regard to
non-proliferation are prevalent. The multilateral arms
control regime and order are being undermined. Under
those new circumstances the international community
should uphold the concept of a community of shared
future for humankind, be mindful of the bigger picture
of maintaining international peace and security, show
political wisdom, strengthen unity and cooperation and
jointly steer the 2020 Review Conference towards a
pragmatic outcome.
First, States should shoulder their responsibility
effectively and maintain global strategic stability.
Nuclear-weapon States should abandon the Cold War
mentality and zero-sum concept, discard the nuclear
deterrence policy based on the pre-emptive use of
nuclear weapons and diminish the role played by
nuclear weapons in their national security policies so
as to effectively reduce the risk of nuclear war.
China calls on Russia and the United States
to continue to resolve their differences through
negotiations and consultations, return to compliance
with the obligations under the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty as soon as possible and explore
extending the existing treaty between the United States
of America and the Russian Federation on nuclear
disarmament.
Secondly, States must adhere to international
rules and uphold the multilateral arms control regime.
The international community should firmly support
multilateralism and the internationally recognized
principle of promoting the three pillars of the NPT in
a balanced manner and work together to preserve the
authority of the United Nations and the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva in the area of multilateral
arms control.
Thirdly, States should strengthen dialogue and
consultation and safeguard the Treaty regime. The
authority, effectiveness and universality of the Treaty
must be strengthened and not undermined. In nuclear
disarmament principles such as maintaining global
strategic stability, undiminished security for all and
a step-by-step process must be followed. The regional

S/PV. 8500

hotspot nuclear issues should be resolved peacefully
and by political and diplomatic means on the basis of
respect for international law. All parties should actively
encourage and promote cooperation on the peaceful use
of nuclear energy and make it a hallmark of the current
round of the Treaty review process.
On the issue of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations will hold a meeting later this year to
discuss relevant issues. All parties should actively
cooperate to facilitate the smooth conduct of the
meeting, thereby creating conditions for the successful
holding of the 2020 Review Conference.
As the coordinator of the cooperation process
among the Permanent Five, China hosted a formal
conference among the five nuclear-weapon States
in Beijing in January. The Beijing conference sent a
clear political message on the importance of upholding
the NPT regime. The five nuclear-weapon States
committed to jointly safeguarding the NPT regime,
comprehensively and fully implementing the Treaty,
promoting its universality and working to make the
2020 Review Conference a success. They reiterated
their readiness to respect the principle of undiminished
security for all and to work to achieve greater progress
on nuclear disarmament. They affirmed that they would
do their utmost to resolve nuclear non-proliferation
issues by political and diplomatic means. They remain
committed to promoting international cooperation on
the peaceful use of nuclear weapons and to supporting
the efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in
South-East Asia and the Middle East.
Since it is committed to the path of peaceful
development, China poses no threat to any country
and will never pursue its own absolute security to the
detriment of the interests of other countries. China will
continue to implement the new concept of a common
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security
through its concrete actions, steadfastly uphold the
authority, universality and effectiveness of the Treaty
and make its own contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa would
like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this timely and relevant briefing
on supporting the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) only a few weeks before
the start of the third session of the Preparatory

19-0952113/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
on 29 April. Likewise, we thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Amano, and the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for their
detailed and insightful briefings.
We thank the Foreign Ministers of Germany,
Indonesia, Poland, France and Kuwait for their inputs
and welcome the United States Under Secretary of
State for Arms Control and International Security,
Ms. Thompson.
Allow me to reiterate South Africa’s commitment
to the attainment of a world free of nuclear weapons.
In this context, I reaffirm my country’s commitment to
the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear-disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation regime, which are two
sides of the same coin.
It is undeniable that the NPT plays a critical role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The three broad objectives of the NPT, namely, nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, are inextricably linked
and mutually reinforcing. Therefore, in our view, efforts
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons should
be matched by an equal commitment by the nuclearweapon States to eliminate all nuclear weapons in a
verifiable and irreversible manner. As such, the support
of the Council for the full and balanced implementation
of all the objectives of the NPT is paramount.
Regrettably, we remain disheartened at the
apparent lack of urgency and seriousness with which
nuclear disarmament has been approached in the NPT
context. This state of affairs places the Treaty, as well
as its review process, under increasing pressure and
falls far short of expectations. Nor have the continued
reliance on nuclear weapons in security doctrines, the
development of new types of nuclear weapons and
qualitative improvements to existing arsenals allayed
the fears of non-nuclear-weapon States.
Almost 50 years since the entry into force of the
NPT, we cannot be complacent about the continued
threat posed by nuclear weapons and the lack of
implementation of the disarmament obligations
flowing from article VI. We must respect the Treaty
and the outcomes of its Review Conferences in order to
maintain its continued longevity. Measurable progress,
in particular on nuclear disarmament, must therefore
14/24

02/04/2019

be a major determinant in achieving and sustaining
international peace and security.
With this in mind, South Africa believes that
the 2019 Preparatory Committee should respect
the agreements arrived at in 1995, 2000 and 2010 in
order to strengthen global security. The 2020 Review
Conference should likewise not roll back or reinterpret
previously agreed commitments, which constitute the
current nuclear-disarmament benchmarks. While we are
aware that some States are arguing for the creation of a
so-called special environment for nuclear disarmament,
it is our view that this was already established with the
entry into force of the NPT on the basis of its “grand
bargain”. We believe that the success of future Review
Conferences will be determined by the extent to which
these undertakings are implemented.
Despite the lobbying and immense pressure on South
Africa, as well as other States Members of the United
Nations, we clearly demonstrated our commitment to
nuclear disarmament when we deposited our instrument
of ratification of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons (TPNW) on 25 February, joining the 21 other
Member States that have ratified the Treaty. We want to
use this opportunity to encourage Member States that
have not done so to sign and ratify the TPNW at the
earliest possible time in order to ensure its early entry
into force. For us, the TPNW is a positive and bold step
towards a world free of nuclear weapons. It complements
and reinforces the NPT. A mass movement towards and
a general call for a nuclear-free world has begun, and
the process is unstoppable.
It would be remiss of me not to commend the
sterling role played by the IAEA in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda is critical for the
socioeconomic development of developing countries,
especially on the African continent. We therefore urge
the Council to fully respect the inalienable right of the
States parties to the NPT to use nuclear technologies
for peaceful purposes, as envisaged in the Treaty. We
further call upon the Council and the international
community to continue to support the Agency’s
technical cooperation projects and activities.
The Agency, furthermore, continues to verify and
monitor the implementation by Iran of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), one of the recent success stories of
multilateral diplomacy. We call upon the Council to
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

continue to support and encourage these contributions
to international peace and security by the Agency and
reiterate our calls for the preservation of the JCPOA.
Nuclear-weapon-free zones will continue to play an
important role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. In that regard, I highlight the importance
of the Treaty of Pelindaba; this year marks the tenth
anniversary of its entry into force. In the same vein,
my delegation calls for the early establishment in the
Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction, as outlined in the
1995 resolution.
South Africa strongly supports the full implementation
of the NPT and its universality in pursuit of the goal of
achieving and maintaining a world free from nuclear
weapons. In this regard, we would do well to remember
that the strength, credibility and utility of the NPT rests
on a fundamental bargain, which all of us should uphold.
We express our profound appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for facilitating the press statement to be
adopted later.
Finally, I would like to leave the Council with a
quote from a South African President: “There are no
safe hands for nuclear weapons”.
Ms. Thompson (United States of America): I
thank Foreign Minister Maas for having convened this
crucial meeting today on supporting the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu
and Director General Amano for their briefings today.
The Security Council tackles some of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security. But
perhaps no challenge is more potent or more relevant
to all of us than the further proliferation of nuclear
weapons. We are approaching the fiftieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the NPT. Over nearly five
decades, the NPT has grown even more critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
made us all more secure by constraining the spread
of nuclear weapons and has also thereby enabled the
global peaceful use of nuclear energy and helped create
conditions for progress on nuclear disarmament.
Fifty years ago, few would have dared to predict
that we would be here today celebrating the success of
the NPT. Before the NPT, United States Government
national intelligence estimates had expressed dire
concern about a possible snowball effect of cascading

S/PV. 8500

proliferation, which would increase the world’s nuclear
stockpile and undermine confidence in the ability of
non-proliferation policies to prevent such an action.
Yet, in a demonstration of remarkable diplomatic
resolve, the international community joined together
against that collective threat, reflecting rare consensus
during a time of Cold War polarization. Diplomatic
efforts culminated in the negotiation and entry into
force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. There has been unwavering international
consensus about the indispensable role of the Treaty
in maintaining collective peace and security. The NPT
has succeeded for half a century because it serves the
fundamental and widely recognized common interest
of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
We have also seen enormous progress on
disarmament, in part because the NPT helped curtail
the emergence of new nuclear Powers. With the easing
of Cold War tensions and the success of the NPT-based
non-proliferation regime in impeding proliferation, it
has been possible to reduce the nuclear arsenals of both
the United States and Russia to levels not seen since
the 1950s. The stockpile of the United States today has
been reduced to approximately 12 per cent of its Cold
War peak.
We must also recognize that advancing towards the
ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons must
take into account the global security environment. We
cannot overlook the fact that the actions of those States
that are expanding and modernizing their nuclear
stockpiles, threatening their neighbours and violating
their arms-control obligations have contributed to a
deterioration in global security conditions.
The United States is in the process of developing
implementation plans for a path-breaking new
initiative, entitled “Creating an environment for nuclear
disarmament”. It is an initiative aimed at bringing
countries together in a constructive dialogue, exploring
ways in which it might be possible to ameliorate
conditions in the global security environment so as to
make further progress towards and ultimately achieve
nuclear disarmament. In that regard, in addition to its
emphasis on dialogue and diplomatic engagement with
all relevant parties, the initiative stands in stark contrast
to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
or the Ban Treaty, which fails to address the security
challenges that continue to make nuclear deterrence
necessary and seeks to stigmatize, rather than engage

19-0952115/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

with, countries that rely upon nuclear deterrence for
their national security.
As we turn towards the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the United States seeks a positive
outcome of that meeting that reflects consensus on
the broadest possible basis. We believe consensus
is possible if the parties to the NPT focus on the big
picture, while emphasizing their common interests and
avoiding using divisive issues, such as the Ban Treaty
and a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, to hold the Review Conference hostage.
In addition, to strengthen the NPT and the
non-proliferation regime, States must support the
universalization of the International Atomic Energy
Agency additional protocol, which has become the
de facto nuclear safeguard standard and makes the
protocol a condition for nuclear supply.
States must also be united in demanding the final
fully verified denuclearization of North Korea and must
continue to hold that a secure, peaceful and bright future
is possible for North Korea if it fulfils its commitments.
We must remain united in our determination that Iran
must never acquire a pathway to nuclear weapons.
The 2020 NPT Review Conference will also be an
opportunity to highlight how the NPT, in the broader
nuclear non-proliferation regime, has made possible
thriving international cooperation on the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, science and technology. We aim to
build on that success. We are optimistic that the NPT
will endure. Yet that outcome is far from guaranteed.
We must now continue to preserve and strengthen the
NPT so that 50 years from now our successors may
mark the one hundredth anniversary of the Treaty in
an enduring accomplishment that continues to promote
international security and prosperity.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s high-level briefing in support
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Indeed, today’s meeting, one year
before the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty and on the fiftieth anniversary of its entry into
force, is an opportunity to reiterate, within the Security
Council, our steadfast support for this keystone of the
collective security system. I would also like to thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Amano for their contributions.
16/24

02/04/2019

Belgium is concerned about the erosion of the
multilateral system based on international law, which is
particularly visible in the context of non-proliferation and
disarmament. I will focus only on the threats that affect
the implementation of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces (INF) Treaty and the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, as well as the uncertainties that surround
the future of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START) and the North Korean issue.
Recent developments regarding those issues reflect
the increased polarization within the non-proliferation
community, where trust and cooperation among States
have registered a sharp decline. That climate challenges
the global non-proliferation and disarmament
architecture, making it even more difficult to achieve
the progress that is nonetheless essential now that the
risks of proliferation are increasing.
That is why Belgium reaffirms its strong support
for the three pillars of the NPT and continues to call
for the full and balanced implementation of the 2010
Action Plan of the Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty. Its mutually reinforcing practical
measures for nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy remain relevant
and provide a basis that is acceptable to everyone for
progress towards the ultimate goal of a world without
nuclear weapons.
Curbing nuclear proliferation is one of the major
successes of the NPT. It is an undeniable achievement
for our collective security and requires constant
consolidation and strengthening. At the same time, it is
vital to continue to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, facilitate the sharing of nuclear technologies
for peaceful purposes and encourage cooperation with
developing countries.
Belgium remains committed to the pursuit of
nuclear disarmament, in accordance with article VI
of the Treaty. A world free of nuclear weapons is both
a common goal and a shared responsibility. In that
context, Belgium would like to underline the primary
responsibility of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, which possess nuclear weapons.
No other weapon has the destructive power of a
nuclear bomb. That fact underlines not only the need
for urgent disarmament but also the need for a proactive
approach to non-proliferation. On that difficult road,
it is essential to establish a legally binding instrument
banning nuclear tests.
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

With regard to the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty, as coordinator of the article XIV process,
together with Iraq, Belgium calls on States that are not
yet parties, in particular the annex 2 States, to accede to
the Treaty so that it can finally enter into force. A world
without nuclear weapons requires a world without
nuclear tests. For my country, that principle also applies
to North Korea, and therefore makes the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty a relevant instrument for any
negotiated solution aimed at ensuring verifiable and
definitive denuclearization.
The future of the INF Treaty affects the security
of Europe. We reiterate our call to Russia to return
to full and verifiable compliance with the Treaty in
order to safeguard its existence. The erosion of the
Treaty occurs in parallel with rapid changes in missile
technology, such as the emergence of hypersonic
missiles, with potential consequences for doctrine and
nuclear deterrence. That development demonstrates the
need to give the proper attention to the issue of missiles
in international debates. I also reiterate my country’s
wish to see the New SТARТ Treaty extended, as it is the
only instrument regulating the deployment of strategic
nuclear missiles between the United States and Russia.
Belgium therefore strongly reaffirms its support
for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which must be wholly preserved. The NPT is
the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime, the essential foundation of the quest for
nuclear disarmament and an important element of
prevention and confidence-building for the purposes of
maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting ahead
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We commend Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, UnderSecretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for their excellent briefings.
In four weeks, the final session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
NPT, which entered into force in 1970, will be held here
in New York. That session will be the last opportunity
for the States parties to the Treaty to reach consensus
on the points on which they disagree with regard to
the implementation of the NPT. It will be held in an

S/PV. 8500

international security environment that is constantly
changing, in which there is an increasing need to
prevent the risks related to the acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors, especially
terrorist groups.
In that regard, my country is particularly concerned
about the lack of progress achieved in the nuclear
disarmament process and the recurrent obstacles
faced by its main mechanisms. As a State party to the
NPT, Côte d’Ivoire, which remains fully committed
to safeguarding and strengthening the international
non-proliferation architecture, also signed the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons on 20 September
2017, the date on which it was opened for signature. For
my country, the total elimination of nuclear weapons
remains the only guarantee to transform our common
desire to maintain international peace and security
into a reality in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
As my country is convinced that the NPT — the core
of the international non-proliferation regime — must
be preserved, regardless of differences in interpretation
among States parties, Côte d’Ivoire fervently hopes that
the 2020 Review Conference will achieve the expected
progress, particularly in the implementation of the
three pillars of the NPT, namely, nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes.
Côte d’Ivoire also stresses the need to apply
article IV of the Treaty so that States lacking nuclear
technology may further benefit from civil nuclear
energy in the specific areas of agriculture and medicine.
In that regard, my country welcomes the constructive
cooperation it has enjoyed with the International
Atomic Energy Agency, which led to the construction
of the Lamto Geophysical Station and the opening of my
country’s first radiotherapy centre for the treatment of
cancer in Abidjan. Côte d’Ivoire intends to pursue such
cooperation and step up its investments in that area with
the goal of opening its first nuclear medicine centre.
My country believes that non-nuclear States can
legitimately pursue adequate security guarantees
through a universal legally binding instrument that
protects them from possible actions by nuclear-weapon
States. Such security guarantees must be accompanied
by verification measures to enhance transparency and
trust among States parties in accordance with article
VI of the NPT and the Action Plan agreed at the 2010

19-0952117/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

Review Conference. States parties will therefore be able
to work constructively to promote nuclear disarmament
in their respective regions through the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, following the established
models in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and
Central Asia.
In that regard, my country urges the States of the
Middle East region to pursue negotiations with a view
to concluding a similar agreement. We also urgently call
on all countries that have yet do so to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Although the
Treaty was signed by 184 States and ratified by 168 of
them, it has yet to enter into force, as it has not been
ratified by 44 annex 2 States.
Similarly, my delegation calls for the early
conclusion of a treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices, which should unambiguously serve the cause
of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Although the North Korean-United States Hanoi
summit failed to achieve the outcome hoped for by
the international community, my country nevertheless
welcomes the choice of dialogue as a means of seeking
lasting solutions to the current situation on the Korean
peninsula. Côte d’Ivoire also expresses its support for,
and encouragement to, the IAEA for its outstanding
work in connection with the Iranian nuclear agreement.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire is convinced that the
nuclear threat is not a matter of fate but of decisions by
men and women, who have the urgent duty to eliminate
it permanently in order to build a safer world.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As we embark
upon another review cycle for the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), it is
important that we, as the Security Council, charged
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, take a step back and consider the contribution
made by the NPT to international stability. Over the
past 50 years, the NPT has minimized the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and provided the framework for
significant nuclear disarmament. For example, the
United Kingdom has more than halved the number of
warheads it had at the height of the Cold War.
Of course, the NPT has not just been about
prohibition. It has also provided the framework to
develop secure and safe peaceful uses for nuclear
energy globally, which ensures that the international
18/24

02/04/2019

community can have confidence in the safety of civilian
nuclear energy and, where proliferation does occur, the
NPT provides the framework for the Council’s action
to contain it. Under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, Iran is subjected to a rigorous programme
of inspections made possible by the architecture
underpinning the NPT; and while the Council continues
to demand that North Korea dismantle its nuclear
programme, its verification will ultimately need to be
conducted consistent with the NPT.
As we approach another Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, we should keep in mind that there is
more that unites us than our differences and that we all
agree that we should strengthen the NPT going forward.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with all
partners to secure a positive outcome to the Review
Conference process, which means resolving the issue
of the presidency and agreeing an agenda for the 2020
Review Conference and its Preparatory Committee at
its third session.
Despite those challenges, it is important that we
continue to demonstrate progress on disarmament
in a way that strengthens all of our security. That is
why the United Kingdom is working on developing
disarmament verification solutions, in particular with
the United States, Sweden and Norway in the Quad
Nuclear Verification Partnership. Establishing an
effective verification regime will be vital if we are
to realize our long-term goal of multilateral nuclear
disarmament. States will need to have confidence that
a nuclear-armed State has dismantled its warheads
and — crucially — that they have been dismantled
in a way that makes us safer rather than spreading
nuclear knowledge.
Such work has demonstrated that non-nuclearweapon States can play an important role in the
development of nuclear disarmament verification, while
preventing proliferation. We encourage all States to
fully participate in that process in order to continue to
grow capacity for verification worldwide; and we very
much welcome France and Germany’s joint verification
exercise scheduled for later this year.
We must all continue to promote the step-bystep approach, work for the universalization of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the early entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
promote the early commencement and conclusion of
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8500

negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty at the
Conference on Disarmament.

of the NPT process and an agreed, consensus-based
outcome of the upcoming Review Conference.

Allow me to outline some of the steps that the United
Kingdom is taking to support a successful outcome of
the Review Conference. We will be submitting a draft
implementation report to the Preparatory Committee,
setting out how we have implemented the NPT in this
review cycle. We encourage all States to do the same.
We intend to use our coordinator role of the process
involving the Council’s five permanent members (P5) to continue the excellent work that has taken place
under Chinese leadership, including continuing the
P-5’s dialogue with all signatories. We will remain a
strong supporter of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and all the work that it does, including
efforts related to technical cooperation.

Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this meeting to focus the
world’s attention on the need to address the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, especially nuclear weapons. We also welcome
the presence of the authorities who are with us today
and thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for their important briefings.

The United Kingdom has made significant
extrabudgetary
contributions
to
support
the
refurbishment of the nuclear application laboratories
at Seibersdorf, Austria, including in the amount of
more than €1 million for the period from 2016 to 2018.
We are pleased to have signed a new Voluntary Offer
Agreement and Additional Protocol with the IAEA in
June 2018 and a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
in 2018, which enables the United Kingdom to establish
a domestic nuclear safeguards regime. We continue to
regard the additional protocol as the gold standard of
safeguards and urge those States that have yet to do so
to agree and ratify such agreements with the IAEA. We
strongly support the State-level concept.
I also want to note the echoing silence on compliance
issues from some of the States that are most eager
to promote the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons, a treaty lacks any concrete provisions for
verifying compliance. The United Kingdom will not
support, sign or ratify it.
We should not underestimate the challenges
facing the NPT, which are themselves an indication
of the challenges facing international security. Any
meaningful discussion on disarmament must take the
wider security environment into account. We all have a
responsibility to work for a safer, more stable world in
which States with nuclear weapons feel able to relinquish
them. That is where the Security Council must make
its own contribution to the NPT. That must involve
remaining resolute in our determination to fully disarm
North Korea and prevent the escalation of conflicts. We
must give our full political support to the continuation

Throughout its history, the Security Council has
remained united in the fight against the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, in fulfilment of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations. There is no better way to eliminate the
risk posed by weapons of mass destruction than by
ending their existence. In that regard, we support the
preparations leading up to the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to be held next year.
Peru maintains its firm position in support of the
full implementation of the three pillars of the NPT and
emphasizes the importance of achieving its universality.
We therefore urge the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil
their commitments under article VI of the Treaty
and make progress towards the total destruction of
those weapons, thereby eliminating their effect on
humankind. In our understanding of and commitment
to that goal, we participated actively in the adoption
of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
and have signed it. We hope that one day all countries,
especially those with nuclear arsenals, will accede to it.
In our view, this legally binding instrument strengthens
and complements the current disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes, particularly as it contributes
to the implementation of article VI of the NPT, on the
reduction of such weapons.
In recent years we have observed with concern
the challenges that have arisen to the non-proliferation
regimes, especially that of nuclear weapons, which
pose the most serious threat to international peace and
security in our current circumstances. We will continue
to seek unity in the Council in our response to such
challenges, such as those we have seen in the nuclear

19-0952119/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

02/04/2019

and ballistic-missile programmes of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.

47 regional projects with the IAEA that are in their
completion and implementation stages.

Peru affirms the inalienable right of all States to
conduct research on, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. In that regard, we support the work
that the IAEA has been doing in the implementation of
safeguards and verification mechanisms for the use of
nuclear energy.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm
commitment to the obligations outlined in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and its three fundamental pillars of disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. The full implementation of those three pillars
represents the key route to achieving a world free of
nuclear weapons and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

With respect to nuclear disarmament, it is
imperative that we begin negotiations that will lead
to a fissile-material cut-off treaty. In that connection,
we especially call on nuclear-weapon States to break
the deadlock in the Conference on Disarmament with
a view to immediately taking up negotiations on a
non-discriminatory and verifiable treaty. Similarly, as
we look ahead to the tenth NPT Review Conference,
we believe that this regime can be strengthened only by
reducing the nuclear arsenals that remain, which is why
we urge nuclear-weapon States to comply with article
VI of the NPT and take concrete measures. Peru hopes
to see points of convergence in well-known areas of
disagreement. In that regard, we deplore the suspension
of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and
urge both countries to resume a dialogue with a view to
overcoming their differences and achieving agreements
based on the principles of irreversibility, verifiability
and transparency.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our strong
commitment and resolute support to ensuring the
success of the forthcoming NPT Review Conference.
It will be essential to work on addressing the various
perceptions of insecurity by countering proliferation
and arms races and coming up with measures geared to
cooperation, trade and development.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the presidency for convening this
high-level meeting. We also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Amano for their informative briefings.
At the outset, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable role that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) plays in providing assistance to States
for the safe use of nuclear energy for development and
peaceful purposes. We are grateful for the strengthened
relations between our nation and the IAEA, especially
in the implementation of cooperative projects. Through
its Ministry of Energy and Mines, the Dominican
Republic is currently a partner in two national and
20/24

We commend the progress that has been made in
the framework of non-proliferation, including the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran. Its adoption
and continued effective implementation to this day,
in spite of setbacks, is a convincing testament to the
success that multilateralism and dialogue can achieve.
We hope that Iran, the States parties to the agreement
and other Member States will refrain from taking steps
that undermine the agreement and the confidence
placed in it.
That is why we urge that similar concrete and
practical action be taken on disarmament, the pillar
of the Treaty that has seen no significant progress. We
believe that the only guarantee against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons is their complete elimination
and prohibition, in a transparent, verifiable and
irreversible manner. That is why we became a signatory
to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
adopted in July 2017. The Treaty is the logical and
necessary result of the deep concern that NPT member
States have expressed about the potentially catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons. It also strengthens the NPT and represents an
urgent multilateral response to the erosion of bilateral
treaties and the threat posed by efforts to modernize
nuclear weapons, which could lead to a new nuclear
arms race. In that regard, we note with concern the recent
suspension of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty. We hope that the parties will be able to resume
the dialogue and arrive at reasonable conclusions.
One element that strengthens the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime is the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones. Thanks to our experience of being
part of the densely populated area declared as the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone through the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, we can confirm that the establishment
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

of such zones brings us closer to achieving general
and complete disarmament and promotes peace and
regional and international stability.
In that connection, we hope that during the next
review of the NPT we will be able to definitively
agree on the holding of a conference on a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, in accordance
with what was agreed in the final document of the
2010 Review Conference. We also encourage the
States parties to the NPT to keep their commitments,
in particular those outlined in article VI of the Treaty,
which call for negotiations with a view to general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international supervision.
We believe that the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty complements the NPT. We therefore call
on the annex 2 States to the Treaty that have not yet
ratified it to do so for its entry into force. Likewise,
the expeditious negotiation of a legally binding,
non-discriminatory instrument banning the production
of fissile material cannot be postponed.
In conclusion, we believe it is inconsistent for us to
aspire to live in a peaceful world and, at the same time,
allow the existence of nuclear weapons. Such weapons
pose a threat to collective security, the development
of our nations and the environment. Their use runs
counter to the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
For the Dominican Republic, there is a clear
relationship between disarmament and development.
We believe that it is undesirable to allocate excessive
resources to the maintenance and development of new
nuclear-weapon technologies instead of using those
funds to meet basic human needs.

S/PV. 8500

the near or distant future, and we do not participate
in military or civilian programmes with other States
or international institutions on nuclear activities or
activities regarding other weapons of mass destruction,
for my country firmly champions universal nuclear
disarmament. We have always appealed to the sense
of responsibility of States with nuclear arsenals and
those with military nuclear ambitions or plans — as
the President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo has always noted in
speeches on this subject before the General Assembly
and other international forums — to move towards the
common goal of a world without nuclear weapons and
the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction
from the face of the Earth.
Fifty years after its entry into force, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea underlines the importance of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as
the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
regime and the basis for promoting nuclear disarmament
and developing nuclear energy for civilian purposes.
But the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has never fully
endorsed the Treaty’s approach, as it seeks to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear weapons only in countries
that have never possessed them and has done little with
regard to their elimination in States that are armed to
the teeth with such weapons and with the capacity to
devastate our planet and turn it into a lifeless wasteland.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages all
parties to the NPT to show real political will to hold a
dialogue and seek consensus to reform this international
Treaty, specifically article I, as soon as possible, during
the 2020 Review Conference, which also coincides with
the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty’s entry into force.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to thank and commend
the Federal Republic of Germany for having organized
this meeting on the essential topic of support for the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We are also grateful to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Organization (IAEA), for
their valuable briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea considers it
necessary to promote a nuclear disarmament process
in line with the framework provided by the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons adopted in June
2017, in which the nuclear Powers are expected to work
in collaboration with the non-nuclear-weapon States
to make further progress towards the objectives of
strengthening universal nuclear disarmament and the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime by considering
the wishes and the concrete and realistic initiatives of
the international community.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is a country
without weapons of mass destruction or a nuclear
programme. We do not foresee such a programme in

Our delegation is very attuned to the debate on the
humanitarian impact of the use and threat of use of
nuclear weapons. In view of the current proliferation

19-0952121/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

crisis, the Council must remain united and take united
action. It must assume its responsibility as guarantor
of international security, responding firmly to any
activity that seeks to undermine the global peace
regime and serving as a deterrent to such action, as
widely expected.
We believe that it is not enough to establish some
regions as zones free of weapons of mass destruction.
Rather, planet Earth as a whole should be declared a
nuclear-weapon-free zone. Through the signing of the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, Africa
became a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The issue of
ensuring non-proliferation is a key issue for Africa,
given its concern about the proper management of its
uranium reserves. We therefore call upon the Council to
regulate the use of uranium from Africa and that of any
region declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone, in order
to ensure its exclusive use for civilian and peaceful
purposes and to promote non-proliferation.
We express our strong support for the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the IAEA,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs. We support the efforts of
those entities to negotiate multilateral disarmament
instruments and prevent non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, from gaining access to nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and weapons of
mass destruction.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea emphatically
condemns the manufacture, stockpiling, distribution,
sale and use of any chemical substance as a weapon,
by anyone and in any situation, and stresses the
importance of strengthening the non-proliferation
regime on nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
and bolstering civil nuclear security.
The fiftieth anniversary of the NPT coming in
2020 underscores the importance of adapting that
international instrument to our times, which are very
different from the Cold War period when it entered
into force. We therefore encourage the international
community to explore our common ground with a
view to rewriting and bringing us closer to the NPT
of 2020, which should be different from that of 1970,
in that its scope with regard to disarmament and
non-proliferation should be applicable generally and
equally for all States, and should no longer take into
consideration the differences and prerogatives that the
22/24

02/04/2019

NPT has privileged whereby some States are exempt
from some of the international obligations that global
nuclear disarmament requires. That calls into question
the international equality of all States.
I would like to conclude by making a strong
appeal to all nuclear-weapon States that are
embroiled in negotiations or that have yet to resolve
outstanding issues on the establishment or renewal
of non-proliferation agreements to keep going and
spare no effort to achieve those agreements. In that
regard, Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full support
for the Secretary-General’s Agenda for Disarmament,
published in May 2018, Securing Our Common Future,
which outlines a series of practical measures focused
on weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons
and new technological battlefields.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to say how pleased we are to
see you, Minister, presiding over our meeting, and since
I have not yet had the opportunity to do so, I would
like to congratulate Germany on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for April and to wish it every
success. We are also grateful to Mr. Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), and Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for their briefings.
As one of the three depositaries of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
Russia attaches the greatest possible importance to
its preservation and sustainable operation. It would
be hard to overestimate its contribution to ensuring
international peace and security. The Treaty has
played a crucial role in preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and laid the foundation for steady
progress towards disarmament, in particular nuclear
disarmament, and for the development of broad
international cooperation in the peaceful use of atomic
energy. It can rightly be considered an example of the
effectiveness of international diplomacy and a model of
cooperation by the international community in solving
global problems. Unfortunately, despite its undeniable
successes, we must acknowledge the very difficult
circumstances in which we are approaching the Treaty’s
fiftieth anniversary and its next Review Conference,
which has to sum up the functioning of the Treaty in its
latest five-year cycle.
The contradictions and disagreements among
various groups of States within the framework of the
19-09521

02/04/2019

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8500

NPT are gravely deepening. Universally recognized
norms and mechanisms in the area of non-proliferation
are being undermined or subjected to revision. To
that we have to add the recent emergence of new and
dangerous trends that are heating up an already difficult
situation with regard to nuclear non-proliferation. This
is about attempts to use the NPT review process as a
platform to settle political scores, including on issues
that have nothing to do with the Treaty. Long-standing
differences also persist with regard to a number of
items on the Treaty’s agenda.

a positive contribution to the general state of affairs in
the context of the NPT review process. The General
Assembly’s decision is logical and balanced and does
not run counter to the interests of the States in the
region. The Russian Federation plans to participate in
the conference on the WMD-free zone and to promote
its successful outcome, as well as support subsequent
efforts to establish the zone. It will be important for the
other five nuclear-weapon States, but most importantly
all of the countries in the Middle East, to join the efforts
to convene and hold the conference.

The Russian Federation shares the noble goal
of building a nuclear-weapon-free world, and as a
responsible and consistent supporter of the nucleardisarmament process, we have been making a
significant contribution to the further reduction of
strategic offensive arms. Last year we reached the
levels for delivery systems and warheads established
in the New START Treaty. Overall, Russia’s nuclear
arsenal has been reduced by more than 85 per cent.

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
which was established to form a solid bulwark against
the spread and development of more sophisticated
nuclear weapons, plays an exceptionally important role
in the efforts to limit and reduce nuclear weapons.

It is clear that consistent preliminary efforts will
be needed to lay the groundwork for future progress
towards nuclear disarmament. First and foremost, that
requires improving the strategic situation in various
regions and in the world as a whole. That can be done
only by addressing a whole range of factors that affect
strategic stability and international security. They
include, specifically, the United States’ completely
unrestricted deployment of its global anti-ballistic
missile systems; the development of high-precision
non-nuclear strategic offensive arms; the possibility that
weapons will be launched in outer space; the weakening
of the system of international treaties and agreements
in the areas of security, stability and arms control; and
attempts to weaken the defence capabilities of other
countries through illegitimate unilateral sanctions that
circumvent the Security Council. If those problems
are not solved, we will hardly be able to create an
international security environment that is conducive to
furthering nuclear disarmament.
Another pressing issue related to the NPT is
the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) in the Middle East. General
Assembly decision 73/546, adopted in December by a
majority of votes, on convening a conference on the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction was intended to
begin the process of the practical implementation of the
1995 resolution on the Middle East and thereby make

We view the IAEA safeguards as a key element of
the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Their purpose
is to prevent the diversion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy to the creation of nuclear weapons.
We are determined to continue to assist the IAEA in
strengthening the safeguards system. However, it is
vital to ensure that the NPT verification mechanism
remains objective, depoliticized and technically based,
and to maintain the clarity and transparency of its
work for the parties to the Treaty. Russia supports
the universalization of the additional protocol to the
IAEA safeguards agreements, which, together with the
comprehensive safeguards agreement, should eventually
become a universally recognized norm for verifying
States’ compliance with their non-proliferation
obligations under the NPT. At the same time, we note
that adherence to the additional protocol is voluntary.
One issue on which there appears to be agreement
among the NPT States parties is the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. In accordance with article
IV of the Treaty, States parties have an inalienable
right to the peaceful use of atomic energy. The current
level of technological development makes it possible
to combine nuclear power and other types of energy
production organically, opening up the prospects for
creating more advanced, flexible and efficient energy
systems. But as Mr. Amano rightly pointed out, the
use of nuclear technologies is not limited to energy but
extends to uses in various areas of activity including
industry, agriculture, medicine, climate, water use
and more. We believe that the NPT significantly
expands the possibilities for the use of nuclear power

19-0952123/24

S/PV.8500

Non-proliferation

systems for sustainable development while eliminating
risks to the nuclear-weapon non-proliferation regime.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that
the next Review Conference has a positive outcome
and that all NPT States parties at the very least affirm
the viability and relevance of the Treaty and their
willingness to uphold their obligations under it.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I would now like to add some
concluding remarks.
I believe that today’s exchange clearly testified
to the relevance of the topic, and I heard many if not
all members of the Security Council express strong

24/24

02/04/2019

support for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its commitments. There
are tangible concerns with regard to the challenges that
burden the NPT today, but I sense a willingness in the
Council to jointly assume responsibility for the future
of the Treaty and for advancing its objectives beyond
2020. This meeting has also contributed to fostering
a better understanding of the different views and
priorities related to the issue within the Security Council
membership, and should help us to find the right way
forward towards a successful Review Conference. I
thank all Council Members for their support in holding
today’s meeting and for their active participation.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-09521
