A /76/PV.21

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

21

st plenary meeting
Monday, 25 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Ponikvar
Velázquez
(Slovenia),
Vice-President,
took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 30
Space as a driver of sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/76/L.3)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative over Romania to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.3.
Mr. Piso (Romania): It is a pleasure for me to
address the General Assembly on behalf of my country,
Romania, which this year has the honour of chairing the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.3, entitled “The
‘Space2030’ Agenda: space as a driver of sustainable
development”, which includes an implementation plan.
This is a milestone document that charts the way to
enhancing the contribution of space and its applications
to sustainable development and the realization of other
global agendas, namely, those on addressing climate
change and disaster risk reduction.
In 2018, States Members of the United Nations and
representatives of the international space community
gathered in Vienna at the high-level segment of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its
sixty-first session to mark the fiftieth anniversary of
the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration

(Maldives)
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE+50),
to reflect on more than 50 years of achievements in
space exploration and use and to strengthen global
cooperation in outer space and the use of outer space
for sustainable development.
As a result, in its resolution 73/6, of 26 October
2018, the General Assembly mandated the Committee
to continue to develop, on the basis of the results of
the UNISPACE+50 process, a “Space2030” agenda
and implementation plan and to provide the General
Assembly with the outcome of its work for consideration
by the Assembly.
Based on that mandate, the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as the unique platform
for strengthening international cooperation in the
peaceful uses of outer space and with expertise in
promoting space tools and applications for sustainable
development, engaged in a three-year-long negotiation
process that resulted in the “Space2030” Agenda: space
as a driver of sustainable development, as well as its
implementation plan, as contained in draft resolution
A/76/L.3, following their endorsement by consensus
by the Committee at its sixty-fourth session on
1 September 2021.
The submission of draft resolution A/76/L.3 also
completes the work of the Committee’s Working Group
on the “Space2030” Agenda, under the able leadership
of its Bureau, comprising the Chair, Mu’ammar Kamel
Haddadin, Director-General of the Royal Jordanian
Geographic Centre, and the Vice-Chairs, Ambassador
Alessandro Cortese of Italy and former Committee

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-30134 (E)

*2130134*

A/76/PV.21

Chair and
of Romania.

25/10/2021

cosmonaut

Dumitru-Dorin

Prunariu

The “Space2030” Agenda and its implementation
plan together comprise a comprehensive and strategic
document for the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and for the international community at
large, as it contains valuable tools and a number of
international and regional mechanisms, programmes,
projects and platforms that Member States could
benefit from in order to leverage space technologies
and applications and space-derived data to further
economic growth and prosperity.
The Agenda is divided into two main parts:
Part A, “Agenda”, contains three sections, entitled
“Introduction”, “Strategic vision” and “Objectives”;
Part B, “Implementation plan”, contains four sections,
entitled “Partnerships”, “Tools”, “Resources” and
“Review of progress”.
The four overarching objectives are structured
around four pillars — space economy, space society,
space accessibility and space diplomacy — and aim
to enhance space-derived economic benefits and
strengthen the role of the space sector as a major driver of
sustainable development; harness the potential of space
to solve everyday challenges and leverage space-related
innovation to improve quality of life; improve access to
space for all and ensure that all countries can benefit
socioeconomically from space science and technology
applications and space-based data, information and
products, thereby supporting the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals; and build partnerships
and strengthen international cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space and in the global governance of
outer-space activities. The actions described under
each overarching objective could be taken by Member
States to realize those objectives.
It is stipulated that each Member State will
implement the “Space2030” Agenda on a voluntary basis
and, moreover, in fulfilling the “Space2030” Agenda
and its implementation plan, sharp focus is attached
to partnerships and cooperation among Member
States, United Nations entities, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and industry
and private-sector entities, with the United Nations
Office for Outer Space Affairs serving as a conduit
for promoting and facilitating the use of space-based
solutions, including in the implementation of the
“Space2030” Agenda.
2/6

The Agenda envisages a mid-term review by the
Committee in 2025 of progress on implementing the
“Space2030” Agenda. It also calls on the Committee
to carry out a final review of the implementation of the
“Space2030” Agenda in 2030 and report to the General
Assembly on the results.
Space is becoming a permanent presence in
common life and on the political agenda of Governments
and international organizations. The dependence of our
civilization on space systems is proven and of critical
importance. From science to direct applications of
space tools in everyday life, space has become a rapidly
developing area of activity. The global space industry
and services turnover already averages more than $55
per capita of Earth’s citizens.
Space activities support and accompany most
recent activities in human development, from vehicles,
navigation and tele-health to the monitoring of the
Earth and the climate and world-changing scientific
discoveries. Outer space systems generate science and
technology, provide day-to-day, necessary and critical
services and increase safety and security for citizens
and the global community. The role of space-based
assets in measuring and monitoring the Earth’s global
parameters and the effects induced by our civilization
are critical and indispensable tools for mitigating
those effects.
More and more countries and international
organizations are increasing or starting to engage
in space activities and programmes and developing
strategies with a national, regional or international
impetus for the exploration, exploitation and sustainable
use of outer space. Nevertheless, we all have one planet,
and outer space is still the “uni” verse.
The international treaties on outer space guidelines
and mechanisms successfully developed by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
since the beginning of the space era, including the
“Space2030” Agenda that is before the Assembly today,
should be able to suggest ways and means to address
the common challenges that we face as a civilization by
ensuring sustainable development, both on our planet
and in space.
We hope that, once the General Assembly has taken
action on the “Space2030” Agenda, it may serve as a
blueprint for strengthening the use of space tools for
sustainable development and a conduit for Member
States to avail themselves of the available mechanisms,
21-30134

25/10/2021

programmes and projects contained in the Agenda that
contribute to, and highlight the broad societal benefits
of, space for everyone, everywhere.
With this brief overview, I thank those countries
that have joined in sponsoring the draft resolution and
the General Assembly for its support.
Mr. Matthew (Singapore): Singapore welcomes the
consensus reached by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space on the “Space2030” Agenda
and its implementation plan. That consensus reflects
the growing importance and global interest attached
by States to space activities and the recognition of
the need for greater international cooperation in this
important area.
Space is taking on an increasingly significant role
as a major driver of sustainable development and in
the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Most space-based technologies support
critical Government functions and everyday life,
from monitoring weather patterns and conditions to
telecommunications and public health. Singapore is
building a robust space sector, in which our research
institutions and companies are developing innovative
space-based solutions to support sustainable
development needs in our region and beyond.
For example, ST Engineering Geo-Insights
leverages geospatial imagery data and analytics to help
farmers monitor crop health and size and optimize
fertilizer and water input, while the Earth Observatory
of Singapore’s recently launched remote-sensing
laboratory uses tools such as synthetic aperture radar
to map and understand natural disasters to support
regional and other international stakeholders in disaster
response and preparedness.
The use of space-based technologies has also been
crucial in global efforts to analyse and address the
effects of climate change. Singapore has a keen interest
in this area and recently became a member of the Space
Climate Observatory. We look forward to contributing
to the Observatory’s efforts to use earth-observation
tools and data to study climate change and its effects,
to which small island developing States are the
most vulnerable. We also look forward to being involved
in similar initiatives to better utilize space-based
technologies for sustainable development efforts.
Access to space science and technology
applications and space-based data by all countries

A/76/PV.21

can support the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals. It is therefore important that we
work together to encourage the use of space technology
to provide equal opportunities to all, such as by
enhancing Internet connectivity and access to data and
broadband technologies, especially in areas with lessdeveloped infrastructure.
In that regard, we welcome efforts by
Singapore-based companies such as Kacific and
Transcelestial to provide broadband connectivity via
satellites at low cost to underserved areas in our region.
Kacific satellite broadband services in particular have
enabled those in remote areas to access crucial services
such as telemedicine and online education.
Space-based solutions offer much potential for
development, but the proliferation of space activities by
various stakeholders has brought about new challenges,
such as space debris and orbital congestion. It is
imperative that the international community continue
its efforts towards promoting the responsible and
sustainable use of outer space to ensure that future
generations will continue to enjoy the benefits of the
space economy.
Singapore reiterates our commitment to preserving
outer space as a peaceful global commons to be
harnessed for the collective benefit of all humankind.
Singapore looks forward to working with all Member
States to advance the peaceful exploration and use of
space. We are committed to the “Space2030” Agenda
and will continue to support efforts, at the United
Nations and elsewhere, to promote an open, inclusive
and rules-based approach to the responsible use of
outer space.
Mr. Turner (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join as a co-sponsor of
draft resolution A/76/L.3, entitled “The ‘Space2030’
Agenda: space as a driver of sustainable development”,
which is the culmination of several years of tireless
work by many individuals and truly embodies the spirit
of compromise and international cooperation.
The United States would like to thank the Chairs and
Vice-Chairs of the Working Group on the “Space2030”
Agenda of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space for their persistent efforts in pushing this work
forward. Their patience and willingness to find areas
of compromise were instrumental in the establishment
of the Agenda. I have no doubt the process would have
been far more difficult without their guidance.

21-301343/6

A/76/PV.21

The United States has been committed to the process
from the very beginning and has enjoyed working with
other representatives to further the important cause
of sustainably developing outer space. The ability to
work together and find common ground is what the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space truly
embodies, like the United Nations system itself.
We are pleased that the Committee’s efforts were
not in vain and it was able to put aside politics and
brinksmanship to produce a substantive and ambitious
document for the safe and sustainable exploration and
development of outer space. This process has highlighted
the Vienna spirit and showcased that, even in the darkest
of times, which many of us have experienced for the
past year and a half, the international community can
come together and work towards a common goal. The
United States looks forward to continued opportunities
to engage with the international community on outerspace issues and would like to underscore the vital role
that the United Nations plays in this process.
Mr. Schlaepfer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the adoption by the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of the “Space2030”
Agenda: space as a driver of sustainable development,
an ambitious Agenda that aims to facilitate access to
satellite data and technology and promote their use in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Those
technologies provide unique services — for instance, in
meteorology and climate change, in telemedicine, longdistance education and emergency assistance, as well
as in urban and agricultural planning.
The range of applications of space-based
technologies is extremely broad, and in certain
respects irreplaceable. The “Space2030” Agenda will
improve both the accessibility of such applications,
while promoting their use in support of political
decision-making and their day-to-day operational
management. To that end, international cooperation
will continue to play a key role.
The impressive list of initiatives and activities
proposed in the implementation plan will allow
everyone to contribute to the best of their abilities so
that the benefits of space activities can reach as many
people as possible.
Switzerland supports the adoption by the General
Assembly of the “Space2030” Agenda as contained in
draft resolution A/76/L.3. We thank Jordan, Italy and
Romania for having led, with the support of the United
4/6

25/10/2021

Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, the efforts
towards this important achievement.
Ms. Fowler (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the “Space2030” Agenda and
implementation plan and commends the work of the
Working Group on the “Space2030” Agenda of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. We
are pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution A/76/L.3
and will continue to advocate for a safe and sustainable
space environment that is available for all States to use
in support of their development.
The implementation plan is a key tool to achieve
our joint goal and will assist Member States in
understanding how to use space-based technology to
realize the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We look forward to using the yearly agenda items at the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the
review phases flowing from the “Space2030” Agenda
in 2025 and 2030 as further opportunities to showcase
international cooperation on this important topic.
The United Kingdom Space Agency‘s awardwinning
International
Partnership
Programme
initiative uses the United Kingdom’s space capabilities
in satellite technology and data services to develop
space-enabled projects in partnership with developing
countries, which deliver real benefits to people on the
ground and ultimately make the case for investment
in space to policymakers. To date, the Programme
has benefited 47 countries across Africa, the AsiaPacific region and Latin America, while tackling
global development and resilience challenges in the
areas of climate, food security, maritime safety, health,
education and disaster management.
Alongside the “Space2030” Agenda, the United
Kingdom will continue to support the implementation
of the 21 guidelines on the long-term sustainability of
outer space activities. We are committed to driving
discussions on space safety, security and sustainability
across the various parts of the United Nations system,
in whichever forum is most appropriate, and holding
other nations to account for their actions in space.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom fully endorses
draft resolution A/76/L.3 and its contribution to ensuring
the further realization of Sustainable Development
Goal targets. We will continue to work to deliver on
our shared goal of maintaining space as a peaceful,
safe, stable, secure and sustainable environment for the
benefit of all.
21-30134

25/10/2021

Ms. Aondona (Nigeria): Let me begin by expressing
the appreciation of my delegation to the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, a dynamic
Committee that has continued to ensure that its mandate
of promoting the peaceful uses and exploration of outer
space is achieved.
Nigeria commends the good work achieved during
the 2021 deliberations of the Committee’s Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee and of its Legal Subcommittee
to ensure that the Committee implements its mandate
and continues its important work despite the challenges
brought on by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Nigeria is also proud to represent Africa on the Bureau
of the Committee as the First Vice-Chair.
The present-day role of space technology has become
pervasive. Indeed, never before have information,
communication, banking, navigation, medicine and
even political and strategic decision-making been
so dependent on space-based technologies. For that
reason, outer space and celestial bodies must continue
to be regarded and safeguarded as a common heritage
of humankind and must be used, explored and utilized
for the benefits and interests of all humankind in the
spirit of cooperation.
Securing the future of outer space assures the future
of our world. We therefore welcome the “Space2030”
Agenda and regard it as a major driver, and its adoption
and implementation plan as a positive way forward
towards ensuring that outer space is beneficial for
all nations regardless of their level of technological
advancement. My delegation urges Member States to
implement the Agenda in good faith.
Nigeria remains committed to using its growing
space-science
capabilities
for
developmental
purposes. To that end, we have embarked upon several
projects, including on a desertification-sensitivity
index,
population-dissymmetric
analysis
and
carbon-emission assessment.
Nigeria firmly believes that space technology has
immense potential to benefit developed and developing
countries alike. In that regard, the United Nations must
continue to promote equal, non-discriminatory access
to outer space, irrespective of levels of social economic
or scientific development.
Nigeria accordingly reiterates that the immense
potential of space technology and applications
should be equally beneficial to all Member States

A/76/PV.21

and calls on the United Nations to promote equal
and non-discriminatory access to outer space for all
nations. We must all refrain from actions contrary to
that objective and to the relevant existing treaties in the
interests of promoting international cooperation.
Mr. Abdullah (Bangladesh): We are happy to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/76/L.3 and join others
in supporting its adoption. We thank the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for drafting the
“Space2030” Agenda and its three-year implementation
plan. We also thank the Committee for successfully
holding its sixty-fourth session despite the challenges
posed by the pandemic.
Bangladesh believes in the safe, secure and
sustainable use of outer space to achieve the goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We launched our first communication satellite,
Bangabandhu-1, into space in 2018. Bangabandhu-1
has imparted momentum to Bangladesh’s ongoing
development trajectory and helped achieve progress
towards the targets of the 2030 Agenda. It is playing
an instrumental role, particularly in the fields of
disaster risk reduction, Internet and banking services,
telemedicine and remote education. We are preparing
to launch our next communications satellite.
We thank the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space for recommending Bangladesh to become
a member and look forward to contributing to the work
of the Committee.
We feel that the disparities in terms of access to
space technology between developing and developed
countries are still very high. We need to work hard
to eliminate that gap and ensure the benefits reach
everyone everywhere. We would like to highlight some
specific thoughts.
First, greater access to space-based data and
applications and space infrastructure can play an
important role in achieving our shared goals under
the 2030 Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. Data-driven analysis and databased future planning are vital for implementing those
global agendas.
Secondly, space-based technology plays a crucial
role in reducing the spread of the coronavirus disease
through contact tracing and the identification of
affected areas. Moreover, amid this challenging time

21-301345/6

A/76/PV.21

25/10/2021

of the pandemic, we have seen how space technology
and its application helped us to continue delivering
health and education services through telemedicine
and distance-learning. Space technology will help us to
reach more people in remote areas through health and
education services, which are essential for achieving
the 2030 Agenda.
Thirdly, gender dimensions should be incorporated
effectively into outer space affairs. Promoting the role
of women in space science, technology, innovation and
exploration is highly important in this Agenda.
We look forward to the successful adoption of the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.3, entitled “The ‘Space2030’ Agenda:
space as a driver of sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.3 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also

6/6

become sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.3: Albania,
Angola, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Bolivia, Canada, the Central African
Republic, China, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Finland, the Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Jordan, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, Namibia, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, Uzbekistan and
Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.3?
Draft resolution A/76/L.3 was adopted (resolution
76/3).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 30?
It was so decided
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

21-30134
