Rc,olulions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commiti.•c

Africa by the national liberation movements concerned, in an appropriate capacity, when dealing with
matters pertaining to those Territories;
8. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they arc members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in that
connexion should accord priority to the question of
providing a:,sistance, on an emergency basis, to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
9. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
with a view to facilitating the implementation of paragraph 8 above, should request their executive heads to
formulate and submit to their respective governing
bodies or legislative organs, as a matter of priority and
with the act,ive co-operation of the Organization of
African Unity, concrete proposals for specific programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples in
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of the
problems, if any, confronted by these agencicf; and
organizations;
10. Requests the Economic and Socia·] Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;

11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item.
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a report on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2981 (XXVII). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
RecaJ.ling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, whereby it established an integrated educational and tmining programme for Namibians, South
Africans, Southern Rhodesians and persons from Territories under Portuguese administration,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2349 (XXII), that the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa

83

should be financed from a trust fund made up of
Vlll1111tary contributions.
J'a/,.ing nute of the report of the Secretary-General
on thL· Programme for 197 1/72, ~"
Tiding note with satisfaction of the increase in contrihulions during the period under review and the
Cllrr,·spumling increase in assi,tance, in the form of
individual awards, to persons from the Territories concernL'd to further their education,
Rccogni:)ng, however, that the funds made available
have thereby been expended to provide such assistance
and that :1dditional funds arc required if the Programme is to continue in l,pcration,
L'.1pressing i1.1· firm conviction that the provision of
assi,tance for the cducat ion and training of persons
from the Territories concerned is as essential as ever
and should not only continue, but also be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
rnadL' voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Once again urgently appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions
tu thl' Programme so that it might not only continue
in nperation, but also be strengthened and expanded;
3. necides that, as a further transitional measure,
provi,ion shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the financial year 1973, for an
amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. J"a/,.es note with approval of the further efforts
made to strengthen co-operation between the Program me and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies, the Organization
of African Unity and other agencies assisting persons
from southern Africa, and hopes that these efforts will
be continued with a view to the co-ordination of their
activities in the field of education and training for persuns from the Territories concerned;
5. h,"xpresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the members of the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance
of paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 2431
( XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for the work they have
accomplished during the period under review in connexion with the Programme;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
activity and progress of the Programme.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2982 (XXVII). Offers hy Member States of study
and training facilities for inhahitants of
Non-SPH-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2876 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Tcrritories,:i0
211 A/8850
30 A/8855.

and Add. I.

_8_4_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _G_eneral Asselllbly-Twenty-seventh Session

prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities, at all levels, for the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made under this programme and, whenever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination in
the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities
made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities
to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2 I I 0th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2983 (XXVII).

Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara, 31
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Ninth Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, held
at Rabat, Morocco, from 12 to 15 June 1972, and by
the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Georgetown, Guyana, from 8 to 12
August 1972,
Having regard to the decision of the Heads of State
of the countries concerned, adopted at the Conference
held at Nouadhibou, Mauritania, on 14 September
1970, to intensify their co-operation in a positive manner in order to hasten the liberation of so-called Spanish
Sahara,
3 1 Official Records of the Genrral Assembly Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l ),' chap. XII.

Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
2354 (XXll) of 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII)
of 18 December 1968, 2591 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969 and 2711 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Deploring that the administering Power has not provided suflicicntly clear information on the conditions
and time-table it intends to apply in bringing about the
complete decolonization of the Territory,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Sahara to self-determination and indcpcndence in
accordance with General Assembly rcsolution I 514
(XV);
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples and its solidarity with, and support for,
the people of the Sahara in the struggle they are
waging in order to exercise their right to self-determination and independence, and requests all States to give
them all necessary moral and material assistance in
that struggle;
3. Declares that the continued existence of a colonial
situation in the Territory is endangering stability and
harmony in north-west Africa;
4. Expresses its support for, and solidarity with,
the people of the Sahara, and calls upon the Government of Spain, in conformity with its obligations and
its responsibility as the administering Power, to take
effective measures to create the necessary conditions
for the free exercise of their right to self-determination
and independence;
5. Repeats its invitation to the administering Power
to determine, in consultation with the Governments of
Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested
party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum
under l!nited Nations auspices to enable the indigenous
populat10n of the Sahara to exercise freely its right to
self-determination and independence and to this end
invites the Government of Spain:
'
'
(a) To create a favourable political climate for the
referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial basis by permitting, intl'r alia, the
return of political exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous inhabitants exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, with a view to
the decolonization of the Territory;
. (c~ To receive a United Nations mission and provide rt with all the necessary facilities so that it can
participate actively in the implementation of measures
making it possible to put an end to the colonial situation in the Territory;
6. Invites all States to comply with the resolutions
of the ~eneral Asse~bly on the activities of foreign
economic and financial mterests and to refrain from
helping to perpetuate the colonial situation in the Territory by means of investments;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility nf the Unitecl Nations in all consultations intended "'• lead to the free
expression of the wishes of the p..:orlc;
. 8. Urges the administering Power to respect and to
implement scrupulously, under the auspices and guarantee of the United Nations, the provisions ( ,f the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly relating
to the decolonization of so-called Spanish Sahara;
. 9. Requests th~ Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee on the Situation iih ,·egard ,,) the Jmplementa-
