S/PV.8497

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8497

th meeting
Friday, 29 March 2019, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Maas
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Lord Ahmad
Mr. Hale

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2423 (2018) (S/2019/207)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2019/262)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09042 (E)
*1909042*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8497

The meeting was called to order at 2.40 p.m.

Ogossagou in Mopti province. It appears to have been
a premeditated massacre, in which whole families,
including mothers and young children, were hacked to
death with machetes in their homes, which were then
set on fire. And while it may be the worst attack so
far, it is not the first. I want to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government and the people of Mali, and I wish the
injured a speedy recovery.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2423 (2018)
(S/2019/207)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/262)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Prime Minister
of Mali, Ministers of Germany, Côte d’Ivoire and
the United Kingdom, the Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs of the United States of America
and other distinguished representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Mali, and I request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to his seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/207, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2423 (2018) and
document S/2019/262, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Council. I welcome His Excellency Prime
Minister Maïga.
We have all been shocked by the recent surge in
violence in central Mali, particularly the killing last
weekend of at least 160 civilians in the village of
2/27

29/03/2019

Impunity only fuels the cycle of violence. This
attack must be investigated urgently and its perpetrators
brought to justice. I urge the Malian authorities to step
up efforts to end the violence and bring back peace and
stability to central Mali. But as these attacks become
deadlier and more frequent, we must decide what the
international community can do to better support the
Malian authorities and protect all of Mali’s people,
including the Fulani, who were targeted in the massacre.
The security situation is deteriorating rapidly,
particularly in the centre of Mali. Terrorist and
militia groups are taking over more territory and have
become more agile and mobile. The expansion of
extremist movements has exacerbated long-standing
intercommunal tensions between ethnic groups over
access to land and water. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the arming of ethnically based
self-defence groups have increased violence against
civilians. If those concerns are not addressed, there is
a high risk of further escalation that could lead to the
commission of atrocity crimes. Last year there were
more than 240 attacks on civilians, representatives of
the Malian Government and national and international
forces, up from 183 in 2016. The number of people
forced to flee their homes increased from 40,000 a year
ago to 123,000 in February 2019, and cases of the use of
improvised explosive devices in central Mali more than
tripled, from 29 in 2017 to nearly 100 in 2018.
We owe Special Representative Mahamat Saleh
Annadif and his military and civilian staff our
gratitude for the work they are doing in this extremely
challenging and dangerous mission. Eighteen Blue
Helmets from Chad, Guinea and Sri Lanka lost their
lives in Mali in the past 18 months. I want to express my
deepest condolences to their families and friends, but
their sacrifice will not be in vain. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) has enhanced its capacity to respond
to attacks, even when heavily outnumbered. But as
extremists expand their activities and use increasingly
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

sophisticated weapons, the Malian and international
forces must also step up and strengthen their response.
MINUSMA works in close coordination with the
Malian defence and security forces and the international
forces present in Mali — the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the French Operation
Barkhane. I welcome the recent operations led by
Barkhane and the G-5 Sahel, and the Council is aware
of my view of what is needed to make the Joint Force
fully operational.
(spoke in English)
While the security situation is deteriorating,
there have been some important steps in the past six
months towards accelerating the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
More than 1,400 former combatants in Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu have joined the Malian army as part
of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, which is an important sign
of commitment. Interim administrations have been
established in all five northern regions. Discussions
on enhancing the participation of women in the peace
process are under way. The Government has launched
a comprehensive political and administrative reform
process laying the groundwork for dialogue on how
Mali’s institutions can best serve the interests of
its people. I encourage the Government to promote
reconciliation and intercommunal dialogue, aimed
at ensuring inclusivity, strengthening resilience and
creating social cohesion from the ground up.
I welcome efforts by the Government to make
this process as broad as possible by including political
leaders from across the spectrum, the signatory
movements and armed groups, experts and members of
civil society. The recent meetings initiated by President
Keita with the leaders of the democratic opposition,
including Soumaïla Cissé, show a willingness on both
sides to rise above partisan politics and support the
reforms. I urge all Malian parties to redouble their
efforts, address differences through dialogue and
listen to the voices of the Malian people, so that those
gains can be irreversible. I also urge the international
community to continue its support.
While we must do more to support the Malian
authorities and improve security across the whole
country, military approaches alone will not solve
Mali’s problems. We can only prevent increased
violence and instability by tackling root causes such

S/PV. 8497

as poverty, climate change, competition for resources,
underdevelopment and the lack of opportunities for
young people. Some 2.4 million people in Mali need
food assistance. There are just three health workers
for every 10,000 people in the northern and central
regions. More than 800 schools have been closed and
nearly a quarter of a million children have no access
to education.
MINUSMA and the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have now adopted an integrated
strategic framework that will help to prioritize tasks
and define responsibilities to support broader and
longer-term sustaining peace efforts by the Malian
Government. There are several important international
initiatives under way, including the Alliance for the
Sahel, launched by France, Germany and the European
Union, which aims to invest €9 billion across the region
by 2022. The G-5 Sahel held a successful partner and
donor conference in Nouakchott in December. While
I welcome such initiatives, they are insufficient.
I call upon all to strengthen efforts to address the
root causes of instability and insecurity in Mali
through humanitarian aid and support for sustainable
development, including programmes on climate change
mitigation and adaptation.
The situation in Mali is a test of the international
community’s ability to mobilize in support of peace
and stability. That is not a question of charity. It is
one of enlightened self-interest. Security in Mali has
an impact on the entire Sahel, which in turn affects
global stability. The entire Sahel region faces severe
transnational challenges, from climate change and
drought to growing insecurity, violent extremism and
the smuggling of people, weapons and drugs. The
Council is aware of the growing threat to stability
in Burkina Faso. We cannot stand by while the
humanitarian situation deteriorates, development gaps
increase and security risks become unsustainable. I call
on all national, regional and international actors to step
up efforts to tackle the multiple threats facing Mali and
the entire Sahel region. Investing in peace in Mali is
investing in global security.
I urge our continued full support to MINUSMA,
the United Nations humanitarian and development
agencies and all partners on the ground. However, that
support will never be sufficient. There is no substitute
for political will. I call on the Government of Mali, the
leaders of the political opposition and the signatory
movements to redouble their efforts to overcome the

19-090423/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

29/03/2019

challenges the country faces. Now is the time to work
together to bring back peace and stability to Mali.

the elections, as well as the resumption of the national
dialogue between the authorities and the opposition.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and for being with
us for today’s discussion on such an important issue.

The security mechanisms outlined in the agreement
have gradually become stronger in Gao, Kidal and
Timbuktu, bringing together hundreds of soldiers from
the Malian army in those three areas and combatants
from the signatory armed groups and launching the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
process. With the return of a few deserters, nearly
2,000 members of those groups have already laid down
their weapons and will join the Malian army following
a period of training. The fact that former rebels are now
poised to join the national army attests to the progress
made and demonstrates the growing trust among
the parties. It is a major step forward that should not
be underestimated.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
First of all, I too would like to say a few words as a
tribute to the villagers who were massacred on Saturday
in Ogossagou in a reprehensible, cowardly attack. That
tragic incident reminds us that we must take action to
support Mali. France firmly condemns the attack. I call
on authorities to do their utmost to find and prosecute
those responsible for that horrendous crime and to
disarm the militia groups that are sowing fear in central
Mali. Such attacks are a betrayal of Mali’s tradition of
secularism and tolerance.
The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali was finalized in Algiers in 2015. We meet today
to assess its implementation and to underscore the
critical role being played on the ground by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The agreement involves
all stakeholders in seeking a settlement to the conflict.
The peacekeeping mission tasked with supporting
the process and other security forces deployed in the
country to shore up stabilization and development
efforts are two key components of the peace process
in Mali.
The peace process has accelerated over the
past six months — and it was high time. Last June,
Council members raised the alarm about the persistent
delays in implementing the main provisions of the
agreement, expressed their impatience and called
on all Malian parties to make a genuine and spirited
effort. The Council set specific goals in resolution 2423
(2018), encouraging the Government and signatory
armed groups to reach them within six months of the
President’s inauguration. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/262) provides an overview of efforts in
that regard and gives a clear idea of the progress made
and of the work that remains be done. The facts are
clear and can be verified. The spirited effort sought by
the Security Council was made. Presidential elections
took place in satisfactory security conditions, even
in northern Mali. At this juncture, I would like to
commend the decisive efforts of MINUSMA to support
4/27

Consultations on a reconstituted army are under
way, thanks to agreement among the Malian parties
on the criteria for the integration of combatants, which
were announced in a decree signed in early March. The
establishment of a counter-terrorism unit, as called for
in the peace agreement, has also been planned. The
decentralization process is also under way in Kidal,
Ménaka and Timbuktu. New interim administrations
have been installed at the regional and district levels
and financial and human resources are gradually
being transferred. An important decree was issued a
month ago for the transfer of competent services. With
regard to development, a trust fund has been set up and
legislation to create a development zone in the north of
the country is under consideration.
To date, the level of women’s participation in the
peace process has been negligible but is now on the rise.
Prime Minister Maïga’s Government is now includes
11 women, in line with goal set by Malian legislation.
Women have also been appointed to posts within the
interim authorities and, with the help of MINUSMA,
a greater number of women will be involved in the
Agreement Monitoring Committee.
Lastly, the parties are engaged in regular dialogue
with greater trust, in particular thanks to the new
Ministry of Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation. I commend its head, Minister Bouaré.
I congratulate the Malian authorities, President
Keita and Prime Minister Maïga, whose presence here
today demonstrates the importance he attaches to the
agreement. I commend his efforts. I also commend
all parties to the peace process, who have managed
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

to find the resources and determination needed to
demonstrate that spirited effort. Today, however, that
effort must continue and be sustainable. We expect all
parties to pursue their efforts. The DDR process must
be completed and the establishment and redeployment
of reconstituted units must occur in accordance with
a precise timetable. Decentralization must continue
following inclusive consultations and, on the ground,
development must be achieved to the benefit of
the people.
With regard to development, I recall that France
and Germany are determined to take action in the
region, working alongside our partners in the Alliance
for the Sahel. The time for inaction and the status quo
is behind us. All parties must honour their obligations
and, if necessary, new sanctions should be envisaged
for those who might hinder the implementation of the
agreement. To confirm the Council’s determination,
new designations may be required under the sanctions
regime established by resolution 2374 (2017).
I would like to inform our Malian friends that the
attention of the Security Council shall not flag. We
will set new specific goals to implement the agreement
that will be based on specific criteria and, if possible,
accepted by all Malian parties. I encourage them to
work to develop a new road map that takes into account
the progress already made and the work that remains to
be done, as a token of their renewed commitment to the
implementation of the agreement. The Security Council
resolution that will renew the MINUSMA mandate in
June could be used to formalize those goals.
MINUSMA has played a decisive role in helping
the Malian parties to make considerable progress. I
underscore the outstanding work done by Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali. I also commend the commitment of
all its civilian and military components and pay tribute
to the soldiers who have died in service of peace in
a demanding and dangerous mission. MINUSMA is
making every effort to adapt to operational needs and
to the dynamics of the peace process by securing the
launch of the DDR process in northern Mali.
It has also demonstrated its responsiveness to the
deterioration of the security situation in the centre,
where circumstances require resolute action to put
an end to the violence. Let us be clear — the primary
responsibility for stabilization must be assumed by
the Malian authorities, but we must also note that

S/PV. 8497

MINUSMA is the only international presence in that
region and the one best able to support the efforts of the
Malian authorities.
With troops from Operation Barkhane, France will
continue to support the Mission, as often and as long
as necessary. Not long ago, we provided air support in
attacks on the Timbuktu, Ber and Aguelhok camps,
and when necessary, Operation Barkhane’s health
service cares for peacekeepers wounded in combat.
These examples show that, both operationally and
logistically, MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing in the
performance of their respective functions and missions.
While each has its own mandate and stance, it shares
the same objective — the implementation of the
peace agreement.
Thanks to the stabilization efforts of MINUSMA,
its support for intercommunity reconciliation and the
redeployment of the State in the centre of the country,
Operation Barkhane can now focus on counter-terrorism
and combat the territorial control of jihadist armed
groups. This is a long-term and difficult mission, but,
as Council members know, we have already achieved
significant victories recently.
A new dynamic has begun in the implementation of
the peace agreement. Six months after the inauguration
of President Keita, we can only welcome this
momentum. Without the support of MINUSMA, this
process could not have begun or continued today. I am
pleased to see that we are moving in the right direction,
but there is still a long way to go, whether it is in the
political, security or development field, whether it is for
the Malian parties or in terms of international support.
I think it is now important for everyone to pursue their
efforts in this direction in a concerted and coherent way.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): I am pleased to participate
in today’s important Security Council debate under the
leadership of French Foreign Minister Le Drian. Sitting
next to him here in the Council underlines how closely
France and Germany are working together as Council
members in advancing multilateralism and cooperating
on the ground, for example in Mali.

19-090425/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

I was reminded of how important that is during my
visit to Mali a few weeks ago. I vividly remember a
discussion I had with young people in Gao. They told
me about how they fought to resist Islamist terrorism
in 2013. They also talked about how they have been
working to promote peace since then. They did not
allow their freedom, including the freedom of thought,
to be taken away. How did they find the courage to
do this? “Because it is our country”, they told me. To
me, this was encouraging, because it is the women
and men of Mali who hold the key to a peaceful future
for their country. That is why I am very pleased that
Prime Minister Maïga has joined us today for this
important discussion.
The road to peace and reconciliation is long. Even
though Malian leadership plays a critical role, Mali will
continue to need international support as it travels down
that road. It will need the Security Council right by its
side. Our message today is that the Council is ready
to support it. The Council underlined this fact with its
trip to Mali and Burkina Faso the last week, which was
organized by Germany, France and Côte d’Ivoire. The
European Union to is ready to continue training and
supporting the Malian security forces.
Our support to Mali is provided thanks to the
civilian staff, police officers and soldiers of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who often serve at great
risk to their lives. I heard first-hand how dangerous the
mission is from the women and men in uniform whom
I met in Gao. They are doing a fantastic job, and we are
all most grateful to all of them. The work of MINUSMA
deserves our full support. MINUSMA needs a strong
and comprehensive mandate. Germany will continue to
work in the Security Council towards this end. We are
prepared to continue to participate in MINUSMA with
our largest Blue Helmet contingent. Germany stands
shoulder to shoulder with Mali and its people.
The terrible massacre that took place last week near
Mopti demonstrated how great the threat still is. More
than 160 people were killed, including many women
and children. The perpetrators of this despicable crime
must be brought to justice. It should remind all of us
how important it is to do everything possible to improve
the security situation.
Regional cooperation in the Sahel region also
remains important because many of the challenges do
not stop at national borders. We call upon the Group
6/27

29/03/2019

of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to rapidly make the
Joint Force fully operational, which is an effort being
supported by Germany and the European Union.
In addition, MINUSMA should continue to play an
important role in supporting the G-5 Sahel.
No matter how much MINUSMA is helping to
provide stability in Mali, a peace mission cannot replace
the political process. It is therefore very important that
the Government has set important reforms in motion.
The Secretary-General is right to point out in his report
(S/2019/262) that the peace process has recently gained
new momentum. The demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of former fighters are making progress.
Work on reforming the Constitution has gotten under
way. These reforms must steadily continue, and
the upcoming parliamentary elections are another
important step.
But something else is needed as well. To have truly
lasting peace, it must be ensured that human rights
are respected, women play a major role in the peace
process, the different social groups and regions in
Mali are brought together, State structures are built up
everywhere in the country, and economic opportunities
are created, especially for young people. This is a
tremendous task, but I am convinced that it can be
done because Mali has a great advantage — it has a
strong and vibrant civil society, and it has young people
who believe in the future of Mali and who, in the face
of many difficulties, have decided to stay and build a
future for themselves because it is their country. These
people need our support, and I believe they deserve it.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): As this is the first time I take the floor at
an open meeting of the Security Council under the
French presidency, I am pleased to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, and to express Côte d’Ivoire’s
appreciation for the smooth conduct of the Council’s
work and for the well-chosen topics addressed.
I extend my warm and fraternal greetings to His
Excellency Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Mali; Her Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation and His Excellency the Minister of Social
Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation. Their
presence here today is sufficient proof of commitment
at the highest level of the Malian State to working
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

in concert with the United Nations and partners to
strengthen peace and security in Mali.
I also welcome the presence of my brother His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation
and Burkinabe Abroad, whose commitment to the cause
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is well
known by all. I reiterate my sympathy to him.
Similarly, I welcome the presence of His Excellency
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
and congratulate him in advance on the German
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Lastly, I welcome all the Ministers who grace us
with their presence at this meeting.
I would also like to commend Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, Special Representative of Secretary-General
for Mali, and his team for the multifaceted efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
in support of the peace process in the country, in
accordance with resolution 2423 (2018).
Мy delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting,
which once again demonstrates France’s interest in
the restoration of peace and security in Mali and the
West African subregion. I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on the quality of his reports (S/2018/207 and
S/2019/262) and the interest to which they give rise.
It prompts Côte d’Ivoire to make observations on the
political, security and humanitarian situations in
Mali, as well as on the activities of MINUSMA in an
increasingly difficult context, which invites us to make
important adjustments in our collective response to the
situation in Mali.
At the political level, Côte d’Ivoire takes
note of the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
initiatives undertaken by the Malian parties with a
view to implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. It therefore welcomes the creation of the
Ministry of Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation, an important institutional tool that
shows the Malian Government’s concern to intensify
the coordination of Government action in the
operationalization of the aforementioned agreement.
In that regard, my country encourages Malian political
actors and civil society to further pool their efforts
with a view to creating the conditions for a rapid and
lasting return of peace, security and stability to Mali,
particularly in the northern and central regions.

S/PV. 8497

The Pact for Peace, signed on 15 October 2018,
provides an encouraging and positive response on
the part of the Malian authorities to the expectations
of our Council and the international community. It
also reflects their commitment to a more inclusive
peace process. The commitment of the signatory
armed groups to joining an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process, as
well as the integration of the elements of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu,
are all encouraging signals.
My country therefore welcomes the launch, on
6 November 2018, of the accelerated ad hoc DDR
process, which has enabled the integration of combatants
from the Operational Coordination Mechanism into the
security system of the Republic. The security sector
reform process should also be expedited. That is key to
reducing violence and creating an army of the Republic
of Mali, a crucial instrument in the service of peace
and stability.
We remain convinced that the Malian authorities
will be able to capitalize on the positive momentum
of the presidential elections to organize the upcoming
legislative elections, in accordance with their ongoing
concern to strengthen the anchoring of democracy in
their country.
Ensuring a successful end to the crisis in Mali is
everyone’s business. It is essential that the efforts of
local stakeholders enjoy the ongoing support of the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the independent observer,
who must all maintain their level of mobilization in
support of peacebuilding in Mali and the subregion.
On the security front, my country shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General about
the prevailing situation, particularly in the northern
and central regions of Mali, where attacks by extremist
groups and recurrent episodes of intercommunal violence
are upsetting the social balance that is the foundation
for peaceful coexistence among populations. Those
attacks also undermine the stability of neighbouring
countries, such as the Niger and Burkina Faso, to which
I reiterate Côte d’Ivoire’s condolences and compassion.
The fight against terrorism and organized cross-border
crime is therefore a regional security issue. It requires
a collective response and coordination of the efforts of
all actors.

19-090427/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

In Mali itself, the latest act of outrageous violence
was the deadly attack perpetrated on 23 March against
vulnerable civilians in the village of Ogossagou, in
the centre of the country, where 160 people, mainly
defenceless women, children and elderly people, were
systematically massacred. Those killings, and many
others before them, require our Council to take urgent
measures to support the redeployment of the police and
judicial institutions, which should enable the Malian
State to fully discharge its sovereign functions. We
welcome the decision of the Government of Mali to
expedite an investigation to shed light on those crimes,
find the perpetrators of those heinous acts and bring
them to justice. That initiative must be supported by the
United Nations.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the joint efforts of the G-5
Sahel member States and international donors, which
made it possible, at the conference held in Nouakchott
on 6 December 2018, to mobilize €2.4 billion to finance
the 40 key projects included in the 2019-2020 Priority
Investment Programme.
In that regard, my country reaffirms its conviction
that the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
is of crucial importance to the effective fight against
terrorism and the restoration of peace and stability in
the subregion. It therefore calls on the international
community, in particular the United Nations and
international financial partners, to work together to
provide the Force with the necessary resources for its
action as soon as possible. That also requires a review of
the technical agreement, which defines the modalities
for MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force.
Turning now to the worrying humanitarian
crisis, which, according to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/262), could affect 7.2 million people in
2019, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the assistance that has
been provided by specialized agencies. It invites the
international community to show greater solidarity and
mobilization to provide emergency relief to populations
in distress. We remain convinced that multifaceted
responses to humanitarian challenges should be part
and parcel of an integrated approach to promoting
economic development, including the fight against
poverty and unemployment, which are the root causes of
insecurity and instability in Africa. That is a welcome
development for the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel,
which aim to intensify and better coordinate support to
States of the region in their development efforts.
8/27

29/03/2019

With regard to MINUSMA — an essential
link in the current security system in Mali and
the subregion — my country believes that it must
undeniably enjoy the ongoing support of our Council.
Indeed, the complementarity of its actions with those
of the various forces involved — including the Malian
armed forces, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, Operation
Barkhane and the European missions — constitute
a considerable asset in the fight against terrorism
and organized crime throughout the subregion. It is
therefore imperative to ensure that its capacities are
strengthened in order to enable it to react effectively
to or anticipate attacks against its civilian and military
personnel. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the fact
that its readiness to contribute more to peacekeeping
operations has been materialized by the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to deploy a contingent of 650 Ivorian
soldiers to MINUSMA’s area of operations in the near
future, in addition to the 150 soldiers already present
on the ground.
Our debate is taking place in a worrisome regional
security context, characterized by the unprecedented
proliferation of terrorist groups, the worsening of
intercommunal conflicts and the alarming growth of
a structured criminal economy and trafficking of all
kinds, which undermine the foundations of our States.
The are many worrying signals, and we in the Council
must go further and be pragmatic in our support for the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel and West Africa.
Today more than ever, MINUSMA needs a regional
secular arm with a coercive mandate in the fight against
terrorist groups in order to effectively implement its
peacekeeping mandate. That is the thrust of President
Alassane Ouattara’s ongoing appeal for the resolute
commitment of the major countries and the United
Nations, in particular our Council, to benefit the G-5
Sahel, which is designed with a view to the long term.
In that regard, the Côte d’Ivoire appeals to the
Council for unity and to the international community
for continued mobilization in support of MINUSMA’s
mandate, which is more necessary now than ever before,
as well as for its logistical and operational support to
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017).
In conclusion, my country urges the Council to
strengthen its support for the Government of Mali in
its efforts to restore peace and stability and promote
economic and social development.
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

Mr. Hale (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and Secretary-General
Guterres for today’s briefing. I also wish to thank the
representatives of France, Germany and Côte d’Ivoire
for coordinating the recent Security Council trip to
Mali and Burkina Faso. Council members witnessed
first hand the security and political challenges in both
countries. A frank dialogue about the realities of the
situation will enable the Council to help advance peace
and security and improve the lives of the people of
the region.
The Council must recognize the gravity of the
security situation in Mali. While the troops of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) wear blue helmets,
they find themselves in an environment far outside
the bounds of traditional peacekeeping. MINUSMA
peacekeepers are consistently and purposefully attacked
by extremists who are mobile, smart, well organized
and not about to give up. MINUSMA has suffered as a
result. MINUSMA is the most dangerous peacekeeping
mission in the world and has borne an unprecedented
rate of casualties. Too many peacekeepers have been
killed or had their lives, and those of their families,
shattered by life-altering injuries. America honours
their sacrifices and offers its gratitude and appreciation
to the troops, police and civilians of MINUSMA, along
with their families, who sacrifice daily to promote
peace and stability in Mali.
That
violence,
together
with
increasing
intercommunal and inter-ethnic violence, particularly
in Mali’s centre, is accompanied by an unacceptable
lack of progress in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the
Algiers process. In resolution 2423 (2018), the Security
Council requested that the Secretary-General deliver a
special report on progress in implementing seven key
provisions of the agreement. The Council requested
the Secretary-General to provide recommendations for
significant adaptations of MINUSMA’s mandate in the
absence of significant progress on those benchmarks.
The 5 March report (S/2019/207) notes some progress on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
and the successful conduct of Mali’s 2018 presidential
election. However, we are disappointed that the report
does not provide a clear assessment of the lack of
significant progress on all remaining items. That gap
contrasts with the independent observer’s report, which

S/PV. 8497

acknowledge preliminary progress but sounds the alarm
on the lack of political will to implement the accord.
Given the gravity of the situation in Mali, we have
made clear to all parties our disappointment at the
lack of significant progress, with only one of seven
benchmarks fully completed. Now is not the time to
give up, nor is it the time to pretend that peace in Mali
is advancing sufficiently. We expect to see progress on
the outstanding measures before the Security Council
negotiates the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate in
June. In particular, we will carefully review progress
and seek completion in three areas.
First, Mali should expand the inclusivity of the
constitutional reform process, leading to a legitimate
constitutional referendum. That step is key to the
viability of the agreement and the future of Mali
beyond MINUSMA. The armed groups, opposition and
civil society must have input into an inclusive process.
Secondly, the parties to the Algiers accord should
accelerate the integration, training and deployment
of fighters participating in the DDR programme in
northern Mali. Thirdly, the Government should codify
the northern development zone into law and provide
greater resources to interim administrations in the
north. The Government should ensure that interim
administrations are not merely token presences, but can
actually deliver services. Inclusivity and transparent
political progress have been delayed for far too long.
While we have focused on the north, security in
the centre of Mali is also deteriorating. In the first
few months of this year, we have witnessed just how
precarious things have become, with, as previous
speakers have noted, the deaths of more than 160
people just this past Saturday, the loss of 23 soldiers in
the Diourra attack and continuing threats to civilians.
United Nations agencies are now reporting that in the
first two months of 2019, 70 per cent of human rights
violations and 80 per cent of civilian deaths in Mali
occurred in the centre of the country. The Government
and MINUSMA are responsible for protecting
civilians throughout the entire country, not just in the
north. We are encouraged by the changes that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif and
Force Commander Gyllensporre have made since last
year’s mandate. They are strong leaders whose teams
have focused the Mission on its core mandate and made
it more integrated and effective.

19-090429/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

No matter how valiant their efforts are, however,
MINUSMA cannot fill the gap while the Government
and parties to the Algiers accord fail to make progress
in its implementation, and the Council has tried during
MINUSMA’s six years to get the Mission to perform
optimally and minimize risks to peacekeepers. The
inability of the parties to make significant progress after
signing the 2015 Mali peace agreement has inhibited
the Mission’s ability to implement the mandate. That
failing has put civilians, peacekeepers and domestic
and international forces at greater risk from terrorism
as communal violence has spread throughout the region.
Despite some progress in the past several months, and
after only modest progress in prior years, it is time to
evaluate whether a peacekeeping mission in such an
environment is the appropriate or effective solution to
the problem set in northern Mali.
In determining MINUSMA’s future, we ask the
Secretary-General to proceed with the Council’s
request, outlined in paragraph six of resolution 2423
(2018), to provide us with options for a significant
adaptation of MINUSMA in time for the negotiation
of its mandate this June. Six of the seven benchmarks
have not been completed, and most have seen no
significant progress. We ask for a plan that positions
MINUSMA to address the security and counterterrorism environment, protect personnel and support
political progress more effectively than at present. The
plan should include options for significant adaptation
so that the Council can consider the best way forward
in such a precarious environment. The plan should
outline options to address the significant instability in
Mali’s centre.
Turning to Mali itself, inclusive constitutional
change will require tremendous political courage
and significant input from all concerned. Inclusive
constitutional reform will result in more voices being
heard in Mali’s institutions, the decentralization of
power and genuine political dialogue, which are all
important steps towards re-establishing security and
governance throughout the country. We call on Mali’s
leaders to work together towards achieving real and
lasting power-sharing. Progress will benefit the region,
but above all else it will benefit the people of Mali.
Only by building a bridge between Mali’s diverse
communities will leaders pave a road leading towards
a more secure future for all — a road upon which there
will be opportunity and a more prosperous future for
Mali and its people.
10/27

29/03/2019

Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Let me start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting and the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and informative briefing. Like many
others, I am also looking forward to haring Prime
Minister Maïga give his perspective on the challenges
that his country faces. However, I would like to begin
by addressing the Prime Minister, on behalf of the
United Kingdom Government, by offering our sincere
condolences for the tragic deaths of more than 160
people in the most recent violence in Ogossagou.
Given the ongoing security challenges, we particularly
welcome the recent steps that his Government has
taken to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, including on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
Nevertheless, while progress in recent months has
been more encouraging than in previous years, the
United Kingdom notes that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/207) highlights a number of areas in
which progress has not matched the benchmarks set out
in the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is clear that more still needs to be done to ensure that
Mali is able to achieve long-term peace and stability.
Even where positive steps have been taken,
more fundamental changes are required to achieve
peace, sustainable development and prosperity. That
is particularly the case with constitutional reform,
decentralization, security sector reform, economic
development in northern Mali and the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process. I
commend the Government of Mali’s commitment to
holding a constitutional referendum before the end
of June. In order to give the reform process the best
chance of success, we would urge the Government to
ensure that it is properly inclusive, involving genuine
consultations with all signatory parties to the peace
agreement and all sectors of Malian society. We also
welcome the Prime Minister’s clear commitment to
stabilizing the situation in central Mali. We hope that
he can give assurances that the Government’s plan will
be both truly comprehensive and properly funded, in
order to ensure its effectiveness.
MINUSMA plays a crucial role in Mali in
extremely challenging circumstances. The United
Kingdom unequivocally condemns the recent attacks
on MINUSMA personnel, and we would like to express
our condolences to the families of those who lost their
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

lives. As we approach the June renewal of MINUSMA’s
mandate, the United Kingdom wants to work with
everyone here today to build on recent progress and
further enhance the effectiveness of the Mission. In
particular, we want to see a mandate that enables it
to continue to focus on its core task in the north and
its areas of strength. MINUSMA has had the greatest
political impact when it has used its good offices to
defuse tensions and enable agreement to form around
the tough compromises necessary. Those compromises
are absolutely essential to peace, and we believe that
the Mission can do more in that area, particularly in
central Mali.
Where MINUSMA’s military operations are
concerned, we are worried about the fact that the
Mission still spends too much time and money on
resupply and force protection rather than protecting
the Malian people. We want to support the Mission
in making longer-term cost savings so that it can free
up capacity, because that is crucial to saving lives.
Finally, we should all recognize that MINUSMA is not
a permanent solution but a means to an end, which is
the achievement of sustainable peace in Mali. We all
need to work together across the whole United Nations
family to achieve that.
I want to conclude by underlining the importance
that the United Kingdom attaches to progress in
Mali and the broader Sahel region. The issues that
we are discussing here today have major long-term
implications not only for the security and prosperity of
the people of Mali but also for the broader region and,
indeed, for Europe. That is why the United Kingdom
is stepping up its engagement in the Sahel. We already
work with countries of the region to support peace,
development and prosperity. We are the region’s third
largest humanitarian donor. We are enlarging our
Embassy in Mali, which spearheads our work on the
very issues that we have been discussing so far today.
We are also establishing new embassies in the Niger and
Chad and building a broader stability and development
programme. As we step up our engagement over
the coming years, the principles of frank and open
partnership will be central to our approach, both with
the people and Governments of the region and with
our broader international partners. I look forward to
working with many here, the Government of Mali and
all partners to achieve our shared ambitions and our
shared goals.

S/PV. 8497

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Prime Minister Soumeylou
Maïga of Mali to today’s meeting and thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his briefing.
At the outset, we would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Mali regarding the horrific tragedy in the village of
Ogossagou, where more than 160 peaceful residents
were killed as a result of an inter-ethnic clash on
23 March. We wish all the wounded a speedy recovery
and hope that those responsible for what happened will
be found and duly punished. This tragic event, which
occurred while the Security Council mission was
visiting the country, demonstrated once again the size
and gravity of the threats facing the country and the
region, as well as their vulnerability to the proliferation
of destabilizing forces represented by terrorists,
organized criminals and ideological extremists.
In general, we share the views that the SecretaryGeneral expressed today and in his two reports for
March on the situation in Mali (S/2019/207 and
S/2019/262). We welcome the efforts of Bamako,
Malian political stakeholders and the Platform coalition
and Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad
signatory groups to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that the existing
positive momentum in implementing its key provisions
with regard to the reconstitution of Mali’s security
forces, administrative and territorial reforms and
the preparations for a constitutional referendum will
continue. Ensuring that the parliamentary elections
scheduled for June are held on time would be an
important step towards strengthening Mali’s internal
dialogue. The international community should prioritize
those issues in providing assistance to the country.
While
recognizing
the
obvious
positive
developments in Mali’s peace process, we cannot
ignore other trends there that are unfortunately less
encouraging. In a situation where there is no Government
control in large parts of the country, it should be no
surprise that those areas are becoming ideal breeding
grounds for extremist activities. We have seen that the
number of terrorist attacks on both military personnel
and civilians has increased in recent months. There
are human rights violations everywhere. In central
Mali inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflicts are
not just simmering but increasingly often are full-on
erupting. It seems that the issue here is not merely the
centuries-old differences between herders and farmers.

19-0904211/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

Militants are intentionally trying to gain the support
of local residents by providing protection and basic
services and by skilfully playing on existing disputes.
If those challenges are to be dealt with, the presence of
State authority must be restored. However, we should
not fail to point to the results that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has achieved in reconciling the warring parties.
The worsening humanitarian situation is extremely
worrying. The numbers of those in need of assistance
are growing. We urge all external donors to fund the
humanitarian appeal as quickly as possible. We all
know that when the situation seems hopeless, Mali’s
young people have no option but to join the ranks of
terrorist, extremist or criminal groups. In that regard,
it will be crucial to ensure that the efforts to stimulate
economic activity and restore social services in the
central and northern areas do not let up.
The situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. However, it is very unlikely
that peace can be achieved there without normalizing
the situation in the region. The Libya factor continues
to play a negative role in this. The links between the
terrorists operating in Mali and in the region as a
whole are becoming increasingly clear. In that regard,
we support the concrete steps that the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel have been taking to form
a joint force to combat terrorism and organized crime,
and we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.

29/03/2019

deliberations and contribute constructively to them.
Ensuring an inclusive and transparent constitutional
review process is of the utmost importance. Despite
some positive developments, we regret that some of the
key provisions of the agreement have not yet been fully
implemented. There is no doubt that the implementation
of the agreement requires strong dedication and
commitment from all the relevant stakeholders. Those
who are trying to obstruct the process should be aware
that the Council is ready to impose all the necessary
measures against them, pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017).
Secondly, we remain grievously concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation in
central Mali and the alarming increase in the number
of civilians killed. Saturday’s horrific massacre in
Ogossagou, in the Mopti region, is the latest sign
that violence in Mali is spiralling out of control. We
therefore call on the Government to intensify efforts to
address the situation in the centre of the country with
the support of the international community, including
through implementing its Plan de sécurisation intégré
des régions du centre. We strongly condemn attacks
against civilians in the village of Koulogon-Peul
and call for the perpetrators to be held accountable.
For the situation in Mali to improve, the effective
implementation of the peace agreement is crucial.
We express our deep condolences to the families of
the victims.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his very informative
briefing on the recent developments in Mali and
welcoming Prime Minister Soumеylou Bоubèуе Maïga
of Mali. I want to take this opportunity to express our
sincere condolences to the Prime Minister as well as to
the families of the victims of the tragedy in Ogossagou.
I would like to focus today on three issues — the
political process, the security situation and the human
rights and humanitarian situation.

It goes without saying that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) plays a critical role in preventing
extremist armed groups from taking control of areas in
northern Mali where there is little or no State authority.
However, the recent Security Council visit to the region
shows clearly that the current situation is extremely
difficult and that there is a need to create a broader
security architecture, which includes MINUSMA,
the Malian armed forces, the Group of Five for the
Sahel Joint Force and Operation Barkhane deployed to
the region.

First, on the political process, we commend
the commitment shown by President Keita and his
Government to prioritizing the constitutional review
process. It is an indispensable step towards adopting
the critical political and institutional reforms envisaged
in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We therefore call on all Malian political and civilsociety leaders to participate actively in those important

Thirdly, the human rights situation remains
worrisome, particularly in the centre of the country,
as well as in the Ménaka region and the Gourma area,
where serious human rights violations and abuses
continue to be reported. No effort should be spared
to bring the perpetrators of those heinous acts to
justice. At the same time, all national and international
military forces operating in Mali must ensure that their

12/27

19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

operations comply with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. We remain
deeply concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Access to basic services and assistance, such
as food, water and sanitation, as well as education and
health care, remain limited and challenging. As the
number of displaced persons in Mali grows, it is of the
utmost importance to step up efforts to address that
difficult situation.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that peace and
stability in Mali remains key for the peace and security
of the whole Sahel region. But Malians alone cannot
achieve those ambitious goals. Poland therefore applauds
Special Representative Mahamet Saleh Annadif for his
excellent leadership, and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment. Last but not least, we
commend the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union and other
bilateral and multilateral partners for their commitment
and valuable support for the peace process in Mali.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
Secretary-General’s valuable briefing. We are honoured
by the presence of the Foreign Ministers of France and
Germany, and also welcome the Prime Minister of Mali
to this important meeting.
The Security Council visited Mali a week ago,
where we were able to observe the progress made in the
country at the political level. We were also able to learn
at first-hand about the delicate humanitarian situation
and the continuing deterioration in security due to the
increase in terrorism and organized crime.
Peru believes that the full implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali must remain the priority for the Government
and the people of Mali, with the support of the
international community. The establishment of
provisional authorities; the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process; the
reintegration of approximately 1,400 combatants; and
the efforts to achieve development in the north of the
country are achievements that reflect the will of the
parties to implement the agreement.
Despite those achievements, much remains to
be done. It is essential that all parties join efforts to
ensure that the progress achieved is reflected in an
improvement of the living conditions for all Malian

S/PV. 8497

citizens. To that end, we consider it necessary, first of
all, to work without delay on the reforms relating to
the revision of the Constitution and decentralization,
as well as on the holding of peaceful, transparent
and inclusive legislative elections to be held in June.
We welcome the establishment of the committee of
experts on the constitutional review and the national
consultation framework. We encourage all parties to
work on the necessary reforms in an inclusive manner
so as to enhance social cohesion.
Secondly, we must address the constant security
deterioration, the continuing violence and the critical
humanitarian situation in various parts of the country,
particularly in central Mali. We regret that at least 134
civilians, including women and children, were killed in
an attack in Mopti in the course of our visit. We support
the efforts made to strengthen the armed forces, which
rely on the trust and backing of the people, in order to
equip them with the technical skills and training that
will enable them to confront terrorist and rebel groups.
It is equally important to combat inter-ethnic,
intercommunal and religious violence among the
communities in the centre of the country through
dialogue initiatives at the local level. It is key to
complement those actions with an independent judicial
system capable of investigating and prosecuting human
rights violations, while contributing to accountability
and the fight against impunity.
Thirdly, we must continue to work to eliminate
economic and development inequality between the
capital, Bamako, and the other regions of the country.
Bringing about sustainable peace will be possible
only through a comprehensive approach that includes
improvements in security, political dialogue and the
rule of law as essential prerequisites for addressing the
root causes of the conflict. In that process, it is crucial
to promote measures to ensure increased participation
and empowerment of women and young people, which
is key to defining and building the future of the country.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that, in
order to achieve stability in Mali, the various efforts,
initiatives and mechanisms deployed on the ground
must maintain political and operational coherence.
We especially recognize the work being done by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in a particularly difficult
operational environment. We support the provision of
the necessary resources and capacities to enable it to

19-0904213/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

carry out its mandate effectively in the best possible
security conditions.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I welcome Foreign Minister Le Drian to
the Security Council to preside over today’s meeting.
I also welcome Prime Minister Maïga and thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
An outbreak of violence in central Mali on 23 March
claimed 160 lives. China strongly condemns that
violence and we would like to express our condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Mali and the families of the victims.
Last year witnessed the successful conclusion of
a general election in Mali and a peaceful transition of
Government. The peace process in Mali has registered
positive progress since President Keita began his new
term in September. Prime Minister Maïga has been
engaging extensively with the parties and has made
important contributions to that end. China commends
the Malian Government and people for their tireless
efforts in implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. At the same time, we note that
the security situation in the north and centre of the
country continues to deteriorate. Terrorist activities are
rampant. Serious issues such as poverty, unemployment
and underdevelopment are undermining the peace
process. The international community should continue
to provide support for peace and development in Mali.
First, it is important to intensify efforts to advance
the peace and reconciliation process in Mali. China
hopes that all parties to the Malian peace agreement
will consolidate the current positive momentum,
continue to strengthen mutual trust and put the interests
of the country and its people first, while making a joint
commitment to the development and reconstruction
of the country. The international community should
provide assistance and capacity-building in the areas
of autonomous development and governance on the
basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. The sanctions
regime for Mali should aim to support the political
process and strictly adhere to the mandate entrusted to
it by the Council.
Secondly, we should help Mali to enhance its
capacity-building in the area of security. In response to
the increasingly complex security challenges in the north
and centre of Mali, the international community should
continue to support and help the Malian Government
14/27

29/03/2019

to improve its of security and counter-terrorism, as
requested by the Malian Government, so that it can
gradually assume greater security responsibilities
throughout its territory. Peace and security in Mali
is closely related to the overall security situation in
the surrounding areas, which calls for an integrated
approach to international cooperation against terrorism
in Mali and neighbouring areas.
China acknowledges the progress made by the
Malian Government and its security forces in assuming
security responsibilities on the ground and welcomes
the initiative of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in tackling security threats in
the region, such as terrorism. We commend the United
Nations and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
for their support of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, we should support the economic and social
development of Mali. The international community
should continue to step up its support to Mali with
a view to consolidating its economy and achieving
autonomous, sustainable development at an early date.
That will help Mali to address the underlying problems
that it faces. China calls on all the relevant parties
to follow through on their aid commitments so as to
ease the financial pressure on the Government. The
appointment of heads of the interim administration
in the north of the country was completed a few days
ago. China welcomes that development and hopes that
the relevant processes can be advanced so that basic
services can soon be provided to the people in the north
of the country and so that living conditions improve.
Fourthly, it is imperative to support MINUSMA
in continuing its work. The Mission and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, have played an important
role in maintaining stability in Mali, strengthening
the security and capacity-building of the country
and assisting in the peace process. MINUSMA’s
mandate is significant for the security and stability
of Mali and the wider Sahel region. We hope that
MINUSMA will continue to cooperate closely with the
Malian Government.
China expresses its condolences and pays tribute
to the MINUSMA peacekeepers who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty. We have taken note
of the measures taken by the Secretariat — as set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/262) — as
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

well as the efforts of MINUSMA to improve the security
and safety of its personnel. We hope that the Mission
will continue to strengthen the safety and security of
its personnel and ensure that security equipment is in
place. At the same time, it should continue to strengthen
communication with the troop-contributing countries
and the donor community in order to ensure that the
Mission has the necessary equipment and resources to
fulfil its mandate and act in self-defence.
China firmly supports the people of Mali in their
pursuit of peace and development. China is a major
troop-contributing country, with more than 400 of its
peacekeepers assuming responsibilities in the areas
of engineering and medicine, among others. Our
contribution is widely acknowledged, and China will
continue to work with the international community
to contribute to the peace, stability and development
of Mali.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting and commend your presence here as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, as
well as that of the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Mali, His Excellency Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga,
and all the other members of the Governments present
here today. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his detailed and very
informative briefing.
As has been comprehensively outlined, the security
situation in the north and centre of Mali faces various
challenges. The situation has made those two areas
even more vulnerable and exposed to threats such as
violent extremism and organized crime, including
trafficking in persons as well as trafficking in drugs
and weapons. Against that background, there are also
ecological and climate challenges. Given the explosive
situation that is endangering the very existence of
the State, it is important to continue promoting broad
consultations and exchanges between national and
international stakeholders and partners in order to
provide the tools to combat and prevent terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, both at the national level
and throughout the Sahelo-Saharan region.
Despite the unwavering international mobilization
and support for the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the situation in Mali remains of great concern. The

S/PV. 8497

Republic of Equatorial Guinea once again wishes
to firmly condemn the continued attacks being
perpetrated against Blue Helmets, United Nations
personnel, the Malian armed forces and, above all,
against the population. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea wishes to express its appreciation of, and pay
tribute to, all national and international defence forces
involved in the brave efforts to combat violence and
transboundary organized crime in Mali and throughout
the Sahel region. Those despicable attacks must
serve to strengthen the determination of the Malian
authorities, in collaboration with the African Union and
the international community as a whole, to continue
to support, to the extent possible, efforts aimed at
combating terrorism and violent extremism as well as
to promote sustainable peace, security and stability in
the country.
As we emphasized yesterday at the ministerial
meeting on the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, and having taken into account recent
events, it is essential to ensure greater international
mobilization in support of the work of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the Government
of Mali throughout the country and the wider region.
The central role played by all international actors must
also promote a new geostrategic approach based on
multi-stakeholder cooperation among the countries of
the Sahel, the Maghreb countries, the European Union
and the African Union, through their competent regional
mechanisms, in order to contribute significantly to the
improvement of the security and stability situation in
Mali and the wider Sahel.
We will never tire of reiterating that, in view of
that disheartening backdrop, it is imperative that the
Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
expedite the full implementation of the key provisions
of the Malian peace agreement, as also highlighted in
resolution 2423 (2018). In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made by President Keita and his Government in
promoting the review of the Constitution. We support
the words of the Secretary-General in emphasizing
that the constitutional review is an indispensable step
towards adopting critical political and institutional
reforms envisaged in the agreement, given that such
reforms will lay the groundwork for a unified nation
and a more peaceful and stable Mali. In the framework
of those consultations, we stress the importance of the
inclusive nature of reform and permanent dialogue with

19-0904215/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

all political actors and civil society for the successful
completion of the process.
My country’s Government also believes that, in
order to bring the security situation under control in
Mali, the national authorities must do everything in
their power to put an end to massacres of all kinds,
such as that of 23 March in the village of Ogossagou.
Political actors must consistently ensure not to create a
gateway to civil war. In the same vein, it is necessary to
urgently implement the disarmament and dismantling of
all militia groups committing murders and massacres,
in order to protect the civilian population. The national
authorities must therefore deploy the security forces to
the areas most affected by such attacks. We believe that
that also constitutes a solution to the current crisis.
The long-term solution to put an end to the violence
and any conflict is inexorably through solutions of a
political nature. In that regard, we urge all parties to be
fully committed to prioritizing, supporting and actively
participating in all initiatives aimed at ensuring the end
of the conflict, such as the promotion of justice and
reconciliation among the sons and daughters of Mali.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank His Excellency the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the current situation in Mali.
Likewise, we welcome the insightful remarks made
by you, Mr. President, as the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of France, as well as the remarks made
by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, the
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs of the
United States of America and the Minister of State for
the Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I also
extend a special welcome to His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Mali, Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif. I thank them for hosting
us on our recent visit to Mali.
Allow me to join other members of the Security
Council in expressing our deep concern about the current
security situation in Mali following the massacres in
the villages of Ogossagou and Welingara, in the Mopti
region of central Mali, during the visit of the Council,
which resulted in the killing of at least 160 people,
including women and children. My delegation wishes
16/27

29/03/2019

to condemn in the strongest terms those shameful
attacks on innocent and defenceless civilians. We urge
the Council, MINUSMA and the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to help prevent further bloodshed
and the systematic maiming of innocent civilians, as
well as the increasing transnational organized crime,
which may reverse the gains made in advancing the
political process.
South Africa is pleased with the political
developments and progress made so far in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We are particularly encouraged
by the active involvement of the Prime Minister of Mali
and President Keita in spearheading the implementation
of the agreement — a clear demonstration of political will
in resolving the situation in the country. South Africa
therefore calls on Malian stakeholders to continue to
make significant strides towards the implementation of
the agreement with a view to bringing about peace and
stability and preserving the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Mali. It is the responsibility
of all Malian parties to ensure the successful, effective
and inclusive implementation of the agreement in
order for Mali to usher in a period of lasting peace,
stability and prosperity. In that regard, we welcome the
establishment of a committee of experts and a national
consultation framework on constitutional reform, which
will contribute to a political atmosphere conducive to a
successful constitutional referendum — the first of its
kind since 1992.
The Council has the arduous responsibility — together
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union — to support the
Government of Mali and Malians in general on the
path towards sustainable peace and stability. Stability
in Mali is critical for that country to realize Agenda
2063 of the African Union: The Africa We Want. In that
regard, we wish to commend the concerted efforts of
MINUSMA in continuing to discharge its political and
security-related mandate in Mali under the leadership
of Special Representative Annadif. The significant
progress made so far on the political track gives credence
to the Secretary-General’s decision to streamline the
coordination of priorities between MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team through the United
Nations integrated strategic framework. It is against
that backdrop that South Africa wishes to express its
strong condemnation of all terrorist attacks against
civilians, peacekeepers and Malian security forces, as
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

evidenced by the recent attacks perpetrated on 1, 20 and
25 January, 22 February as well as 16 and 17 March. We
call on the Malian authorities to hold to account the
perpetrators of those heinous crimes.
It is our considered view in South Africa that
it is important to achieve sustainable peace while
pursuing the objectives of reconciliation and peace.
We welcome the progress made by the Prime Minister
towards the operationalization of the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission. More attention should be
paid to post-conflict reconstruction and development
activities and the rights of women and children. As
such, South Africa agrees with the observations made
by the Secretary-General that the challenge in the
implementation of the Agreement is that
“[it] is not taking place in a post-conflict context,
as initially hoped for upon its signature, but in a
context of continued crises, terrorism and extremist
violence.” (S/2019/207, para. 57).
Those activities have the potential of eroding trust
among the conflicting parties. The Council should
therefore continue to support the Malian Government
in dealing with this crisis.
It is of vital importance to address those conditions,
given the increase in terrorism and violent extremism,
and to take the necessary measures to address them
so as to discontinue the vicious cycle of conflict on
the continent as a whole. That would also contribute
to ensuring the safety, protection and well-being of
the population in the neighbourhood of Mali as well
as sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. We underline the
importance of regional and international coordination
in fighting the scourge of terrorism and violent
extremism because the geographical reach of terrorist
groups is growing, constituting a serious threat to the
peace and security of not only Mali but the entire Sahel
region. In that context, we express our appreciation of
the French Operation Barkhane.
South Africa calls for enhanced efforts on crossborder cooperation among neighbouring countries
in order to strengthen mechanisms for the effective
sharing of information, as well as close cooperation
and coordination between MINUSMA, the G-5 Sahel
and ECOWAS in bringing together efforts to address
the situation in Mali and the Sahel.
My delegation would like to emphasize three things.
First, we support increased assistance to MINUSMA

S/PV. 8497

and the G-5 Sahel. Secondly, we reiterate the request
made by the G-5 Sahel to be allowed to carry out
cross-border operations into neighbouring countries to
neutralize armed groups in those countries. Thirdly, we
support all efforts by the Malian authorities to extend
their administration across the entire Malian territory,
especially in the north of Mali. The cooperation
between MINUSMA and other security presences on
the ground, including the Malian defence and security
forces, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, the French
forces and the European Union Training Mission in
Mali has had a positive impact on the security situation
in the region.
Mali is shouldering a huge responsibility and
making huge sacrifices for most of us across the rest
of Africa. I therefore urge the Council to stand by Mali
and its people.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence among us of the Prime Minister of Mali as well
as the Malian Foreign Minister. I wish to once again
thank the Foreign Minister for the welcome extended to
us on our visit to her country a few days ago.
Since our previous debate on the situation in Mali
in January (see S/PV.8445), more Blue Helmets and
Malian soldiers have been killed and the country has
experienced a new spike in violence against civilians.
We were in particular deeply shocked by the massacre
in Ogossagou on Saturday. I wish in turn to pay tribute
to the memory of all the victims.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali has not progressed as quickly as
we had all hoped. Belgium is greatly concerned about
the delays in that implementation. That key provisions
of the agreement have not been finalized jeopardizes
the development, security and stability of Mali and
gradually destroys the hopes that the agreement had
generated among the population. It bolsters the enemies
of peace, who continue to denounce the path of dialogue
and compromise as a dead-end route and advocate
violence as an alternative.
Therefore, Belgium of course welcomes the recent
progress made in the implementation of the agreement.
We particularly appreciate that the constitutional
reform process is crucial but at the same time delicate
to carry out — crucial as it would pave the way for the
realization of a series of measures provided for in the
agreement. It would also allow the country to adapt its

19-0904217/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

basic law to the realities of Mali today — significantly
different to those of 1992 — for the benefit of Malians
throughout the country.
Such efforts and political courage must also be
extended to the other key provisions of the agreement,
in spite of the difficulties and obstacles that — I am
aware — are sometimes significant. I would like to
underscore that that responsibility lies with the three
signatory parties to the agreement, and I urge them to
make it their urgent priority. Belgium wishes to stress
the critical role of women in the implementation of all
aspects of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation,
including the constitutional reform process, as essential
to achieving lasting and inclusive peace. Furthermore,
in view of the centrality of the peace agreement, I
would like to stress that Belgium believes that it must
be possible for all Council measures to be used against
those who obstruct peace. Sanctions have already been
put in place, and the Council should be ready to take
further action if necessary.
It is hard not to mention the situation in the
centre of the country, and specifically the regions of
Koulikoro, Ségou and especially Mopti, where there
are now victims of violence on a daily basis. We
commend the efforts undertaken by Mali, in particular
the establishment in 2017 of a comprehensive plan to
re-establish State presence in the centre of Mali on
the initiative of the Prime Minister, a well as his visits
to the region to promote peace and reconciliation.
Nevertheless, it is clear that, despite all of those
efforts, the situation has not improved. In addition
to terrorist acts, intercommunal violence has led to
an alarming spiralling of violence since last year.
That phenomenon is worrisome in a country such as
Mali, which is historically a country of diversity and
peaceful coexistence among ethnic groups. Terrorists
and aggressive militias cannot be allowed to take root.
As the Council regularly recalls, the solution
cannot be related only to security, although that is
obviously essential. The aspirations voiced with regard
to governance, the fight against corruption, justice and
basic social services deserve to be heard. Living together
and the refusal to stigmatize specific ethnic groups, as
well as local mediation, are essential parameters for
the return of State authority over the country’s entire
territory. Moreover, combating impunity must be made
a priority.
18/27

29/03/2019

Recent events in the centre of the country cannot
remain unaddressed. I therefore stress the need for
the necessary investigations to be carried out and for
those responsible to be brought to justice. Without
that, resentment will only increase and further fuel the
violence. Only Malians hold the key, and the United
Nations must support them in their efforts. In that
respect, Belgium believes that the future mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) should
sharpen its focus on the protection of civilians,
including in the centre of the country, and in particular
through supporting the authorities.
Belgium welcomes the development of an
integrated strategic framework by MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team. It is essential that the
resources available to the United Nations as a whole
in Mali be used to the fullest and in the most efficient
and integrated way possible. In the same vein, Belgium
remains attentive to the integrated nature of MINUSMA
and encourages all pillars to work together closely.
Finally, I would be remiss not to commend the
efforts of all Mission staff, and in particular Special
Representative Annadif, for their work in often
difficult circumstances.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome the fact that you, Sir, are presiding over this
meeting and thank you for organizing it. The convening
of this meeting at this level undoubtedly reflects the
Security Council’s interest in the issue before us and
we, as the Security Council, must find solutions to it
and support the people of Mali. I would also like to
welcome the participation of the Prime Minister and to
thank his Government for hosting the visiting mission
of the Security Council last week.
We thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
briefing on the latest developments in the Republic of
Mali, in particular, and the Sahel region, in general. I
would also like to thank and commend the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mohamed Saleh Anadif, and all the staff of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which
operates on a daily basis in a hazardous environment in
order to achieve peace in the Republic of Mali.
We have seen positive steps in the peace process over
the past few months. However, the security situation
has deteriorated, especially since the beginning of this
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

year, with an increasing number of attacks targeting
peacekeepers and Malian forces as well as an increasing
number of incidents on ethnic groups. In that regard, we
express our shock and condemnation in the strongest
terms regarding the heinous crime committed in Mopti
on 23 March that resulted in the killing of nearly
160 people. We call upon the Government of Mali to
undertake the necessary investigations concerning this
crime. We express our condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people and the Government of Mali.
We also wish speedy recovery for the injured persons.
I would like to touch upon the following issues in
my statement: the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation, the security situation and the
humanitarian affairs.
With regard to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, I would like to note that, during the
previous Security Council meeting on Mali, which was
convened in January (see S/PV.8445), we welcomed
the positive steps taken to implement the agreement, in
particular the establishment of provisional authorities
at the district level in Kidal, Ménaka and Timbuktu. We
also welcomed accelerating the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). But the pace
of progress is not at the appropriate and expected level.
As reported by an independent observer — The Carter
Center — we are halfway in the implementation of
the agreement. We urge all parties to intensify their
efforts to ensure its implementation. Continuing delay
in the peace process will not only lead to prolonging
the crisis; it will also encourage terrorist groups to
continue their activities.
The commitment of all parties to the cease-fire
agreement since 2017 and to the peace process
represented by the Pact for Peace, which was signed in
October 2018, is very positive. National ownership of
the peace process is essential, and the United Nations
must support that aspect. We call on the parties to now
implement all the requirements of the Pact for Peace
in a comprehensive manner. We also encourage them
to prioritize the requirements of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation. There is a need for many
reforms, especially constitutional reform. Those steps
are essential to building trust among all parties. We call
on the Government to complete its efforts specifically
in the area of establishing a national consultation
framework. We welcome the steps taken to launch
that process.

S/PV. 8497

With regard to the DDR process, we welcome the
steps taken to reform the security sector and restructure
of the Malian defence and security forces, which will
be crucial steps in strengthening Government control
over many areas that suffer from the proliferation of
terrorist groups across the country. All parties must
agree on the numbers of those linked to the signatories
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation who will
join the national forces.
We are concerned about the security situation
following the increase in the number of attacks in the
country since the beginning of the year — a threat
not limited to Mali but also faced by neighbouring
countries and all parts of the Sahel region. On
17 March, we witnessed a terrorist attack targeting a
military base in central Mali that killed 23 soldiers.
Therefore, steps must be taken to combat terrorist
threats. That is a role to be performed by the Malian
national forces to implement the Government’s latest
plan on the situation in central Mali, as well as by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) to combat violent extremism in the border areas,
especially because combating violent extremism is not
within the mandate of MINUSMA. However, we call on
the two forces to use the expertise of the Mission and
support it in accordance with resolution 2391 (2017).
We stress the need to fully activate the Joint Force and
the importance of ensuring sustainable funding for it.
The security situation in the country is dangerous,
and MINUSMA deserves appreciation given the
environment in which it operates. As the Force
Commander told the Mission, there are nearly 18
attacks each month by improvised explosive devices.
He also stated that the Mission had improved its
capabilities to be able to address half the attacks it had
been subjected to. We commend that effort to confront
the security challenges.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
deteriorating security situation in Mali has continued
and it reflects negatively on the humanitarian issue.
The activities of terrorists in central and northern Mali
have contributed to the displacement of 129,000 people,
whereas nearly 2.5 million people are in need of food.
Many schools are closed and humanitarian challenges
persist throughout the country. Therefore, the
Government of Mali and the Governments of the region
must cooperate with humanitarian workers to ensure
that assistance reaches those in need. Kuwait appreciates
the role played by the Office for the Coordination of

19-0904219/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

Humanitarian Affairs to alleviate the suffering of the
Malian people. We urge the Government to make every
effort to open schools. Young people play an important
role in stabilizing the country in the long run.
Development plays a key role in avoiding conflict,
as it creates hope for the people and constitutes an
important element in dissuading them from joining
terrorist groups. We are pleased to see the work
done by the Government in that regard. We call on
MINUSMA to support it and the priority action plan
for the G-5 Sahel, the 2063 Agenda of the African
Union and the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. We reiterate our position that implementing
all those strategies and achieving all their objectives is
something that promotes stability.
In conclusion, I welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/207) on the implementation of paragraph
4 of resolution 2423 (2018), on the assessment of
progress made in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation. The report provides an
overview of the current situation. We must now consider
the next steps to be taken pertaining to the renewal of
the Mission’s mandate. We will be closely monitoring
developments over the next few months, and we hope
that progress will be made during that period.
I would like to end my statement by expressing my
sincere gratitude to the peacekeepers participating in
the Mission in Mali. I commend their important role in
supporting the peace process and ensuring the safety
and security of the Malian people.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Mali and the other ministers who are
attending this afternoon’s meeting.
The search for peace and reconciliation in Mali
continues to face great challenges due to ongoing
conflict among armed groups, intercommunal violence
and delays in implementing essential parts of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. However,
we recognize and commend the progress made in the
implementation of some areas of the Agreement, in
particular with regard to the establishment of interim
authorities, the launch of an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, the
resumption of the constitutional review process and
the convening of consultations with human rights
and civil society organizations on draft legislation for
national agreement.
20/27

29/03/2019

However, we regret the slow pace of implementation
of some essential areas of the agreement, such as
reform of the security sector and the establishment of a
northern development zone in Mali, among others. That
lack of progress in implementing fundamental areas of
the agreement contributes to the Malian people’s loss
of confidence and hope for change in their efforts to
live in a nation of lasting peace and opportunities. We
urge the Government and the Platform coalition of
armed groups to continue their joint efforts to move
forward the implementation of the agreement, for the
welfare and progress of their own people. Moreover,
we call for the necessary resources to be provided so
that the interim authorities can effectively fulfil their
commitment to implementing the agreements endorsed
in resolution 2423 (2018).
The Dominican Republic expresses its concern
about the prevailing security situation in northern and
central Mali, as well as intercommunal violence and
the attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against the
Malian defence and security forces, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), international forces and the civilian
population, in particular women and children. In that
context, we commend the efforts of MINUSMA and the
Government in combating impunity, and we welcome
the inauguration of the regional office in Kidal of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission.
We strongly condemn the deaths of 18 soldiers
and the injuries inflicted on 77 other members of the
peacekeeping forces in the past six months, as well as
the attack perpetrated in the town of Mopti, in central
Mali, during which more than 70 people lost their
lives. We express our condolences to the families of the
victims. We hope that no effort is spared to identify and
bring to justice the perpetrators of those attacks.
The Dominican Republic firmly believes that the
inclusion of women has great potential to transform
societies and contribute to peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome President Keita’s efforts to increase
the number of women in decision-making positions.
We advocate continued efforts, such as the introduction
of quota systems, in order to achieve meaningful and
equitable representation in all areas of decision-making.
In that same vein, we believe that young people
must participate in stabilization efforts in Mali. The
determination of young people and their projects for
consolidating peace create a multiplier effect in their
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

communities. In that regard, we support the efforts made
by UNICEF, UNESCO, the International Organization
for Migration and the United Nations Development
Programme to actively involve young Malians in the
implementation process of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. No society can prosper and no peace
agreement can last if women and young people are not
empowered to play a part in consolidating peace and
rebuilding the nation.
Allow me to turn to the adverse effects of climate
change as a multiplier factor of the fragile internal
situation of Mali. That is nothing new. Mali has spent
years dealing with recurring climate-related events,
such as droughts and variable levels of rainfall, for
which herders and farmers have paid a high price, as
well as the majority of Malians, who depend on such
economic activities for a living.
Climate vulnerability in Mali, a landlocked country
with a particularly arid area of territory, together with
its extremely fragile, violent and insecure domestic
situation, jeopardizes the scope of the country’s
development and a peaceful future for its population.
Of particular concern to us is the humanitarian situation
triggered by the convergence of all those elements,
particularly food insecurity and a lack of access to
water resources.
However, we also believe that that represents
a major opportunity. A better understanding of the
risks associated with climate change that are directly
affecting the security situation in the country is the
primary duty of the Security Council and, in particular,
of MINUSMA. We must work hand in hand with the
Government of Mali and its relevant institutions to
establish mechanisms for assessing risks and designing
plans and strategies to strengthen the resilience of the
most affected sectors. In that context, we must also
establish information and cooperation channels with
local communities in order to expand early-warning
mechanisms that contribute to joint planning for the
impact of those climatic shifts. All of those elements
must be aligned with the multidimensional approach of
MINUSMA, while meeting Mali’s national priorities of
resilience and sustainable development.
To conclude, the Dominican Republic commends
the work of MINUSMA and the various national and
international actors that come together in Mali to bring
peace and stability to the country and other bordering
States in the region. Moreover, we are convinced

S/PV. 8497

that, in order to overcome the challenges facing Mali,
we will need a comprehensive strategy to implement
processes that can make progress on issues related to
peace, development, climate change and security, with
the equal participation of women and young people.
Only then, by investing in the different areas of change
in Malian society, will the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community be able to
bring lasting peace to Mali and ensure the sustainable
development of its people.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very
important meeting, as well as the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing on the current situation in
Mali. I would also like to extend our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annandif, and, of course, to all
MINUSMA personnel on the ground. In that same vein,
I would like to sincerely welcome His Excellency Prime
Minister Maïga and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs. I
thank the Prime Minister for recently hosting us in her
beautiful country.
We gather here today following a visit by the Security
Council visiting mission to Mali and Burkina Faso last
week. That visit has been useful to us in discussing and
envisioning a way forward with regard to supporting
the peace process and development in Mali. We saw
the sincere commitment of the Government of Mali
to protecting the interests of its people. The Council
and the international community must therefore give it
their full support. In addition, allow me to share three
pertinent points.
First, the progress achieved in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation is
commendable. Indeed, there is some progress, including
the continued establishment of interim authorities, as
well as a disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and integration process. Yet there are many areas that
require further hard work and accelerated progress.
The constitutional reform and the reconstitution
and redeployment of defence and security forces, as
well as the establishment of a northern development
zone, are the areas in which Indonesia believes that
progress is of the utmost importance. We appreciate
the seriousness of the Government to that end through
its creation of the Ministry of National Reconciliation
and Social Cohesion, the key word being reconciliation.

19-0904221/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

In addition, we would like to reiterate our view that
constitutional reform, in particular, is crucial for the
success of the agreement. We hope that it will continue
to progress in a meaningful and inclusive manner.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation, particularly in the north
and centre of Mali. As detailed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/262), there have been an
increasing number of attacks by terrorist groups
targeting the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Malian defence and security forces and other
international forces serving in Mali. Insecurity in Mali
has caused distress among the civilian population and
has altered their livelihoods and other basic services in
certain regions.
There has also been an increase in civilian casualties.
Just last week, during our visit to which many have
alluded in this Chamber, intercommunal violence
resulted in the death of more than 160 people and
injured approximately 75 others. We condemn any
attack on civilians or peacekeepers and reiterate our
sincere condolences and prayers for the victims.
In that regard, we would once again like to
reiterate the importance of strengthening the capacity
of MINUSMA and Malian law enforcement. We
welcome the launch of a campaign to protect civilians
by MINUSMA, which has facilitated the reconciliation
process among communities. We also commend the
series of community dialogues on addressing the
conflict. We believe that such confidence-building,
facilitation, mediation and community-engagement
measures could enhance the ability of MINUSMA to
protect civilians and should therefore be promoted.
While in Mali, I had the opportunity to speak
with Indonesian peacekeepers serving in Bamako
and Timbuktu and I heard praise and many positive
stories from the people of Mali regarding the role of
MINUSMA in helping the civilian population, which is
a noble cause of which we should all be proud.
Thirdly, the progress achieved should translate into
improved living conditions for the population of Mali.
The situation in Mali has not only had an impact on the
daily lives of the Malian people in terms of loss of life
and livelihood — it will also be hard for Mali to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals without resources,
assistance and understanding from the international
22/27

29/03/2019

community. We are ready to share experience and
capacity-building in that regard.
I would also like to underline that, now more
than ever, we, the international community, must
pledge our solidarity to, and show our support for, the
Malian people, not only by supporting United Nations
resolutions but also by concretely supporting Malian
economic development efforts. In our humble way, we
have contributed Indonesian peacekeepers to Mali in
the past and will continue to do so in the future. As
the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting
is being held in the next room, I would like to once
again reiterate our pledge to provide a long-range
reconnaissance patrol unit to MINUSMA, which would
constitute over 200 personnel.
All of the points on which I have elaborated should
be kept in mind when we consider MINUSMA’s
mandate renewal in June. As we heard during our visit
to Mali, MINUSMA remains a necessary presence in
the country. If MINUSMA were absent, there would be
instability and loss of human life not only in Mali but
also in neighbouring countries. Therefore, the future
configuration and possible adjustment of MINUSMA
should take into account the latest developments, aim
to prevent further deterioration and have the ultimate
objective of ensuring lasting stability in Mali.
In conclusion, I would like to quote an old
proverb from the people of Mali: “One finger cannot
lift anything”. We now need the many fingers of the
international community to lend a hand in helping to
create a safe and prosperous Mali, which will contribute
to peace in the Sahel region. Our heart is with the
people of Mali.
The President (spoke in French): Before giving
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye
Maïga, I would like to add an additional comment to
my initial statement. Since we have also talked about
the role of women in the new Government structures of
Mali, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Ms. Kamissa Camara.
I now give the floor to the Prime Minister of Mali.
Mr. Maïga (Mali) (spoke in French): On behalf of
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, my delegation and I extend to
you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations on the
assumption of your country, France, to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. Rest
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

assured of the full cooperation of my country in
that regard.
I would also like to wish every success to South
Africa, Indonesia, the Dominican Republic, Belgium
and Germany in fulfilling their mandate as new
members of the Council. I take this opportunity to
congratulate and thank the delegations of Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Sweden and the Netherlands for
their contribution to the pursuit of international peace
and security.
This meeting gives me the welcome opportunity
to convey to all Security Council members, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and all United Nations staff
who deal with Mali the deep appreciation of President
Keita and the Government and people of Mali for their
continued commitment to peace and security in Mali,
the Sahel and the rest of the world.
My delegation and the Malian people would
like to express our deepest sympathies to the troopcontributing countries in Mali and the United Nations
family and offer our deepest condolences to them for
the loss of the peacekeepers who died honourably by
the bullets of the enemies of peace.
In accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
2423 (2018) and in reference to its paragraph 4 and
the assessment of the results achieved under the Pact
for Peace, I would like to report on the progress made
by the Government of Mali six months after President
Keita’s oath of office, during which he committed to
keeping Mali firmly on its way out of the crisis.
My delegation takes note of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/262) and welcomes the clarity of his
briefing and his updates on the developments in my
country. We also take note of the observations and the
high expectations set out in the report.
At the outset, I would like to assure Council
members that the President of the Republic of Mali,
the Government, the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad, the Platform coalition of armed groups
of 14 June 2014 and all the groups associated with
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process remain fully
committed to the diligent and inclusive implementation
of its provisions.
The establishment of a Ministry to oversee the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation has made it possible to consolidate

S/PV. 8497

cooperation between the Government and signatory
parties. It has also promoted the inclusion of all other
groups that have accepted the Agreement. Today, all of
those groups recognize each other as Malian parties.
The mention of that cohesion in the report under
consideration is cause for my delegation’s satisfaction.
As the Council is certainly aware, presidential
elections were held on 29 July and 12 August last
year in peaceful conditions. President Keita, who
was re-elected with more than 67 per cent of the
vote, was sworn in on 4 September last year. I wish
to note the remarkable contribution of the signatory
parties and those associated with the Agreement to the
smooth running of the electoral process. They played
an important role in fostering a peaceful climate by
providing security support to the process in every area
in which they were present. Their positive involvement
sufficiently demonstrates their strong commitment to
work alongside the Government in implementing the
provisions of the Agreement.
I would also like to acknowledge the important role
that the United Nations Multidimensional Mission for
Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA) played throughout
the electoral process. The Mission provided us with
essential financial, logistical and technical support to
ensure the success of the voting process and a peaceful
electoral climate. Its cooperation with the management
bodies of the electoral process, its participation in
securing voting operations and the training that it
provided to various political and social stakeholders on
the prevention of election-related violence significantly
contributed to the success of the presidential elections.
My delegation would therefore like to take this
opportunity as we consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral to express our sincere thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his exemplary work and contribution
to the holding of peaceful presidential elections.
Since its establishment, the Government has
accelerated the implementation of the provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
particularly with regard to institutional reforms and
security arrangements. In that connection, the Head
of State has instructed us to initiate a consensual
and inclusive process for constitutional review and
institutional reform. The process leading to the
adoption of a new constitution through a referendum
has begun with the establishment of a committee
of experts, which started work on 16 February. The

19-0904223/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

committee is responsible for reviewing previously
drafted constitutional reforms and the provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It
will also take developments in Malian political life into
account and conduct wide-ranging consultations at the
national level.
In order to carry out its mandate, the committee has
met with all parties — the signatory movements and
movements associated with the agreement, trade unions,
youth, women, traditional and religious authorities and
civil society organizations. The few stakeholders with
whom meetings could not be arranged have had their
contributions acknowledged. In support of the experts’
work, the Government of Mali has set up a national
framework for dialogue that brings together political
parties, the signatory and associated movements and
civil society organizations.
Finally, to strengthen the consensual nature of the
constitutional review, the President recently initiated
meetings with all leaders of the majority and the
opposition to gather their views on the national situation
and their proposals for the revitalization of Malian
social and political life, based a common understanding
of the major problems facing our nation.
While the Government is conducting constitutional
and institutional reforms, it is also accelerating
the implementation of the decentralization and
regionalization processes. The new territorial
collectivities code and the law on the conditions of
the free administration of territorial collectivities,
promulgated on 2 October 2017, laid a solid foundation
for administrative reform and decentralization. Those
laws determine the election of municipal, departmental
and regional councillors through direct universal
suffrage, as well as the transfer of 30 per cent of State
budget revenues to local authorities. Nineteen decrees
setting out the details of the powers transferred from
the State to the collectivities have been adopted.
The implementation of those measures increased
the transfer rate of budgetary revenue to more than
21 per cent in 2019. Therefore, the amount of transferred
resources doubled between 2015 and 2019, an increase
of more than $190 million. In addition to the resources
and loans earmarked for the decentralized Government
departments — whose transfer to local authorities was
provided for in the framework of the agreement — the
transfer rate will be even higher than the prescribed
rate of 30 per cent.
24/27

29/03/2019

On 20 February, the Government also adopted a
decree on the transfer of decentralized services from
the State to territorial collectivities, in line with article
14 of the agreement. That transfer makes it possible
to provide basic social services to the population,
particularly in the areas of education, health and water
and sanitation. It also creates conditions conducive
to regional development, particularly in the areas
of agriculture, local taxation, youth employment
and energy.
I am pleased that the report of the SecretaryGeneral has found that the percentage of civil servants
and other State officials in the north and central regions
increased slightly in the past six months. With regard
to the interim authorities, their presence throughout
all of the northern regions of Mali has enabled the
establishment of a framework for the provision of basic
social services to the population. In order to inaugurate
and operationalize those authorities, the State budget
has mobilized just over $45 million.
Those achievements, while encouraging, cannot
mean we lose sight of the extreme volatility of the
security environment in which the Malian authorities
are working. The terrorist threat continues to spread
from the north to the centre of the country and is
complicating the implementation of the agreement.
Terrorist groups are inciting, sustaining and
exacerbating intercommunal violence by reviving
long-standing disputes and secular rivalries. To
counter those emerging threats, the Government of
Mali has developed and implemented an integrated
security plan to strengthen security measures for the
country’s central regions, including the deployment
of 13,000 personnel and the creation of 16 new
security posts in 2018, as well as social mobilization
efforts, labour-intensive employment opportunities,
income-generating activities for women and youth and
outreach programmes promoting social cohesion.
The Government also launched an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process on 6 November 2018 in Gao, Timbuktu and
Kidal. That operation concerns the elements of the
joint operational mechanism and has enabled the
registration and disarmament of more than 1,400 out
of the expected 1,600 combatants, all hailing from
the two signatory movements to the agreement and
other armed groups that have accepted it. That process
will continue to accommodate an additional 417 excombatants. Those soldiers will receive training under
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

the auspices of the Ministry of Defence, MINUSMA
and the European Union, after which they will be
assigned roles in providing security for the remainder
of the DDR process in an environment that — as the
Council recognizes — is a challenging one.
Between February 2018 and March 2019, more than
74,405 combatants were pre-registered by the DDR
Commission, 23,427 of whom were carrying weapons.
Furthermore, 17,000 of them met the eligibility criteria
to participate in the DDR process. I am grateful to
MINUSMA for its collaboration, which contributed
greatly to the success of that process, as well as to
the World Bank, which provided $15 million for the
reintegration of the first 4,000 ex-combatants to be
demobilized. Meanwhile, we have also carried out a
disarmament programme in central Mali to reduce
intercommunal violence, during which 1,500 elements
were identified. In the coming weeks, they will be
joining the Soufouroulaye camp, near Mopti, to undergo
various tests.
Regarding the process of security sector reform,
the Government organized a high-level workshop
in Bamako from 12 to 14 December 2018 at which
consensus was reached with the signatory movements,
particularly with regard to the reconstitution of the
army, special units and territorial police. In accordance
with the provisions of the agreement, the Government
recalled former elements of the Malian armed forces,
505 of whom have to date returned to the defence and
security forces. The issue of quotas continues to be
under discussion with the signatory movements.
Thanks to the support of the European Union,
the European Union Capacity Building Mission in
Mali and the European Union Training Mission in
Mali, the Malian defence and security forces continue
their capacity-building efforts while focusing their
deployment in the north. The Government has also
decided to establish a border protection force in order
to better monitor Mali’s seven borders.
We have also undertaken efforts to create
an environment conducive to development and
humanitarian action. Despite difficult conditions, the
Government maintained an economic growth level of
5.3 per cent and reduced the budget deficit from 2.9 per
cent in 2017 to 2.5 per cent in 2018.
With regard to the implementation of the
specific strategy for the development of the northern
regions, the instrumental nature of the sustainable

S/PV. 8497

development fund should be noted. As part of the fund’s
operationalization, various legislative texts relating to
its creation, organization and management methods
were adopted between February and November 2018.
Pending the fund’s effective operationalization, the
Government has mobilized $20 million to finance
urgent priority expenditures in the regions of Kidal,
Ménaka, Timbuktu and Gao.
The Malian people cherish the values ​​of freedom,
dignity and solidarity, which constitute our moral
compass. It is our commitment to those values ​​that has
motivated our country, for more than five decades, to
participate in peacekeeping missions both in Africa and
beyond the continent. From 1960 until very recently,
Mali provided more than 2,000 personnel — soldiers,
military and police officers — who have been deployed
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Haiti,
Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Darfur,
Liberia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone.
For more than half a century, our country has
responded without hesitation or premeditation every
time it has been called upon, whether to bring peace
to territories in conflict or to help implement a return
to normalcy and stability, reinstate democracy, rebuild
national cohesion and restore dialogue between
communities that have been torn apart. In all our
interventions, we have accomplished what we consider
to be our sacred duty as a nation of peace and harmony.
When it was our turn to face a terrible tragedy, we,
too, were met with steadfast commitment on the part of
other friendly nations. In the liberation of the northern
regions, the restoration of our territorial integrity
and the enhanced security of our populations, our
country has benefited from international solidarity on
a tremendous scale. We will never be able to thank our
friends and partners enough for their solidarity, which
was demonstrated most recently when our country
suffered two terrible tragedies in the space of a week.
We witnessed unprecedented barbarity on 17 March,
when 23 of our soldiers died during a terrorist attack
on their camp in the village of Dioura. Then again,
on 23 March, the horror reached new heights with the
massacre of more than 150 inhabitants of the village of
Ogossagou. Those events serve to underline once more
the need for mobilization and extreme vigilance in our
fight to safeguard the future of our nation. The events
at Ogossagou and Dioura generated an impressive wave
of compassion and solidarity around the world, which
showed our citizens that they have not been abandoned.

19-0904225/27

S/PV.8497

The situation in Mali

29/03/2019

All those committed to restoring peace and security in
our country under those circumstances have declared
themselves to be Malians, as per the touching words of
the Secretary-General.

forces carrying out that mission are essential. I refer to
the Barkhane force and the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, alongside which MINUSMA
plays an indispensable complementary role.

On behalf of President Keita and the Government
and the people of Mali, I would like to convey our
gratitude for all the expressions of sympathy bestowed
upon us. To our friends and to our partners, I would like
to reiterate our determination to pursue our unrelenting
fight against the terrorist and extremist groups — be
they faceless or a thousand faces — that will not cease in
their attempts to destroy our democratic and republican
institutions and the cohesion and secular coexistence
of our societies. By all means, we will ensure that the
persons responsible for those massacres will be brought
to justice.

Terrorist groups have experienced major setbacks
in recent months. That has opened a window of
opportunity to push them back further and is grounds
for the maintenance of MINUSMA in order to fully
exploit that opportunity. More broadly, all forces must
be mobilized to prevent the transfer of foreign terrorist
fighters to our country, which would only increase the
threat in the Sahel and allow it to spread to new areas,
starting with countries in the Gulf of Guinea, such as
Ghana, Togo, Benin and Côte d’Ivoire.

The United Nations is among the partners that has
been involved in safeguarding our country since the
very earliest stages of the 2012 crisis. The Council has
repeatedly reaffirmed its conviction that restoring and
preserving peace in the world and managing the global
security of our planet require solidarity and mutual
assistance from which no nation is exempt. That is why
I would like to stress the importance attached by all
Malian stakeholders to maintaining MINUSMA and
building its capacities so that it can continue to assist
the ongoing peace process.
Initiatives to reduce the budget of MINUSMA
or to downscale or reconfigure its mandate run the
risk of jeopardizing the fragile progress already
achieved. Indeed, for the first time since its signing,
the agreement has made significant headway and a
genuine impetus has been launched. To sustain that
momentum, we require the full support of MINUSMA,
which is constantly working with the signatory groups
and those involved in the agreement’s implementation
to facilitate the establishment of the DDR process and
the interim authorities, inter alia.
Today MINUSMA provides vital services to the
most vulnerable populations pending the effective
reconstruction of the Malian State, and therefore plays
a key role in stabilizing the country. Reducing the
resources available to MINUSMA will therefore have
extremely negative consequences for our economic
situation, leading to the strengthening of terrorist
groups and the further deterioration of the situation.
Similarly, although MINUSMA does not play a direct
role in counter-terrorism activity, its support for the
26/27

Mali welcomes the high level of attention the
Security Council has afforded to the developments in
our country. It is precisely that constant attention from
the Council that impels us to express our concerns
about the security situation in the Sahelo-Saharan zone.
President Keita has solemnly emphasized on several
occasions that Mali is on the front line in the global
mission to counter terrorism in the Sahel. Our country
serves as a buffer zone for the terrorist threat, whose
size and capacity should not be underestimated. That
is why our Head of State has called upon our partners
to not let their guard down with regard to Mali. During
his tenure as President of the G-5 Sahel, he took the
initiative to accelerate the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.
The results we have already obtained require the
staunch support of all our partners through the effective
provision of the pledges made at the Nouakchott
conference on 6 December 2018. While reiterating
Mali’s gratitude for the surge in solidarity expressed
at that event, I reiterate the call of the G-5 Sahel Heads
of State for predictable and sustainable funding for the
activities of the Joint Force.
Recent events have shown that the risks and threats
posed by terrorist and criminal groups are now not only
cross-border but also multidimensional and dynamic.
Those risks and threats are also apparent well beyond
the borders of Mali. The measures taken to neutralize
them, however, are rendered less effective by the
intrinsic limitations of the current international peace
and security architecture.
We cannot ignore the fact that the expansion of
terrorist and criminal groups does not threaten the
Sahelo-Saharan region alone but could very soon spread
19-09042

29/03/2019

The situation in Mali

throughout the entire West African region. We now
need to see solidarity with the States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that
are not members of the G-5 Sahel. Mali therefore calls
upon the Security Council to consider ways to involve
those States in MINUSMA capacity-building and in
support for the actions of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is
important to stress that new initiatives for consideration
with the increased involvement of ECOWAS should not
replace or duplicate the work already being carried
out by MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel. The aim is to
put flexible and effective arrangements and structures
in place to bolster the fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
In the difficult circumstances we are experiencing,
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Mali and
the Malian people, I wish to recognize the outstanding
work done by MINUSMA, under the leadership of
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary General for Mali and Head of the Mission.
We are also extremely grateful to the French
forces of Operation Barkhane, all MINUSMA troopcontributing countries and all other multilateral and
bilateral partners for their ongoing commitment to
finding a lasting and definitive solution to the crisis
in our country. Our thoughts at this time go to those
courageous friendly troops who lost their lives in the
conflict. Their sacrifices have sealed an everlasting
blood pact between our peoples.
In conclusion, I would say that we need to put
things into perspective. Seven years ago, the very
existence of our country was under threat. Much of
Mali’s territory was controlled by terrorist groups,
the State was on the brink of collapse and our people
were suffering grievously. Today, largely thanks to
the enormous investment made by the international
community, primarily through MINUSMA, the
leadership of President Keita and the determination
of the Malian people, Mali has recovered its dignity
and re-established itself as a nation. The jihadists have
retreated, the security situation is generally improved,
a historic peace agreement has been signed and the
State-building process continues.

S/PV. 8497

However, we must remain realistic. While progress
has been made in terms of the situation in 2013, it
nonetheless continues to be of particular concern.
The jihadist threat persists despite military successes,
especially in central Mali, where ancestral rivalries
are being exploited to inflict extreme suffering on the
population, as the tragic events of 23 March cruelly
reminded us. The implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, despite our tireless
efforts and the progress made, remains slow and
fragile — too fragile for us to let down our guard, too
fragile for the international community to withdraw
and too fragile for us to consider that our work is done.
I speak solemnly when I say that Mali is at a
crossroads today. Two paths await us — either peace
will take root so that socioeconomic development can
finally be established throughout the country, or we will
fall back into insecurity and political instability. The
risk is genuine and the whole international community
must be fully aware of it.
All our efforts on every level are now aimed at
ensuring that Mali takes the first path — the path of
stability, peace and development. As the Council is
aware, MINUSMA and, broadly speaking, the entire
international community, play a central role in the
fragile equilibrium and the current progress being made.
Therefore, any withdrawal will be interpreted as a sign
of weakness by our common enemies and will carry a
high risk of dealing a fatal blow to the already laborious
and complex implementation of the agreement.
Mali’s success will be a victory for the international
community, just as Mali’s failure will be a defeat for it.
What is at stake in Mali, as we all know, is of global
significance. Today, therefore, I make a solemn appeal
to maintain and strengthen international mobilization,
which, for us, constitutes a permanent source of
motivation and commitment. Thanks to international
solidarity, we have a reason to believe in peace and
stability — something that all of us owe to the peoples
of Mali and of the Sahel.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

19-0904227/27
