General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

118

5. In determining the forms of operation of the Financing System the experience gained in the operation
of the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development should be taken into account;
3. Takes note with great interest of the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the
United Nations Financinfi System for Science and Technology for Development 07 and, in particular, notes that,
in accordance with the criteria set forth in section VI, paragraph 3, of General Assembly resolution 34/218, the core
resources of the Financing System should amount to $200
million per annum for the period 1983- I 985;
4. Decides that the institutional arrangements should be
determined, inter alia, in the light of the magnitude of the
financial resources and the nature of operations of the Financing System;
5. Further decides that those institutional arrangements
shall be agreed during the transitional year, 1982, in accordance with the relevant provisions of section II of the
present resolution;

II
1. Decides that the year 1982 shall be considered the
transitional period of the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a Pledging Conference for the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development in the first
quarter of 1982 to receive pledges for the transitional year
and, in that context, urges all States to make generous contributions, bearing in mind the recommendations in that
regard of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the
United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development;
3. Decides that, without prejudice to the final agreement
on the long-term institutional and financial arrangements for
the Financing System, the general operational provisions
of the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, including its resources, organization and management, as well as the procedures set forth
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 34/218, will
apply and be transferred to the Financing System during the
transitional period;
4. Decides that an Ad Hoe Intergovernmental Group on
the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, open to the participation of all
States, should hold two sessions, the first, lasting one week,
from l to 5 March 1982, and the second, lasting two weeks,
from 12 to 23 April 1982, and further decides that the time
before and between those sessions should be fully utilized
for consultations in order to ensure the successful conclusion
of the work of the Group;
5. Urges Governments to ensure that representation at
those two sessions shall be at a high level and include experts
in the field of finance;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Intergovernmental Group to
prepare its recommendations on the institutional, organizational and financial arrangements for the Financing System and to submit them to the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development at its fourth
session;
7. Requests the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development to submit its recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council,

to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session for
consideration and decision.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/185.

Report of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 ( XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling further its resolutions 34/110 of 14 December
1979 and 35/68 of 5 December 1980 on the report of the
World Food Council and 35/69 of 5 December 1980 on the
situation of food and agriculture in Africa,
Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action, as adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 108
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution
1981171 of 24 July 1981 on food and agriculture,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government and people
of Yugoslavia for the excellent facilities and generous hospitality provided to the World Food Council at its seventh
ministerial session,
Noting that the World Food Council emphasized the need
to adopt, according to priorities identified in the field of
food, comprehensive national and international measures
with a view to realizing the aims and objectives of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade in the promotion of food and
agricultural development in the developing countries,
Recognizing that a substantial increase in the export earnings of developing countries is essential for adequate financing of their over-all economic development and their
imports of food and agricultural inputs,
Expressing concern that trade barriers constitute a serious
handicap to the efforts of developing countries, in particular,
to realize their economic potential, and of the international
community to overcome recession and inflation and expand
over-all productivity,
Noting, in that context, the need for adoption by all countries of policies designed to avoid disruption of international
trade and to facilitate access to international markets of
agricultural exports, particularly those from developing
countries,
Noting with great concern that the food situation remains
extremely precarious for many developing countries despite
significant increases in production and improved distribution
in some countries ir. the past year,
Noting also with great concern the growing hunger and
malnutrition in many developing countries, especially in the
least developed countries, particularly those in Africa,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that a substantial
part of world resources, material as well as human, contin'"" See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report
of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development.

107

See A/CN.11121. part one.

Rome, 12-20 July 1979 (WCARRDIREP). part one; transmitted to the
members of the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
iArl4/485).

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ues to be diverted to armaments with a detrimental effect
on international security and on efforts to achieve the new
international economic order, including the solution of food
problems, and calling upon Governments to take effective
measures in the field of real disarmament that would increase
the possibilities of allocation of the resources now being
used for military purposes to economic and social development, especially development of developing countries.
and to upgrading their food conditions.
1. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations of
the World Food Council as adopted at its seventh ministerial
session, 109 and calls upon all Governments and appropriate
international organizations to give earnest attention to their
implementation;
2. Expresses its concern at the critical deterioration of
the food outlook for many developing countries in the 1980s,
especially in the least developed countries and particularly
those in Africa, and affirms that international efforts should
be intensified to support improved production of food in
developing countries;
3. Recognizes that the long-term solution to the problems of food and agriculture in the developing countries
depends on increased self-sufficiency in food as part of the
over-all development of those countries within the framework of structural changes in international economic relations;
4. Reaffirms the strong commitment of the international
community to overcoming hunger and malnutrition and, in
that context, the need for more effective international action
to support agricultural development and food production
and distribution in developing countries. particularly in lowincome countries with food deficits;
5. Calls upon the Governments concerned to implement
agrarian reform and rural development within the framework
of their national plans and objectives and in accordance with
the recommendations as adopted by the World Conference
on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development; 108
6. Notes with deep concern that only limited progress
has been achieved towards the solution of the Jong-standing
problems of international trade in agricultural products, including access to international markets of agricultural exports, which adversely affect production and exports,
particularly of developing countries, and the solution of
which could make an important contribution to improving
over-all food production in the world;
7. Calls for urgent action in the different negotiating
forums to move towards the approval and implementation
of proposals to bring about the reduction and elimination
of barriers to trade in agricultural products, in particular in
relation to those of export interest to developing countries,
and thus to facilitate, inter alia. more efficient patterns of
production;
8. Urges developed countries to make their best efforts
to adjust those sectors of their agricultural and manufacturing economies which require protection against exports
from developing countries, thus facilitating access to the
markets of food and agricultural products;
9. Recommends that the generalized system of preferences should be expanded to cover a wider range of processed and semi-processed products and, whenever possible,
agricultural commodities, and that the system of information
on using the generalized system of preferences, by providing
technical assistance-including assistance in the field of
research, development and marketing-should be enlarged
and improved to enable developing countries to take full
advantage of such preferences;
109

Official Records of the General Assemhlv, Thirt_v-sixth Session. Sup-

plement No. /9 (A/36/19). part one.

119

I0. Reaffirms that food is a universal human right which
Governments endeavour to guarantee their people and, in
that context, stresses its belief in the general principle that
food should not be used as an instrument of political
pressure;
11. Reaffirms that developing countries, in the context
of their national development plans and priorities, firmly
supported by the international community, should take all
necessary measures to accelerate food and agricultural production in order to improve national and collective selfsufficiency as early as possible;
12. Calls upon the international community to support
the national efforts of developing countries to increase their
food and agricultural production by increased technical and
capital assistance, in particular for the food-sector strategics
that have already been adopted by interested developing
countries, within the context of national plans and policies,
and the recognition that food strategies and policies remain
the concern of the countries adopting them;
13. Reiterates its belief that food aid for the least developed countries should be provided. in so far as possible.
in the form of grants or on highly concessional terms and
that donors should consider p<'yiag relevant transport costs;
14. Expresses its satisfaction at the growing number of
countries that are adopting a more integrated approach to
food policy, including food-sector strategies, as one of the
means for interested developing countries to translate their
own priorities into effective action and to mobilize, within
the context of their national plans and priorities, increased
technical and financial resources and co-operation from international development assistance agencies;
15. Reaffirms that, in the context of national development plans and priorities, effective policies and incentives
should continue to be pursued and invigorated with a vie·,.,
to accelerating food and agricultural development;
16. Takes note of the renewal of the Food Aid Convention, and calls upon existing and new donor countries
to achieve without delay the minimum target of the 1974
World Food Conference 110 of IO million tons of cereal aid,
as agreed upon by the General Assembly in relevant
decisions;
17. Takes note of the attainment of the minimum target
of 500,000 tons of grain for the International Emergency
Food Reserve in 1981 and expresses its appreciation to those
countries whose contributions have made this possible;
18. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on Food
Aid Policies and Programmes to carry out a review of food
aid requirements in the 1980s. in the context of paragraph
88 of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, which calls for urgent
consideration to be given to a revision of the target of the
Food Aid Convention. taking into account the estimated
requirements of 17 to 18.5 million tons of cereals, which
provide a useful indicator of the over-all requirement of
food aid by 1985, as agreed in the Strategy;
19. Urges developed countries, international institutions and others able to provide development assistance to
increase external assistance to the food sector, for which
the estimated necessary element of external assistance is
$8.3 billion, growing to $12.5 billion by 1990, both figures
at 1975 prices, to take urgent steps for the adequate and
equitable replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development, to conclude the sixth replenishment
of the International Development Association, and to grant
increased development assistance to the developing coun"" See R,,port o{ the World f'ood Cor!(erence. Rome, 5-/6 No,·emh,,,1974 I United Nation, puhlication. Sale, No. E. 7:UI.A.3)

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

120

tries in order to help them become self-sufficient at the
national or regional level in food production;
20. Requests the World Food Council to give further
consideration to a series of feasible measures which. taken
together, comprise a world food security net to ensure international market stability and continuity of world food
supplies, especially for developing countries. at reasonable
prices and on the conditions they can afford. and to make
recommendations thereon;
21. Calls upon all States to consider strengthening their
national food security within the framework of their national
priorities;
22. Urges the conclusion, as soon as possible, of a new
international wheat agreement that includes substantial economic provisions for safeguarding the interests of both exporters and importers and that recognizes the need for special
provisions for developing countries;
23. Welcomes the decision of the International Monetary Fund to integrate compensation for excesses in the costs
of cereal imports with that for shortfalls in receipts from
exports under the Fund's compensatory financing facilit:;;
24. Calls upon the international community to encourage and accord high priority to support for the efforts of
developing countries to strengthen and supplement their
programmes of mutual co-operation in the field of food and
agriculture;
25. Urges the World Food Council, in accordance with
its programme of work and within available resources, to
continue to support meetings requested by interested Governments at the national and regional levels in order to
facilitate the exchange of experience in the food sector;
26. Urges the World Food Council, within the context
of its mandate, to mobilize and sustain greater efforts in the
struggle to overcome hunger, to continue to review and
report on major problems and policy issues and the steps
being taken or proposed to resolve them, and to continue
to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism to provide over-all
integrated and continuing attention for the successful coordina~on and follow-up of policies concerning food production, nutrition, food security, food trade. food aid and
other related matters, by all organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system;
27. Urges the international community, in adopting
multilateral measures in the food sector, to take particularly
into account the problems and interests of food-producing
and food-exporting developing countries.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /9R/

36/186.

Situation of food and agriculture in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974. containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling the Programme of Action of the World Food
Conference, 111 containing the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition adopted by the
Conference, 112

111 Ibid.,
112

part one.
Ibid .. chap. I.

Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 111
Noting with concern that, over the past two decades, the
~ituation of food and agriculture in Africa has drastically
deteriorated, resulting in a decline in food production per
capita and a reduction in average dietary standards below
essential requirements.
Deeply concerned at the unabated encroachment of the
desert in many countries of Africa, which has continued to
accentuate the food problem on that continent,
Noting that a decision on food and agriculture was adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-sixth ordinary session. held at Addis
Ababa from 23 February to I March 1981.
Deeply concerned at the critical food shortages currently
affecting many countries in the African region, which necessitate a distressingly large allocation of the scarce foreign
exchange of those countries for the import of foodstuffs,
to the detriment of their over-all development,
Recognizing the commitment and determination of Africa
to devoting its limited resources on a priority basis to agricultural development in accordance with the Lagos Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy
for the EcGnomic Development of Africa, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, devoted to economic matters. held at Lagos on 28 and
29 April 1980, I 14
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development
of food and agricultural production lies primarily with the
developing countries themselves and that there is an increasing effort and growing commitment by the developing
countries to accelerate the development of their food and
agricultural sectors,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council. as a means for
interested developing countries to adopt an integrated approach for increasing food production, improving consumption and attracting the necessary additional international
resources,
Recognizing the central role of science and technology
in raising global agricultural productivity and output, as
well as the importance of appropriate infrastructure such as
storage facilities and a system of transport conducive to the
efficient distribution of agricultural products within each
country and throughout the African continent,
Recalling its resolution 35/108 of 5 December 1980 on
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Stressing that the current shortagis of foodstuffs demonstrate the continued vulnerability of many countries in
the region to food crises due, inter alia, to crop failure,
drought, soil erosion, low reserves and the high level of
post-harvest losses,
Recalling its resolution 35/69 of 5 December 1980, concerning the critical situation of food and agriculture m
Africa,
Noting that an important document on the problem of
fami11e in Africa was published jointly by the Organization
of African Unity and the Food and Agriculture Organization

11
' See Food and Agriculture Organizalion of the United Nations, Report
o( the World Conferenet· on Agrarian Reform and Rural Dei·elopment,
Rom,•, 12-20 Ju/_1· 1979 tWCARRD/REP). part one; transmitted to the
mcmhers of the General -\,scmhly hy a note of the Secretary-General (A/
"14/48.'i).

"' A/S-1 I.' 14. anne, I
