S/2019/780

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2019
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2435
(2018), by which the Council renewed the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the activities of the Mission every 90 days. The report
covers the period from 27 June to 26 September 2019.

II. Major developments
2.
During the reporting period, the President of Colombia, Iván Duque Márquez,
completed the first year of his administration. With regard to the peace process,
President Duque highlighted advances made in the implementation of the “Peace with
legality” strategy, among them the number of productive projects approved for former
combatants, the start of implementation of the development programmes with a
territorial focus, and his visits to the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration to reinforce trust with former combatants. These welcome efforts should
go hand in hand with additional progress in the implementation of the other aspects
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, a set of interconnected and mutually dependent commitments to bring peace,
security and development to communities affected by the conflict.
3.
On 29 August, in a video statement, the former lead negotiator of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to the Havana
peace talks, “Iván Márquez”, announced a return to armed struggle under the name
“FARC-EP,” arguing that the Colombian State had “betrayed” the peace agreement.
Surrounded by approximately 20 individuals, including the 5 ot her former FARC-EP
commanders against whom the Special Jurisdiction for Peace had already opened
non-compliance verification procedures for failing to uphold their responsibilities
under the peace agreement, he called upon FARC-EP dissidents to join the group and
announced its intention to seek to coordinate efforts with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN).
4.
The announcement was swiftly and emphatically rejected by all sectors of
society, State institutions and the international community, including the Mission. The
political party Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) immediately

19-16135 (E)

041019

*1916135*

S/2019/780

rejected the announcement, reaffirmed its commitment to the peace agreement and
initiated proceedings to expel from the party those appearing in the video. President
Duque condemned the announcement, stating that it was a threat from a criminal
group attempting to cover its illegal activities, including drug trafficking, under
ideological justifications. He further affirmed that the Government would continue to
support law-abiding former combatants. There were widespread expressions of
support from different sectors for the vast majority of former FARC -EP leaders and
combatants who remain committed to the peace process, and many calls for a
reinvigorated implementation of the peace agreement as a whole. The Government,
FARC party leaders and the Mission have since conducted visits to the reintegration
areas, jointly in most cases, to help to reassure former combatants and reiterate their
support for their reintegration efforts, including a visit led by President Duque to the
former territorial area for training and reintegration in Miravalle (Caquetá
Department) on 18 September.
5.
Elections will be held on 27 October to elect 3,306 local and departmental
officials, including governors, mayors and local council members, who will take
office on 1 January 2020. A recent spike in attacks against candidates from parties
across the political spectrum demonstrates the risks facing these first nationwide local
elections since the entry into force of the peace agreement. In a report in September,
the non-governmental Electoral Observation Mission confirmed 54 incidents of
electoral violence since the closing of the registration of candidates on 27 July,
comprising 7 killings, 5 attacks, 2 kidnappings and 40 threats. On 4 September, the
Ombudsman’s Office issued an early warning identifying 418 municipalities (36 per
cent of the total municipalities in Colombia) facing risks associated with the electoral
process, due mainly to the presence of illegal armed groups.
6.
On 26 August, under the leadership of the President of the National Committee
of the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence, Monsignor Héctor
Fabio Henao, and the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, 12 national
political parties, including FARC, signed the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign to reject violence and stigmatization
and promote dialogue and political rights in the context of the upcoming ele ctions.
President Duque, who signed the Pact as a witness, noted that Colombians were able
to come together when focusing on the interests of the nation. My Special
Representative also signed as a witness. Efforts are under way to sign and implement
similar pacts at the departmental and local levels, including through departmental and
municipal councils on peace, reconciliation and coexistence.
7.
On 20 July, the 2019/20 legislative session was inaugurated. President Duque
and the new presidents of both chambers stressed the importance of working towards
unity and national consensus. To date, the Government and members of Congress
have presented more than 440 bills and constitutional reforms, some of which are
related to key aspects of the peace agreement. I reiterate my call for all parties to
ensure that any proposed reforms are the result of inclusive dialogue, that they are
not applied retroactively and that they respect the spirit and integral nature of the
peace agreement.
8.
Congress is currently reviewing the bill on the national budget for 2020, which
must be approved before 20 October. Although the proposal does not include a
specific budget line on peace implementation, the Government included an annex
describing planned expenditures for each chapter of the pea ce agreement. It is
important to ensure that all ministries and entities entrusted with the implementation
of the peace process receive adequate funding. I therefore welcome the inclusion of
a 15 per cent increase for the Comprehensive System of Truth, Jus tice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition in the proposed budget.

2/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

9.
The implementation of the 16 development programmes with a territorial focus
continues, with the Government reporting more than 650 community projects
completed and more than 500 under way, benefiting communities affected by the
conflict. The Obras por Impuestos programme, which permits companies to meet part
of their tax obligations through infrastructure investments in conflict -affected
regions, is also supporting the implementation of the de velopment programmes.
Resolution of disputes regarding implementation of the peace agreement
10. The Government and FARC have both declared that the other party has fallen
short of fully implementing some commitments in the peace agreement. Senior
government officials have stated that FARC has not fully complied with its
obligations to provide information on the location of mines and minefields and that,
among other things, it has not fully disclosed and handed over the entirety of its assets.
FARC has called upon the Government to do more to guarantee its security and has
argued that the Government is focused on reintegration, rather than on a more
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement.
11. Under the peace agreement, mechanisms to resolve controversies and overcome
implementation challenges were established, including the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement
(CSIVI). I encourage both parties to use CSIVI to resolve such issues and to
strengthen other existing coordination mechanisms. The establishment of technical
working groups for specific issues, such as the tripartite mechanism on demining
issues established recently between the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace,
FARC and the United Nations (the Mission and the Mine Action Service) is a welcome
development. The United Nations stands ready to support such constructive dialogue
between the parties.
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
12. During the reporting period, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace prioritized the
participation of victims in the seven cases currently on its docket, supporting them in
getting accredited, providing evidence, obtaining legal counsel and requ esting
protection measures. It is also reviewing the accreditation of indigenous communities
and Afro-Colombian community councils.
13. Under the transitional justice system established under the peace agreement,
benefits are assured only for those who co mply with their obligations. Following the
announcement on 29 August that some former combatants were rearming, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace stated that taking up arms again was cause for expulsion from
its jurisdiction. It ordered the arrests of four of the individuals appearing in the video
(another two were already subject to arrest warrants) and announced that existing
procedures of verification of compliance would be expedited and that new procedures
against other individuals in the video would be opened. On 13 September, it
announced its decision to exclude both “Jesús Santrich” and Hernán Darío Velásquez,
alias “El Paisa”, from its jurisdiction and to remove their benefits under the
transitional justice system, including the guarantee of non-extradition. It also
instructed its chambers and sections that all the individuals appearing in the video
should have all of their benefits removed.
14. On 13 September, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace announced that it had
opened an additional case of verification of compliance against Léider Johany Noscué
Bototo (alias “Mayimbú”), accused by the Ministry of Defence of being the leader of
a group of dissidents suspected of being responsible for a massacre in Suárez, Cauca
Department, in August (see below). This brings to seven the number of former
commanders who have cases of verification of compliance under review.
19-16135

3/17

S/2019/780

15. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has continued to raise awareness of the
transitional justice system and to provide individual legal assist ance to former
combatants through workshops in the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and to military personnel in garrisons.
16. The Unit for the Search for Persons deemed missing currently has information
to proceed with the search for 1,082 persons, including information on 276 cases
submitted by FARC during the reporting period and on 806 cases provided by seven
social organizations. The Unit has encouraged more individuals and entities to come
forward with information.
17. The Truth Commission has so far received more than 940 testimonies from
individuals and communities. During the reporting period, the Commission held a
regional meeting on sexual violence, another on missing persons and three on the
situation of social leaders and human rights defenders. The Commission also received
a report documenting over 100 cases of sexual violence by illegal armed groups
between 1985 and 2006. The Commission has now inaugurated 22 of 27 planned
regional “houses of truth”.
18. On 2 August, the heads of the three components of the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition met with the Presidential Counsellor
for Stabilization and Consolidation and agreed on the development of a joint
workplan and monthly follow-up meetings.
Substitution of illicit crops
19. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, of the 60,070 ha
of coca registered by 99,097 families, an estimated 37,629 ha have been eradicated
voluntarily since August 2017 under the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops provided for in the peace agreement. A total of 24,246
families have received their full year of interim payments, and 60,731 families have
received technical assistance. The Office reports that 94 per cent of families are
complying with their voluntary eradication commitments. Challenges remain with the
next critical phases of the Programme, in particular the implementation of sustainable
alternative development projects for families.
20. Individuals participating in the Programme continue to be victims of threats,
attacks and killings, as repeatedly highlighted by the Ombudsman ’s Office, including
through early warnings. It is important that the Government fully implement the
measures for the protection of leaders participating in the Programme, announced in
July.
Ejército de Liberación Nacional
21. On 20 July, during the installation of the new legislative session, President
Duque reaffirmed his Government’s position that any potential dialogue with ELN
was conditioned upon the release of all individuals held in captivity and the cessation
of all violent actions. ELN has refused those conditions and reiterated its call for the
resumption of dialogue on the basis of progress made during the negotiations with the
previous administration. Continued violence stemming from ELN presence in various
regions of the country has ongoing grave impacts on the civilian population.

4/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

III. Mission tasks
A.

Reintegration
Transition in territorial areas for training and reintegration
22. On 15 August, the legal status of the territorial areas for training and
reintegration expired. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization,
approximately 3,100 former combatants currently reside in these areas, along with
family members and others. On 14 August, the Government issued a statement
explaining that, although their legal status was to change, there would be a two -year
transition period for all 24 locations during which the provision of services, food,
health and collective security schemes would be extended.
23. In preparation for the transition, the Director of the Agency for Reintegration
and Normalization and the FARC component of the National Reintegration Council,
accompanied by the Mission, undertook joint visits to 11 territorial areas for training
and reintegration in which the Government identified obstacles to their permanence
in their current locations. The visits were carried out in a constructive spirit and road
maps were agreed for each location. It is important to ensure joint monitoring of the
implementation of these road maps. During all visits, local authorities and
communities expressed their support for the continued presence of those areas,
indicating that they had brought State institutions, security and economic
opportunities.
24. On 9 September, the Government issued a decree granting the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization responsibility for administering the goods, services
and food supplies for the reintegration of former combatants in locations and for a
period to be determined by the Government, pending the adoption of regulations by
the Agency. While the decree does not stipulate a period for the extension, in a
statement that day, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
declared that the extension would be until August 2020. The decree also conferred on
the Agency the responsibility to administer the sites in which the public security
forces were located, to guarantee security around the former territorial areas for
training and reintegration and the sites to which some of them would be relocated.
25. The adoption of the decree is a welcome development. I trust that the specific
regulations to extend these services until August 2020 will be adopted promptly.
There is also an urgent need to clarify the specific details of the security arrangements,
the provision of services, and land and housing arrangements for each of the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, in their current or future locations.
Doing so will help to reassure former combatants at this critical time.
26. The long-term integration of these areas into municipal arrangements poses
significant challenges in terms of resources and capacity o f local authorities. The
Government has stated that it has enough resources to begin purchasing land for the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration and has committed
approximately $4.7 million for this purpose so far.
27. The basic monthly allowance for former FARC-EP members, due to expire on
15 August, was extended to December 2019 by the Government, conditioned upon
participation in reintegration activities and pending the approval of the reintegration
road map by the National Reintegration Council. The approval of the road map
remains a key pending issue.
28. The Mission and the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization are working
on an outreach strategy to explain the continuity of the reintegration process to former

19-16135

5/17

S/2019/780

combatants both within and outside the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration.
Economic and social reintegration
29. During the reporting period, the National Reintegration Council met on two
occasions and approved 11 new collective productive projects, bringing the number
of approved initiatives to 35, benefiting 2,204 former combatants (including 630
women). Funding has been disbursed for 22 of them, benefiting 1,433 former
combatants (including 426 women) and 16 participants from c ommunities. To date,
431 individual projects have been approved and funding has been disbursed for 424
of them, benefiting 483 former combatants. A total of 1,916 former combatants, or
14.7 per cent of those accredited, have received funding for productive projects
through these mechanisms. The Mission is also aware of 159 self-funded productive
initiatives and 71 initiatives supported by international cooperation.
30. It is fundamental to define clear criteria to ensure the long -term sustainability
of these productive projects, including: a territorial approach so that projects are
better linked with strategies such as the development programmes with a territorial
focus and local development plans; a community-based approach so that projects are
developed jointly with local communities; access to markets; land; and technical
assistance throughout project implementation. The Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization is actively promoting private sector engagement in the reintegration
process.
31. Approximately 5,000 former combatants are involved in 120 productive
organizations, including cooperatives and associations, many of which require
support to overcome technical and bureaucratic limitations to operate, including
barriers to opening bank accounts.
32. Although a gender-sensitive approach is included in the review and approval of
productive projects by the National Reintegration Council, implementation on the
ground remains insufficient, particularly with regard to the participation of women in
decision-making processes and targeted actions for the economic empowerment of
women. Despite these limitations, women former combatants continue to develop
their own productive initiatives, including through women’s associations and
partnerships with local communities.
33. Currently, 822 former combatants are employed in activities related to peace
implementation: 690 former combatants in the National Protection Unit, 102 in the
FARC humanitarian demining organization Humanicemos and 30 in the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization.
34. A total of 3,543 former combatants (including 914 women) are enrolled in
vocational training programmes through the National Training Service, and several
universities and educational institutions are providing similar opportu nities.
35. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization is currently working on an
“employability route” to support former combatants in entering the labour market,
which remains difficult owing to the lack of employment opportunities in conflict affected areas and other factors.
36. Access to land remains a key challenge. While the legal avenues have been
established (Decrees Nos. 756, 758 and 902 and art. 283 of the National Development
Plan), greater efforts are required from the National Land Agency and the National
Reintegration Council technical working group on land to move forward. Allocation
to former combatants of the only plot identified thus far (in Colinas, Guaviare
Department) is still pending. In some cases, ethnic authorities have provide d access
to land to former combatants in collective ethnic territories.
6/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

37. The medical facilities in the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration are still functioning, but greater efforts are needed to offer quality
health-care services, especially to former combatants living outside those areas. There
is limited progress on psychosocial support for former combatants. Limited access to
sexual and reproductive health care, including maternal health care, is also of concern.
It is important that the national plan for rural health be approved and implemented,
for the benefit of both former combatants and communities.
38. The adoption of a national strategy for access to housing for former combatants
is urgent. Despite funding from the European Union, a housing project for 350 former
combatants in the Pondores and Tierra Grata former territorial areas for training and
reintegration is still pending approval.
39. The “Arando la educación” education programme, benefiting 3,300 former
combatants and community members, has been extended until April 2020. The
“Maestro itinerante” programme, led by the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization alongside the Universidad Nacional Abierta y a Distancia, is benefiting
1,335 former combatants in 128 municipalities. These efforts should be included in a
strategy to extend educational services to former combatants and communities, in line
with the national plan on rural education.
40. Progress has been made in the provision of day-care arrangements in the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration in La Guajira, Guaviare, Meta and
Caquetá Departments. A comprehensive response from national and local authorities
is still required to provide education, health and protection for approximately 2,500
children living with former combatants, 600 of them in those areas.
41. Discussions continue between the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
and the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples on a “harmonization programme” for
former combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin. Key elements should
be considered under the programme, including access to land and productive projects
in ethnic territories.
42. Efforts to work towards the targets in the Government ’s acceleration plan for
productive projects, employment, housing and other aspects should be redoubled,
with the aim of benefiting some 11,000 former combatants by December 2019.
New geography of reintegration
43. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, as at 31 July,
8,816 former combatants, or roughly two thirds of those accredited, resided outside
the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, in varied settings in rural
and urban areas. FARC has identified approximately 70 new settlements in which
former combatants are carrying out their collective reintegration. Urban reintegration
is gaining relevance as larger numbers of former combatants are residing in major
cities, including Bogotá (655), Villavicencio (211), Cali (206) and Medellín (202).
44. This evolving context makes it essential for all relevant entities to increase
efforts at outreach, the provision of services, and productive opportunities for former
combatants living outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration,
as they face greater difficulties in gaining access to productive projects, housing,
health, education and security.
45. In July, the tenth departmental reintegration board was established, in Caquetá
Department. These regional mechanisms and the 24 territorial councils for
reintegration contribute to improved coordination and to the appropriation of the
reintegration process by local actors.

19-16135

7/17

S/2019/780

46. The reintegration process must go hand in hand with the extension of State
presence and services in conflict-affected areas to ensure that the benefits of the peace
process reach communities and former combatants alike and to thus help to foster
reconciliation.
Political reintegration
47. The FARC party has been actively engaged in the campaign for local and
departmental elections, endorsing 308 candidates, including for municipal councils,
departmental assemblies and mayors. One third of the candidates are former
combatants, while 38 per cent are women. Sixty candidates are joining coalition lists
with other parties and movements. In addition, some former FARC -EP combatants
are running as candidates of other parties.
48. Protection and mitigation measures should be reinforced to address ri sks and
stigmatization facing FARC party candidates and former FARC-EP members
endorsed by other parties. The Mission has observed specific challenges facing
women candidates, including access to information, resources and close protection.
49. FARC members of Congress remained actively involved in legislative activity,
including convening oversight hearings and promoting bills. On 21 August, a FARC
member of Congress was elected vice-president of a congressional committee. On
2 September, the President of FARC, Rodrigo Londoño, was selected by the five
opposition parties to deliver an official opposition statement.
50. On 20 July, Israel Zúñiga (known as “Benkos Biohó”) took up the party’s fifth
seat in the Senate, which had been vacant in the absence of “Iván Márquez”. On
2 September, the Inspector General opened an investigation and ordered the
suspension of “Jesús Santrich” as a member of the House of Representatives, and on
3 September, the House requested the Council of State to initiate the lifting of his
investiture.

B.

Security guarantees

(a)

Security guarantees for former FARC-EP members
51. I remain gravely concerned over the high number of killings of former FARC EP members. During the reporting period, the Mission verified 24 homicides,
bringing the total number of killings in 2019 to 52. At the current pace, the number
of killings in 2019 will surpass the 64 killings reported during 2018. Since the signing
of the peace agreement, the Mission has verified 147 homicides, 12 disappearances
and 21 attempted homicides. Most killings occurred in the Departments of Cauca (28),
Nariño (20), Antioquia (19), Caquetá (17), Norte de Santander (13), Putumayo (10),
Valle del Cauca (8) and Meta (7). Women former combatants and children of former
combatants continue to face additional risks of violence, including sexual and gender based violence and forced recruitment.
52. Only five attacks have been reported near the former territorial areas for training
and reintegration. This underscores the importance of a decree normalizing what has
been an effective presence of the public security forces around those areas while
ensuring urgent comprehensive security measures for the approximately 8,000 former
combatants living outside those areas, including in new rural and urban settlements.
Security forces should also make greater efforts to build trust with local c ommunities
and new settlements, including through the deployment of women personnel.
53. Nevertheless, the Special Investigation Unit of the Attorney General ’s Office,
in coordination with the Elite Corps of the National Police, reports important
progress: 13 cases with convictions, 13 at the trial stage, 27 under investigation and

8/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

30 with pending arrest warrants. A total of 64 homicides are linked to criminal
organizations, and for 10 of those, the intellectual authors were arrested. To ensure
greater impact on the criminal organizations behind those attacks, investigation
efforts must be increasingly oriented towards the prosecution of intellectual authors,
and investigations should be supported by improved coordination between the Unit,
the public security forces and other State entities.
54. The joint working group on the investigation of attacks against former FARC EP members, which includes FARC, the Special Investigation Unit, the National
Protection Unit, the Elite Corps of the National Police and t he Mission, is prioritizing
cases and elaborating shared investigation methodologies. It is important that the
group continue to meet regularly.
55. In a welcome development, in June, the Government, under the coordination of
the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, announced measures
to strengthen the security guarantees for former combatants, and some initial progress
has been observed. The Special Investigation Unit has been strengthened through the
deployment of 25 judicial police officers and additional attorneys in prioritized
departments. An interinstitutional mechanism led by the Ministry of Defence has been
established to support investigations. In addition, the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization is promoting a working group and regional initiatives for the
prevention of stigmatization against former FARC-EP members. It is important to
include FARC in the monitoring and follow-up mechanisms of these measures, which
the Mission stands ready to support.
56. The Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and Protection of the National
Protection Unit plays a fundamental role in ensuring close protection for former
FARC-EP members. The Subdirectorate’s budgetary shortfalls and recent
disagreements between the Government and FARC on the functioning of the close
protection programme are undermining its capacity. The Subdirectorate reports that,
as at 31 August, one third of the close protection schemes were incomplete and 100
bodyguards were needed in order to complete them. No e fforts should be spared to
allocate resources for the Subdirectorate, and the Government and FARC should
resolve issues constructively in order to guarantee the security of former combatants.
57. The Tripartite Protection and Security Mechanism, in coordi nation with the
Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, is elaborating analysis
and early warning guidelines on specific risks for FARC candidates. The Mechanism
will continue to monitor effective coordination between the Subdirectorat e and the
public security forces.
58. The spate of violence against political candidates requires urgent action. On
8 July, President Duque convened the high-level unit responsible for the coordination
and implementation of the Comprehensive Security System for the Exercise of
Politics, provided for in the peace agreement. He also announced additional security
measures for the electoral period. The Ministry of the Interior established a road map
for the protection of political candidates, including the FARC party.
(b)

Security guarantees for communities, human rights defenders and
social leaders
59. Attacks against social leaders and human rights defenders continue to be a major
concern, and I am particularly worried about their impact on communities and their
social fabric. In 2019, 123 alleged killings of human rights defenders and social
leaders have been reported so far by civil society actors and State institutions. In large
demonstrations in cities across Colombia on 26 July, Colombians reiterated th eir
rejection of violence against social leaders and human rights defenders and demanded
their protection.

19-16135

9/17

S/2019/780

60. The situation in Cauca Department continues to be dire. In just one weekend,
between 30 August and 2 September, an alarming 19 killings were regi stered,
including the brutal attack against the Liberal Party candidate for mayor in Suárez
municipality, massacred along with five other persons, including the candidate ’s
mother and a candidate to the municipal council. The Ombudsman’s Office had issued
three early warnings specifically addressing the risks in that municipality.
61. The Nasa indigenous community in northern Cauca has also been particularly
affected by clashes between criminal organizations over territorial control. During the
reporting period, 11 community members, including 6 of their leaders, were killed. In
2019, 25 members of the Nasa community were killed. In addition, I am concerned
about the situation of the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities in southern
Chocó and eastern Antioquia Departments, as well as in Nariño Department.
62. Comprehensive security measures are urgently needed for communities in
Cauca and other departments historically affected by the conflict. These should
include a gender-sensitive and ethnic approach and specific protection measures that
include the strengthening of the Indigenous Guard, as well as concrete actions to
advance investigations in conjunction with clear plans for dismantling criminal
organizations and their support networks.
63. On 9 July, the Minister of the Interior reactivated the Intersectoral Commission
on Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders and its technical
working groups, which are developing the action plan for the implementation of the
Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights
Defenders. On 3 July, the Ombudsman and the Inspector General organized the third
national meeting of the Pact for Life and for the Protection of Social Leaders and
Human Rights Defenders, focused on the risks faced by women leaders and human
rights defenders. Greater efforts are still needed to address the specific protection and
security needs of women leaders.
64. On 12 August, President Duque convened the National Commission on Security
Guarantees for the first time since January. Its mandate of elaborating a public policy
for the dismantling of criminal organizations and their support networks, as provided
for in the peace agreement, is critically important. Civil society representatives to the
Commission presented proposals, and the High Commissioner for Peace presented
the results of the territorial sessions of the Subcommission on Security Guarantees
and progress achieved in the dismantling of some criminal groups. It is crucial that
the Commission meet on a regular basis to advance on the development of public
policy, taking into account the proposals presented so far, and that immediate concrete
actions be taken in the most affected territories.
65. The Ministry of the Interior has been promoting dialogue with civil society,
including at the departmental level, along with the international community, for the
elaboration of a comprehensive public policy for social leaders, human ri ghts
defenders and journalists.
66. In August, the Government announced the Zonas Futuro strategy (Strategic
Zones of Comprehensive Intervention) targeting five regions affected by weak or
limited State presence; illicit economies, violence and criminality; and high rates of
deforestation. The Government’s objective is to go beyond military and police control
to focus on integrated institutional interventions through joint actions, under civilian
leadership, of the State, the private sector, local communities and international
cooperation actors. The Mission will follow up on this initia tive, including its
effective coordination and linkages with entities and strategies provided under the
peace agreement, such as the development programmes with a territorial focus.

10/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

67. During the reporting period, the Ombudsman’s Office issued 12 early warnings
(concerning eight departments), stressing the continuing structural causes of the
violence linked to the strengthening and expansion of illegal armed groups and
criminal structures and highlighting risks to the safety of communities and
individuals, including sexual violence, forced recruitment and forced displacement.
The Ombudsman’s Office reports that in numerous cases in which it has issued early
warnings, the risks highlighted in those early warnings have materialized. The joint
monitoring strategy between the Ombudsman’s Office and the Inspector General’s
Office to strengthen accountability for follow-up of these early warnings is welcome.
Legal guarantees
68. Transition to legality and accreditation of former FARC -EP members are
essential prerequisites to their political, social and economic reintegration, as they
can access their reintegration benefits only through this process. Delays faced by
some former FARC-EP members in the resolution of their legal situation are a source
of uncertainty.
69. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission have
been meeting regularly to address pending challenges. During the reporting period,
no new accreditations were issued by the Government, whose focus has been on
reviewing the list of former FARC-EP members that have already been accredited in
order to eliminate duplications. As a result, the new total number of accredited former
FARC-EP members stands at 13,057. The Office completed the administrative
notification of 236 accredited former combatants through the publication of their
accreditation resolutions.
70. Some 270 non-accredited individuals remain under review by the Government,
of whom 164 are in prison. FARC and the Office of the High Commissioner, within
the framework of the tripartite mechanism and under the umbrella of the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, agreed that FARC, accompanied by the Mission when possible and with
the facilitation of the Office, would conduct visits to penitentiary institutions, with
the aim of gathering more information on their cases. T he visits started on 29 August.
71. Some 140 individuals from the list submitted on 15 August 2017 are pending
accreditation. The Office of the High Commissioner announced that it was unable to
determine whether these individuals belonged to the former FARC -EP. The Office
and FARC have expressed their commitment to expedite the process and resolve the
situation of these individuals.
72. There has been no progress in the situation of approximately 160 former
combatants, duly accredited by the Office of the High Commissioner, who remain in
prison and whose legal situation is under the jurisdiction of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. Prompt resolution of these cases by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is
required so that individuals who satisfy the legal criteria for conditional liberty or
amnesty can be freed, in accordance with the peace agreement, and participate in the
reintegration process.
73. With regard to the list of approximately 1,000 former FARC -EP members
received by the Government on 10 August 2018, the Office of the High Commissioner
formally announced that the deadline for submitting names for accreditation purposes
was 15 August 2017. Furthermore, it indicated that, according to the Minister of
Defence, the option for these persons to enter the individual route for reintegration
was no longer possible. FARC disagrees with this conclusion and plans to raise this
issue in the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement.

19-16135

11/17

S/2019/780

C.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender
74. It is essential to ensure a gender-sensitive approach to the reintegration process,
particularly since women make up approximately 25 per cent of former combatants
in the process of reintegration. On 20 August, the Government ’s High-level Forum
on Gender met to discuss the gender-related actions under the national reintegration
policy, and the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation requested
the respective government institutions to develop implementation plans for these
actions. The Government and FARC should collaborate closely to monitor their
implementation. Strengthening coordination mechanisms, such as the gender
technical working group of the National Reintegration Council, and the gender
capacity of the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization at the local level is
likewise critical.
75. On 14 August, the FARC Gender Committee presented the conclusions of its
first national meeting of women former FARC-EP members. The conclusions
highlighted key needs, including access to resources and funding for productive
initiatives led by women; access to higher education and work opportunities; access
to decision-making spaces; support for childcare and sexual and reproductive health
services; greater support from FARC party leadership to advance their gender agenda
internally; and strengthening women’s organizations and gender committees at the
local level.
76. As the Special Forum on Gender completes its first year of work in support of
the verification of the gender provisions of the peace agreement, it is important that
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement ensure the Forum’s continuity beyond December 2019,
including with adequate resources and more sustained dialogue between the Forum
and the Commission.
77. The Mission continues to have a productive dialogue with women ’s
organizations at the national and local levels, as well as with women former
combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders, candidates, and members of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) community.
Ethnic affairs
78. On 13 August, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification
of the Implementation of the Final Agreement approved the workplan of the High level Forum of Ethnic Peoples, aimed at strengthening its role as the Commission ’s
main interlocutor for the implementation of the chapter on ethnic matters of the peace
agreement. There has been some progress in the implementation of commitments
undertaken by several public entities in May to include concrete actions in their
workplans and budgets relative to the implementation of the chapter. The Thematic
Subcommission of Ethnic Issues of the National Commission on Security Guarantees
is encouraged to resume its work.
79. Former combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin continue to face
specific challenges in reintegration. In addition to the harmonization programme
being discussed by the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, it is important
to support productive projects for this population. The security risks for former
combatants of ethnic origin in Chocó Department are of particular concern,
particularly those who left the former territorial area for training and reintegration in
Vidrí after it was closed.

12/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

Children
80. In a welcome development, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has
assumed increased leadership in the implementation of the “A different path of life”
reintegration programme for children, including through local follow -up committees.
As at August 2019, 120 of the 123 adolescents formerly associated with FARC -EP
had turned 18; 111 were in the reintegration phase of the programme ; and 110 were
receiving monthly stipends. Eight adolescents are under the protection of the
Colombian Institute for Family Welfare.
81. Of the 123 participants in the programme, the Mission has received reports of
at least six cases of adolescents without proper documentation. Clarification by the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace is required with regard to the situation of 218 new cas es of
young people identified by FARC that could be included in the programme. A legal
instrument that guarantees the programme’s sustainability and resources is also
fundamental. Lack of access to psychological and family support, reparations and
productive projects with a youth-sensitive approach remains a significant challenge.
82. The effective provision of social services for family members of former
combatants, especially children, is crucial. The Mission continues to support training
courses and activities on childcare skills and the prevention of sexual and genderbased violence and sports and cultural activities with children, adolescents and their
families in the former territorial areas for training and reintegration and surrounding
communities. No advances were made regarding cases of former FARC-EP members
seeking legal guardianship of their children.
83. On 26 June, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace received a report with testimonies
of persons who were forcibly recruited by FARC-EP as children and survived an army
attack in 2000. The report is an important step in investigating violence against
children during the conflict.
Youth and peace and security
84. Young Colombians across the country continue to be engaged in creative ways
in peacebuilding efforts, including through volunteering, sports, cultural activities,
and reconciliation and dialogue initiatives. Universities in several regions are also
supporting initiatives for their students and faculty to support the reintegration
projects of former combatants. The Mission has partnered with the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research on a project fostering youth -led reconciliation
dialogues between communities and former combatants near the former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, starting with a successful pilot in Tierra Grata
(Cesar Department). In July, two young former combatants from the Agua Bonita
former territorial area for training and reintegration (Caquetá Department)
participated in the Latin America meeting of the United Network of Young
Peacebuilders, alongside other young Colombian leaders, and later welcomed a
delegation of members of the Network from different countries to visi t the former
territorial areas.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
85. During the reporting period, with funds from the United Nations multi -partner
trust fund for sustaining peace in Colombia, three local stabilization projects were
approved for implementation by the United Nations Development Program me
(UNDP), the World Health Organization and the United Nations Population Fund to
improve access to health in 23 municipalities with the former territorial areas for
training and reintegration; to provide short-term subsistence support to families

19-16135

13/17

S/2019/780

enrolled in the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit
Crops; and to deploy government teams in 170 municipalities to accelerate the
implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus. Moreover,
innovative blended finance funds were approved for seven private sector social
impact projects in 61 municipalities with development programmes. In addition,
funds were allocated to expand the territorial outreach of the Truth Commission.
86. The joint Mission-United Nations country team reintegration group has focused
its support for reintegration in preparation for the transition of the former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, community-based reintegration and the response
to the growing migration of former combatants to urban areas. Financial and technical
support from UNDP and the International Organization for Migration has been
approved for 22 collective productive projects. The fund further approved funds for
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to scale up support for
socioeconomic reintegration and local peacebuilding projects.
87. The Mission and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights regularly co-host meetings with human rights platforms and civil
society organizations. Additional support is being provided to the national early
warning system, improving capacities for the analysis, monitoring and evaluation of
responses at the national and local levels. The Office reports continuously on all
human rights-related components of the peace agreement and collaborates with the
Mission on various cross-cutting issues.
88. The Mission and the country team continue to work with the Ministry of the
Interior and civil society organizations on the development of a comprehensive
national policy for the protection of human rights defenders. Joint meetings were held
with the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia on a specific action plan for
indigenous territories.
89. The $3 million Peacebuilding Fund project on reintegration, implemented by
UNDP, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and developed in
coordination with the Mission, identified productive projects in 15 locations a nd
began rolling out the social component, focusing on childcare, protective
environments for children and support for local gender committees.

IV. Mission structures
A.

Mission support
90. The Mission continues to adjust its presence and mobility in the field to be closer
to former combatants and communities in remote areas. Further to security
recommendations, the Mission completed works in one of the Mission ’s temporary
camps, to which the local team was able to deploy on 8 August, and works are under
way in another location.
91. The Mission continues efforts to meet its gender parity objectives. As at
23 September 2019, 44 per cent of all civilian staff were women. Women represent
54 per cent of United Nations Volunteers, 35 per cent of the international observers
and 58 per cent of consultants and individual contractors. On 29 July, I appointed
Karla Gabriela Samayoa Recari as my Deputy Special Representative.

14/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

B.

Safety and security
92. During the reporting period, security incidents in areas near some former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, mainly illegal checkpoints and curfews,
and reports of explosive devices along roads resulted in mobility restrictions for the
Mission. In addition, alleged members of a dissident group of the former FARC-EP
temporarily retained, extorted and robbed United Nations personnel carrying out a
field mission in Arauca Department. The Department of Safety and Security also
temporarily suspended field mission movements in Cauca Department owing to the
security situation in several municipalities. It also assessed the security implications
of the 29 August announcement. Residual risk levels after the implementation of
security risk management measures remained medium to low.

C.

Conduct and discipline
93. The Mission continues its efforts to prevent and respond to misconduct,
including sensitization activities regarding prevention of discrimination, harassment,
including sexual harassment, and abuse of authority and the Mission ’s code of
conduct for Mission staff and contractors. The Mission-United Nations country team
task force on prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse continues joint efforts on
awareness-raising on sexual exploitation and abuse, including joint training for
country team and Mission staff, implementing partners and civil society organizations
in field locations.
94. During the reporting period, six allegations were reported to the Mission,
including an allegation of sexual exploitation, and are under investigation.

V. Observations
95. The Final Agreement charted a route for Colombia to transit from decades -long
conflict to sustainable peace through an interlocking set of commitments aimed at
putting an end to violence, delivering justice and truth to victims, substituting illicit
economies for licit ones and bringing about a profound transformation of areas long
affected by war. I commend the efforts of President Duque and his administration in
implementing the “Peace with legality” strategy. However, greater efforts are needed
by all involved to implement other parts of the peace agreement in order to deliver on
commitments made to victims, conflict-affected communities and former combatants.
Fully consolidating peace, a precious opportunity for Colombia, wi ll require a
comprehensive effort, for which Colombians can continue to count on the resolute
support of the United Nations.
96. I strongly condemn the announcement made by a group of former FARC -EP
commanders of their decision to take up arms again. Colombia has suffered enough,
and there is no justification for resuming an armed struggle or reneging on the
commitments in the Final Agreement. I am concerned about the potential impact that
this announcement may have on violence in the territories. I welcome the immediate
rejection of this announcement by the FARC party and the widespread expressions of
commitment to the peace process from former combatants across the country. These
law-abiding former combatants should not be stigmatized as a result of the il l-advised
actions of a small minority. Two years after the conclusion of the laying down of
arms, it cannot be emphasized enough that the vast majority of former combatants
remain engaged in the peace process and are developing productive efforts in
partnership with local communities, pursuing academic studies, participating in local
politics, establishing and seeking opportunities for their families and contributing to
19-16135

15/17

S/2019/780

the work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition. The commitments made to the former combatants who laid down
their weapons in good faith and remain part of the reintegration process must be
honoured, and I welcome President Duque’s reaffirmation of his commitment to their
reintegration. At the current juncture, it is more important than ever to accelerate and
deepen the implementation of the peace agreement as a whole and, within that, to
make all possible efforts to ensure the safety, livelihoods and legal guarantees of the
thousands of former fighters who persevere in the pursuit of peace despite the attacks
against them, the uncertainties and the attempts to lead them astray.
97. I welcome the signing of the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign and commend the National Council for
Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence for its leadership and all political parties that
have subscribed to it. The Pact is an example of what can be achieved when political
differences are set aside for the benefit of national interests. I encourage all parties
and Colombian society to move beyond polarizing and stigmatizing discourse and
instead work to build bridges and pursue inclusive consensus on the issues that matter
most to Colombians, particularly those who have suffered the most from the conflict.
98. The conduct of a peaceful campaign free of political violence and stigmatization
is in the interest of all Colombians. The recent attacks against candidates, including
the horrific massacre in Suárez, Cauca Department, and the killin g of a mayoral
candidate in Tibú, Norte de Santander Department, demonstrate the need for urgent
protection measures for candidates of all parties, including tailored measures for
women candidates. The parliamentary and presidential elections held in 2018 were
the most peaceful in decades. I encourage the Government and all parties to spare no
effort to prevent further incidents of violence in the weeks that remain before the
coming local elections, which should be another important milestone in building
peace in Colombia.
99. The attacks related to the elections are occurring in a context of continued and
alarming violence against social leaders, human rights defenders, former FARC -EP
combatants, persons participating in the implementation of the peace agre ement, and
rural communities, including indigenous peoples and Afro -Colombian communities.
Clear measures for dismantling criminal networks and effective criminal
investigations to identify intellectual and material perpetrators are urgently needed. I
welcome the recent meeting of the National Commission on Security Guarantees and
encourage it to meet regularly and focus on immediate, concrete, context -specific
measures to target criminal networks in the most vulnerable areas, namely Cauca
Department, the Catatumbo region, the Pacific coast and the rural areas of Antioquia
Department. I also encourage the Government, public security forces and local
authorities to respond with immediate coordinated actions to the early warnings and
recommendations of the Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Response to Early
Warnings. Time and again, these early warnings have proved tragically accurate.
100. As I have stated in previous reports, the underlying causes of violence can be
effectively addressed only through the integrated and coordinated deployment of the
State, both through the public security forces and through civilian institutions, in
order to bring security, development, infrastructure, economic opportunities and
fulfilment of basic human rights to conflict-affected communities. The Government
has continued its efforts to bring security, infrastructure and services to the rural areas,
including through the implementation of the development programmes with a
territorial focus, and I encourage further progress on other components of the
comprehensive rural reform. Coordination among government -led programmes and
strategies in rural areas should be a priority, along with the involvement of local
actors, including municipal authorities, civil society and the private sector.

16/17

19-16135

S/2019/780

101. I commend the Government for its responsible handling of the transition of the
territorial areas for training and reintegration, and FARC for its constructive role. In
particular, I welcome their joint visits to the territorial areas with spec ific challenges,
which were key to allaying the uncertainty among former combatants. It is important
for the joint visits between the Government, FARC and the Mission to continue to
other former territorial areas for training and reintegration and to new s ettlements.
This joint exercise should set an example for overcoming hurdles in i mplementation
through dialogue.
102. The peace agreement stipulates that reintegration into civilian life shall be a
comprehensive and sustainable process. A comprehensive vie w of reintegration
requires complementary implementation of other key commitments in the peace
agreement. For example, socioeconomic reintegration is closely linked to
comprehensive rural reform, political reintegration to political reform, community based reintegration to the development programmes with a territorial focus and
reconciliation to transitional justice and victims’ rights. It is crucial that all relevant
ministries and institutions play their part. Effective coordination is also paramount,
both among national entities, under the leadership of the Presidential Counsellor for
Stabilization and Consolidation, and between the national Government and local
authorities.
103. To ensure the sustainability of reintegration, relevant actors, including th e
National Reintegration Council, should make certain that all reintegration initiatives
and productive projects have a medium- and a long-term vision that helps to improve
the lives of former combatants and communities. I also encourage further follow -up
on the implementation of the gender-related actions of the national reintegration
policy, as well as an increased focus on the aspirations and participation of young
people. Specific attention should be placed on the needs and particular circumstances
of former combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin and those with
disabilities.
104. The sustainability of the reintegration process also requires that all actors,
including the Government, FARC and departmental and local authorities, pay more
attention to the situation of the more than 8,000 former combatants who reside outside
the former territorial areas for training and reintegration and who face even greater
challenges in terms of security, basic services and productive opportunities.
Furthermore, targeted efforts are necessary to address the reintegration and security
needs of former mid-level commanders and emerging leaders in the former territorial
areas for training and reintegration and new settlements, as their leadership is key to
the sustainability of the process.
105. Victims should remain at the centre of implementation of the peace agreement.
The development programmes with a territorial focus, along with other development
strategies, should ensure that conflict-affected communities, victims and their
families enjoy the dividends of peace. I also commend the three components of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition for their
work to guarantee the rights of victims and their families, and I continue to c all upon
all parties to support the work of these bodies, including by continuing to appear
before the Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and coming
forward with information for the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed missing.
106. I pay tribute once again to the many individuals, social organizations and
institutions in Colombia that are working relentlessly to foster reconciliation, build
opportunities for prosperity and achieve lasting peace. In these noble efforts, they can
count on the partnership of the United Nations through the Mission and the agencies,
funds and programmes, which I thank for their tireless efforts in support of peace in
Colombia, as well as the steadfast support of the international community, which
remains committed to the country’s inspiring example of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding.

19-16135

17/17
