A /75/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

32nd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 1 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 14
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/188 and
A/75/542)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/229)
Agenda item 122
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/542)
Agenda item 128
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/75/L.37)
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Indonesia to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.37.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.37, entitled
“International cooperation to address challenges faced
by seafarers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic to
support global supply chains”.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has led
to unprecedented challenges to the global economy.
Nevertheless, the shipping industry continues to serve
as the backbone of the international economy and the
global supply chain, transporting more than 80 per
cent of world trade. It also plays an important role in
ensuring the delivery of vital medical supplies, food
and basic goods that are critical for COVID-19 response
and recovery.
Behind that critical sector are 2 million seafarers
who have shown their dedication and professionalism
during this crisis, ensuring that world trade and logistics
continue to move properly. Their work and commitment
largely go unnoticed.
Unfortunately, seafarers continue to face
significant challenges because of the pandemic. The
travel restrictions have generated difficulties for crew
changes and prevent seafarers from embarkation and
disembarkation. As a result, hundreds of thousands
of them are reported to have been stranded at sea
for months.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the General
Assembly has recognized the role of essential workers
around the world who have committed themselves and
are risking their lives to protect the health, safety and
well-being of others. In a real sense, seafarers are in

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-33730 (E)

*2033730*

A/75/PV.32

that group. In this crisis, we need to show our attention,
commitment and support to those invisible heroes,
who are working under difficult and challenging
circumstances to ensure that global supply chains
continue unabated.
In that regard, the draft resolution urges Member
States to designate seafarers and other marine personnel
as key workers. It also calls upon Governments to
implement relevant measures to facilitate maritime
crew changes, including by enabling embarkment and
disembarkment, expediting travel and repatriation
efforts and ensuring access to medical care. To sum up,
the draft resolution requests Governments, as well as
international organizations and relevant stakeholders,
to provide the necessary attention and concrete action
to ensure the well-being of seafarers.
The draft resolution was prepared through
continuous engagement in an open and transparent
manner. I would like to thank all the countries that
co-sponsored and supported the initiative, as well
as the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the International Labour Organization
and the International Maritime Organization for their
commitment and assistance during the consultations.
We hope that this initiative will be one more
step to enhance our efforts to address the challenges
confronting seafarers as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic and to support global supply chains.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
once again express, on behalf of all the co-sponsors,
our sincere appreciation to all States Members of the
United Nations for their constructive participation
and flexibility on the draft resolution throughout
the process.
Ms. Vissers (European Union): I have the honour
of delivering this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Widya
Sadnovic of Indonesia for his work as facilitator during
the negotiations on this important initiative, as well as
all others involved, for their constructive engagement.
2/14

01/12/2020

The EU and its member States welcome the
adoption by consensus of draft resolution A/75/L.37.
Seafarers are truly indispensable key workers. They
are the ones transporting essential goods — the food
on our plates, the fuel for buses and cars, the medicines
and equipment that doctors use in our hospitals to fight
the coronavirus disease pandemic and other illnesses.
They are the ones moving global trade, and yet
hundreds of thousands of seafarers are stranded today
aboard their ships. Because of travel restrictions and
border closures, they are unable to leave their ships and
return home after long months of uninterrupted work.
They are both physically and mentally exhausted, many
having worked beyond the time limit for work onboard
set by international law. That threatens their health,
their lives and the safety of vessels they serve on, as
well as the marine environment around the world. It
also risks severe disruptions to supply chains and
international trade, which are more essential than ever
during these difficult times.
We would like to underline the need for seafarers
to be able to travel and transit both to return home
and to embark to relieve their colleagues. Repatriation
is a basic right for seafarers when they finish their
contracts. We must ensure that right is upheld for those
key workers during the exceptional circumstances we
are currently all experiencing.
The EU and its member States also wish to
emphasize that crew changes can be organized
safely and carried out at low risk and that ports in
all EU member States are open for crew changes. On
9 November, the International Maritime Organization
approved protocols for safe crew changes that are a step
towards more harmonized rules that ensure changeovers
can safely take place.
Yet seafarers are not the only ones at sea who are
often overlooked despite carrying out essential work.
The EU and its member States are grateful for the
important and hard work that both seafarers and fishers
carry out every day. For that reason, we regret that no
agreement could be reached to give fishers the attention
they deserve in the draft resolution.
In conclusion, the pandemic has exacerbated
underlying maritime labour issues, and seafarers are
in need of our support. The draft resolution is a clear
commitment to making sure they receive it. Regular
changeovers require States across the globe to work
together and ease travel restrictions for maritime crews,
20-33730

01/12/2020

as a precondition for safe maritime traffic worldwide
and hence for global trade flows. We look forward
to continuing the discussion of how to ensure decent
living and working conditions and safety on board both
merchant and fishing vessels.
Ms. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the submission of his report (A/75/542) on the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
which will serve as a guide for the international
migration review forum to be held in 2022.
El Salvador recognizes that the adoption of the
Global Compact was a crucial step forward towards
a more holistic approach to migration within the
United Nations, with a human rights-based approach
throughout the migratory cycle, while maintaining the
commitment made in target 10.7 of the Sustainable
Development Goals to facilitate orderly, safe, regular
and responsible migration and mobility of people,
including through the implementation of planned and
well-managed migration policies.
For El Salvador, the topic of migration is a priority.
Therefore, the country stands ready to collaborate and
constructively contribute to the follow-up, monitoring
and review process of the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. We therefore believe
that, without efficient follow-up and monitoring
institutions and without reorienting multilateral and
human rights actors, the Global Compact risks turning
into an instrument without impact, which is something
that collectively we cannot allow.
We therefore commend the role of the International
Organization for Migration and the United Nations
development system in that process. We also welcome
the linkages with other global forums outside the
United Nations.
In that context, and as highlighted in paragraph
30 of the report, El Salvador and three other Member
States have committed to become champions of the
Global Compact. We will work with the United Nations
Network on Migration in promoting best practices,
peer exchange and the further implementation of the
objectives of the Global Compact.
We believe that, in order to achieve all of that,
it is important to ensure the technical and financial
resources to effectively respond to the implementation
of the Global Compact on Migration, because no

A/75/PV.32

State can successfully manage migration alone. What
is needed is an international and regional migration
framework that engages host, transit and destination
countries to better manage migration.
We are grateful that the report being introduced
today includes the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) on the implementation of the Global
Compact. In that respect, I would like to refer to the
joint effort led by El Salvador and a group of countries,
and also supported by more than 100 Member States,
in which the positive and important contributions of
migrants in their destination countries was stressed.
Many of those people have faced specific
challenges during the COVID-19 pandemic on account
of various factors, including inadequate living and
working conditions, limited local knowledge and
networks, xenophobia, discrimination, lack of access to
health care and related services, and exclusion from the
response to the pandemic in host countries.
Finally, my country recognizes that many
migrants are on the front line of the response or play
a fundamental role as essential workers in informal
and formal care work. For us, that is an opportunity
to understand the positive contributions of migrants to
their host countries. It is time to change the narrative on
migrants and to note the key role that they are playing
in the response to the pandemic.
Mr. Messenger (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/75/L.37, which sheds light on the dire situation faced
by seafarers in so many parts of the world today.
The United States has worked tirelessly to facilitate
crew changes and the repatriation of seafarers, having
facilitated numerous seafarers this year for those
purposes. The United States has been a strong voice
advocating that States take decisive action to facilitate
crew rotations. In this difficult period, the United
States has ensured access to emergency medical care
consistent with our international obligations and
this draft resolution to address the impacts of the
coronavirus disease on the seafarer community.
I thank the Chair and co-Chairs for their
leadership and constructive engagement under these
extraordinary circumstances.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has indeed taken its toll on
everyone, including seafarers and other marine

20-337303/14

A/75/PV.32

personnel, who risk their lives to ensure that global trade
does not grind to a halt. The pandemic has also served
to underscore the global interdependency of nations
and brought to the fore the importance of maritime
transport as an essential sector for the continued
delivery of critical supplies and global trade in times
of crisis and recovery, as well as in times of normalcy.
In that context, Malaysia is pleased to co-sponsor
draft resolution A/75/L.37, entitled “International
cooperation to address challenges faced by seafarers as
a result of the COVID-19 pandemic to support global
supply chains”.
We are of the view that access to medical care,
as reflected in the twelfth and fourteenth preambular
paragraphs and also in paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution, should be further enhanced in its scope.
Malaysia, in that regard, would like to take this
opportunity to urge Member States to take responsibility
and share the burden to facilitate and treat seafarers
who have shown symptoms of COVID-19 while on
board before repatriating and returning them safely to
their home countries.
In conclusion, as a maritime nation, a Member
State and a member of the Council of the International
Maritime Organization, Malaysia stands behind
seafarers and other front-line workers in the
maritime sector.
Ms. McArdle (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/75/L.37.
As the world has faced the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic this year, collective international
efforts have rightly prioritized the continued functioning
of global supply chains to ensure the resilience of our
national economies.
Seafarers have been on the front line of those
efforts. They are key workers responsible for the safe
and efficient operation of the maritime transportation
system, which moves over 80 per cent of global trade.
Seafarers and those operating their ships have faced
unprecedented challenges posed by the pandemic, in
particular how restrictions have hindered their ability
to conduct ship crew changes to return home and to
access health care and assistance.
The United Kingdom has been at the forefront of
international efforts to address those challenges. In
4/14

01/12/2020

March, the United Kingdom identified seafarers and
other maritime workers as key workers. We wrote to
the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the
International Labour Organization and the World Health
Organization to confirm that we were fully committed
to the welfare of seafarers of all nationalities and to
reassure the international community that the United
Kingdom would continue to recognize its commitments
under the international conventions regarding the
transit and transfer of seafarers and their right to access
shore leave and medical care.
On 9 July, the United Kingdom hosted the
International Maritime Summit on Crew Changes,
which brought together key stakeholders from
Governments, international organizations and industry
and workers organizations. We have worked diligently
to encourage the implementation of the International
Maritime Organization’s protocol to ensure safe
ship crew changes and travel during the COVID-19
pandemic, which were subsequently approved by the
IMO Maritime Safety Committee in November.
Seafarers are the lifeblood of the world’s economy.
As a coastal port and flag State, the United Kingdom
recognizes the critical position that seafarers hold in
both the United Kingdom and the global economy. More
than ever, we need to ensure that freight is able to flow
in and out of the country and that global trade continues
for the benefit of all citizens and the global economy.
The crisis being endured by seafarers and others
at sea cannot be permitted to continue. For the sake of
their physical and mental welfare, the protection of the
marine environment and the protection of the global
economy and supply chains, we urge States to act now.
The United Kingdom continues to work on
measures that will further support seafarers, and
we are pleased to co-sponsor this draft resolution
alongside many other partners, including Indonesia. In
that regard, I would like to note that we are grateful to
Indonesia, in particular to Mr. Widya Sadnovic, for the
initiative and the inclusive approach taken throughout
the negotiation process.
Mr. De La Mora Salcedo (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico takes the floor to welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (A/75/542) on the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
The Global Compact for Migration is a document
that crowns decades of multilateral efforts to give
20-33730

01/12/2020

international migration the comprehensive treatment
it deserves. The fact that the migration issue in all its
dimensions has been consolidated in one document is
an extraordinary achievement of this Organization.
Mexico actively participated in the process of
forging the Global Compact. Today our interest in, and
commitment to, the implementation of its 23 objectives
persists. It is time to act. That is why we welcome the
progress noted in the report of the Secretary-General
and thank the United Nations Migration Network for
helping us to identify areas of opportunity.
We agreed to join the champion countries
convinced of the usefulness of the Compact in building
an international migration governance with a human
rights-based approach. Thanks to international
cooperation, the Compact is coming to life on the
ground for the benefit of Governments, migrants and
their communities.
Following the adoption of the Compact, Mexico
committed to making a voluntary contribution to the
Migration Trust Fund, which aims to carry out projects
that contribute to the implementation of the Global
Compact. We reiterate our appreciation to the Fund for
selecting a joint project between Mexico and a sister
country in our region to integrate migrants.
Mexico has reported to the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean on the actions
that it has undertaken to accelerate the implementation
and achievements of the objectives of the Compact, as
well as on the challenges that we must face. We will
actively participate in the regional review meeting to be
held in March 2021. That work has benefited from the
fundamental support of the International Organization
for Migration and United Nations agencies. with whom
we have also shared our comments on the content of the
report of the Secretary-General.
This is a propitious occasion to recognize that
the issue of migration has made enormous progress
in recent years, much of it influenced by the Compact
itself. However, we cannot ignore the impact that the
pandemic has had on the lives of migrants. Beyond the
vulnerabilities they experience, they demonstrate on a
daily basis how essential they are to the functioning of
the global economy through their work and effort.
Mexico is convinced that the Compact is a
valuable tool for strengthening dialogue, international
cooperation and shared responsibility. On the basis of

A/75/PV.32

joint efforts among States, international organizations,
the private sector and civil society, we can ensure that
migration is a decision and not a necessity.
As we agreed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, migration must be safe, orderly and
regular. We call on all delegations to take advantage
of the report presented today to ensure that migrants
are a fundamental part of efforts to achieve
socioeconomic recovery.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on these items. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.37,
entitled “International cooperation to address challenges
faced by seafarers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
to support global supply chains”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.37: Albania,
Angola, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland,
France, the Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom, the United States,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that it the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.37?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 75/17).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 14, 122 and 128 and its sub-items (a) and (b).

20-337305/14

A/75/PV.32

Agenda item 11
Sport for development and peace
(a) Sport for development and peace
(b) Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/155/Rev.1)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.30)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Monaco to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.30.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.30, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”,
in my capacity as the Permanent Representative of
Monaco and on behalf of Her Excellency Mrs. Alya
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of the State of
Qatar, as well as the other sponsors, in our capacity
as the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport
for Sustainable Development. We hope that other
delegations will join as sponsors before the adoption
of the draft resolution. I recall that the joint statement
on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on
sport, physical activity and well-being, and its effects
on social development was endorsed by 118 Member
States in June.
First of all, we welcome the active and constructive
engagement of all delegations in the consultations to
ensure that this draft resolution will be adopted by
the General Assembly by consensus again this year.
That commitment demonstrates the great interest that
Member States have in the issue of sport for sustainable
development. It also demonstrates the increased
recognition and strengthening of the work of the United
Nations system in that area. The continuing momentum
in the exchanges on this agenda item also shows that
it is particularly topical despite the significant issues
raised by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The draft resolution includes important new
elements. In the particular context of this session, this
draft resolution recognizes the significant impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of professional,
amateur and grass-roots sport, as well as on organized
and informal youth sport gatherings. The most striking
example was clearly the postponement of the Tokyo
2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games. The tireless work
of all the parties involved — the Organizing Committee
6/14

01/12/2020

for the Tokyo Olympic Games, the International
Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee and the Japanese authorities — continues
and, we are convinced, will enable those global events
to be celebrated in the summer of 2021.
In addition to that particularly symbolic example,
there are numerous effects that are all deeply felt and
lamented. The conditions in which athletes train and
compete have been disrupted. The many restrictions
have caused significant problems for the physical and
mental health and well-being of individuals, families
and communities. The difficulties facing the entire
sports ecosystem have had socioeconomic consequences
in several areas, including employment.
However, the United Nations, its entities and many
partners have not remained unresponsive to those
challenges, including by examining the impact of
the pandemic, the role of sport in our daily lives and
the contribution that the sport sector can make in the
recovery. For example, a policy brief on the impact of
the pandemic on sport, physical activity and well-being
and its effects on social development was issued by the
United Nations Department for International Economic
and Social Affairs in May this year. In addition, an
inter-agency guidance note on “Recovering Better:
Sport for Development and Peace Reopening, Recovery
and Resilience Post-COVID-19”, to which 11 United
Nations entities contributed, was adopted very recently.
References to the contribution of sport to physical
and mental health, the empowerment of young people
and the well-being of individuals and communities have
also been strengthened in this draft resolution. The
Secretary-General’s report (A/75/155/Rev.1) provides
a detailed and very relevant analysis of both the links
between sport and the COVID-19 pandemic and the
contribution of sport to sustainable development.
The report contains six recommendations, all of
which have been included in the draft resolution. They
relate to the following: first, system-wide coherence
and coordination; secondly, the inclusion of sport and
physical activity in post-COVID-19 recovery plans
and national strategies for sustainable development;
thirdly, the provision of research, normative and policy
guidance; fourthly, the provision of capacity-building,
technical cooperation and financial assistance, as
appropriate; fifthly, the harnessing of digital technology
in the context of the pandemic and beyond; and, sixthly,
the development and adoption of common indicators
20-33730

01/12/2020

to measure the contribution of physical education,
physical activity and sport.
Lastly, through the draft resolution, Member States
recognize the work of the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, which has been leading the sport
for sustainable development programme since 2017
and encourage the Department to continue its work.
Member States are further called on to support that
work, including through voluntary contributions.
In that regard, the role and activities of the Division
for Inclusive Social Development and its Director,
Ms. Daniela Bas, are crucial.
Allow me to highlight a few additional points in my
national capacity.
The Principality of Monaco has long considered
sport to be a development tool through its contribution
to health, education, inclusion and the fight against
inequalities. That belief has been strengthened by
the current situation. During the pandemic, physical
activity has often been possible only through the
use of digital technologies — for example, to follow
online exercises from home. However, disparities exist
among and within countries in terms of access to those
new technologies.
Furthermore, in order to ensure fully inclusive
access to sport and physical activity, physical education
must be at the centre of everyone’s efforts. It is often
much more difficult for girls, women, people with
disabilities and people in vulnerable situations to have
access to sports facilities and opportunities. Those
disparities need to be addressed now, and even more so
for the long term after the reopening phase.
In responding to the pandemic, as in all other areas,
we need greater solidarity among and within countries.
Through its unifying capacity, the sport movement
can be one of the major actors in that solidarity effort.
It was therefore particularly timely that awarenessraising campaigns regarding the response to the health
crisis were conducted jointly by United Nations entities
and the sport sector. I am thinking, for example, of the
#HEALTHYTogether campaign of the International
Olympic Committee, the United Nations and the World
Health Organization last June.
The role of data and statistics in measuring the
contribution of sport is also critical. For example,
it is estimated that, in the countries of the European
Union, the sport sector contributes 2 per cent of gross

A/75/PV.32

domestic product and creates several million jobs. That
socioeconomic contribution therefore goes far beyond
professional athletes alone. It is in fact a sector of
activity that involves the maintenance and management
of stadiums and sport facilities, tourism and the media,
as well as the manufacture and use of sport equipment
and materials.
I also want to reaffirm that sport is everyone’s
business. While public authorities clearly have the
primary responsibility for ensuring access to sport
and physical education for all, civil society is also a
powerful driving force in constantly enhancing the
unique potential provided by sport and its activities.
In Monaco, for example, Peace and Sport, the
association for peace through sport, has for many years
been implementing initiatives to make sport more
accessible and to use it as a tool for reconciliation
among populations emerging from conflict. A digital
application was launched to assist educators by giving
them access, in an innovative and digital way, to
educational content and the methodology developed by
Peace and Sport. Through a strong commitment at the
grass-roots level, the sport movement and the broader
civil-society sector can therefore mobilize, convince
and push the authorities to act for the collective
good of amateur sportpersons, young people and the
whole community.
In conclusion, to come back to the draft resolution,
we welcome in advance its adoption, in particular the
call made in paragraph 8 where Member States are,
inter alia, encouraged to
“include sport and physical activity in recovery
plans post COVID-19, [and] ... into national
strategies for sustainable development”.
Through its unifying capacity, its contribution to
physical and mental health, the values that it promotes,
the economic opportunities that it provides and its
social impact, sport is truly an important factor for
sustainable development.
Ms. Guo (Singapore): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report entitled “Sport: a global accelerator of peace and
sustainable development for all” (A/75/155/Rev.1). We
also thank Monaco and Qatar for co-facilitating draft
resolution A/75/L.30, entitled “Sport as an enabler of
sustainable development”.

20-337307/14

A/75/PV.32

01/12/2020

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
upended the lives and livelihoods of billions of people
around the world. Its impact has been especially severe
on the more vulnerable segments of the population, such
as, among others, children, young people, women, older
persons, persons with disabilities and those belonging
to minority groups.

upgrading all public gymnasiums to be inclusive and
senior-friendly by 2026 in order to help persons with
disabilities and seniors stay active, healthy and engaged
through sport. The Government will also continue to
support youth participation in all sports so as to help
them to develop into confident and socially engaged
young adults.

It is in these trying times that the value and benefit
of sport become even greater. Sport provides an
avenue for us to celebrate humankind and its highest
ideals. It inspires and uplifts us to pursue excellence
through grit, self-discipline and sacrifice. It promotes
respect for individuals based on their achievements,
regardless of their nationality, race and socioeconomic
circumstances, and is a powerful reminder of the
importance of diversity and friendship. It also rallies
the human spirit and creates a sense of solidarity
among otherwise complete strangers. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development therefore recognizes
the role of sport in the realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals through its promotion of tolerance,
respect and the empowerment of individuals and
communities, as well as its contributions to health,
education and social inclusion.

Thirdly, it is important to ensure the safe reopening
of spectator sporting events. For many, watching live
sporting events is a quintessential part of our sporting
culture and contributes to shared experiences. To allow
such large-scale events to resume safely, Singapore
has been piloting hybrid and in-person events, which
include sport events. That is an important step towards
finding a new balance between keeping society safe
and reinvigorating the economy.

The impact of COVID-19 on the sport sector has
been significant. Most major sporting events have been
cancelled or postponed, including the Tokyo 2020
Olympic and Paralympic Games. As the world begins
to recover from COVID-19, there will be significant
issues to address.
The first issue is to work with the sport community
to find new and innovative ways to mitigate the impact
of COVID-19. For example, to help the sport sector stay
afloat in Singapore, the Government provided financial
support to sport freelancers and businesses to transform
their business models and adopt digital solutions. That
is to ensure that core capabilities in the sport sector
are preserved and that the sport community is well
equipped to adapt to what will likely be a different
operating environment post-COVID-19. Such measures
also aim to preserve the vibrancy of the sport sector,
which, in turn, helps to generate a wider interest and
participation in sport.
Secondly, we should continue to support and
promote sport for all. Sport plays an important role
in nation- and community-building, and it contributes
to health, the quality of life and social inclusivity.
In Singapore, the Government has committed to
8/14

In this decade of action to achieve the 2030 Agenda,
Singapore reaffirms its commitment to leveraging sport
to build a more inclusive, sustainable and prosperous
future for our people.
Mr. Bin Rasidi (Malaysia): Malaysia strongly
believes in the use of sport as an important enabler
for sustainable development, especially in the field
of promoting development and peace. We remain
convinced that sport is a powerful tool, as it possesses
a universal value that unites people. It is a significant
element that binds people together and contributes to
developing patriotism and unity in our nation. Malaysia
has witnessed how sport has been able to bridge gaps
among the diverse communities in the country towards
enhancing the nation-building process.
In support of the objective that no one be left
behind, the Ministry of Youth and Sports of Malaysia
has outlined various national, regional and international
frameworks, including the National Sports Policy, the
Malaysia five-year plan, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) five-year work plan on
sports 2016-2020 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. All the planned activities and programmes
have the objective of ensuring inclusive participation
and implementation at all levels, including national,
state, district and sport associations and clubs, and at
the level of non-governmental organizations through a
multi-stakeholder approach.
Sport for All, for example, is an idea to encourage
Malaysians to develop a healthy and active lifestyle by
cultivating an interest in sport, physical exercise and
recreational activities. Translating that idea into context,
20-33730

01/12/2020

Malaysia has mobilized several key programmes, such
as Fit Malaysia, National Sports Day, Women in Sports,
e-Sports, Traditional Sport Games and other initiatives.
All those programmes include policies to ensure
inclusivity in sporting events, with the participation of
persons with disabilities, women, families and senior
citizens. They also require the upgrading of sport
facilities and infrastructure, as well as increasing
sport education and awareness programmes. All that is
with the aim of achieving the aspiration of becoming a
sporting nation. Initiatives are also tailored to ensure
alignment with Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
3, on good health and well-being, SDG 4, on quality
education, and SDG 5, on gender equality.
Like many countries in the world, Malaysia has
been adversely affected by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in many ways, including in the sport
and recreational field. The imposed restrictions on
movement have resulted in three main challenges
for Malaysia. The first challenge is to keep people
healthy and active while being homebound. The second
challenge is to ensure the survival of businesses in the
sport and recreational industry. The third challenge is
to maintain the fitness and performance of our athletes
and the public at large.
Realizing the importance of having a healthy and
active lifestyle despite being confined at home, Malaysia
initiated various activities, leveraging technology
and digitalization platforms. Those activities include
virtual fitness programmes, e-sport competitions and
healthy lifestyle tutorials suitable for individuals and
families, as well as webinars on various topics.
Special COVID-19-related standard operating
procedures were also developed to allow national athletes
who qualified for the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic
Games to continue training at various training
institutions in order to maintain their performance
levels. That was later expanded to other athletes, general
sport activities and the opening of sport facilities and
sport-related businesses. Malaysia also launched a
special sport fund, which has helped thousands of
national sport associations and other registered sport
bodies to reopen their businesses, organize sporting
activities, adopt digitalization measures and promote
research and development activities in sport. In
addition, Malaysia launched the National Coaching
Academy, which harnesses the digital platform for
the implementation of meetings, discussions and talks
pertaining to sport and physical activities.

A/75/PV.32

The National Athletes Welfare Foundation was also
established to support former national athletes who
were impacted by the pandemic. Other than monetary
incentives, the Government granted rental exemptions
for the usage of sport facilities and premises under the
Ministry of Youth and Sports.
A collaborative effort among Member States is
needed to fully overcome the impact of the pandemic.
Digital platforms, such as forums, webinars and
conferences, should be utilized by regional and
international intergovernmental organizations to
support Member States, including in sharing and
exchanging knowledge, expertise, experiences and
data, in the area of embracing the new norms in the
sport arena.
Related to that, Malaysia participated in various
platforms, including the Commonwealth Ministerial
Forum on Sport and COVID-19, on 23 July, the tenth
ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Sports, the
eleventh ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Sports
and the third ASEAN Plus Japan Senior Officials
Meeting on Sports, from 6 to 10 October, and the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation Sports Policy Network
Roundtable Meeting, on 24 November.
The ability of sport to reach millions of people all
over the world and its potential to empower, motivate
and inspire are universal and have no boundaries.
Malaysia will remain a strong advocate for sport for
development and peace. We will continue to contribute
to the realization of the ideals of sport as an instrument
that promotes social integration, economic development,
peace, fraternity, solidarity, non-violence and tolerance.
We will also continue to support the notion that sport
plays an important role in fostering peace, goodwill
and healthy competition among nations.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the State of Qatar, we are pleased to take
part in today’s important debate on the item of sport
as an enabler for development and peace. We are
very glad to welcome the adoption of draft resolution
A/74/L.30, entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable
development”. We participated in that effort along with
Monaco as co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport
for Sustainable Development.
Our discussion is taking place amid exceptional
circumstances, which have greatly affected all aspects
of our daily lives, including sport activities.

20-337309/14

A/75/PV.32

The Department of Economic and Social Affairs
issued a summary in which it emphasizes the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on
sport, physical activity and well-being, as well as social
development. We endorsed that summary with Monaco
in a statement joined by 118 other States.
The State of Qatar gives great attention to sport,
since we firmly believe that it can create positive social
change that enhances sustainable development. With
a view to achieving our national vision for 2030, the
State of Qatar has significantly invested in building and
developing sport facilities and related infrastructure in
accordance with international standards. As a result,
the State of Qatar was able to successfully host major
sporting events during the recent decades.
The State of Qatar looks forward to hosting the
International Federation of Association Football
World Cup tournament in two years’ time, namely, in
November 2022. That world event will be an opportunity
to promote the values of peace, development and
understanding among the peoples of the world. We are
confident that this unique experience will have a great
impact on sustainability and social responsibility. The
Organizational Committee for the 2022 World Cup
launched a number of programmes and initiatives,
which I commend, including the Generation Amazing
youth programme, which uses soccer games to promote
development and address social issues, in line with
the Sustainable Development Goals. We hope that the
2022 event will help to promote the well-being and
socioeconomic development of peoples and that this
World Championship will be the first environmentally
friendly and carbon-free event.
The State of Qatar includes important sport
initiatives in the development programmes that it
undertakes in different parts of the world. I would
like also to note the Doha Declaration, which is being
implemented by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and supported by the State of Qatar, with a
view to focus on education through sport and prevent
youth from becoming involved in criminal activities in
many countries around the world.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar emphasizes its
commitment to continue supporting international
efforts in order to promote the role of sport in achieving
sustainable development and establishing world peace.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset,
we thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
10/14

01/12/2020

report (A/75/155/Rev.1) related to this item. We also
compliment all States Members and entities of the
United Nations for systematically encouraging the use
of sport as a means to promote development and peace.
We join others in acknowledging the part that sport
plays, not only in advancing development, peace and
social progress but also in its key role in supporting
health, both physically and, more important, our mental
health. We are pleased that sport has been recognized
as an important enabler of sustainable development in
contributing to the promotion of tolerance and respect.
At the same time, it contributes to the empowerment
of women, young people and persons with disabilities.
During these difficult times, many people have
looked to sport to help with the challenges faced due
to the uncertainties of the coronavirus disease, which
has led to the closure of many places of leisure. The
sport community, however, has risen to the occasion
and provided the world with alternative ways to enjoy
sport indoors and outdoors.
Brunei Darussalam implemented a national sport
policy that identifies sport as a central element and
one of the most effective means for enhancing the
quality of life. Among other things, sport gives us a
platform to communicate, understand and develop
new bonds with people across nations and boundaries.
When utilized optimally, sport is a powerful tool in the
promotion and advancement of peace and harmony, not
only at the national level but also globally. By building
relationships, respect and communication among
different groups of people, sport can also be a deterrent
in preventing conflict and tension.
In Brunei Darussalam, physical education has
always been a key element of our national education
curriculum. We have encouraged learning through
play, even from a young age. That curriculum continues
up to the level of secondary education. At the tertiary
level, the Government has ensured that our colleges and
universities are equipped with the necessary equipment
and sport infrastructure.
As a small nation, we believe that it is important to
experience and interact with those beyond our borders
so as to promote a better understanding and learning
of cultures and expertise in the field of sport. In doing
so, we encourage our schoolchildren and young people
to participate in regional and international tournaments
in order to promote mutual trust and respect, tolerance
20-33730

01/12/2020

and a greater appreciation of other cultures and ways of
life, as well as forge lasting bonds of friendship.
In facing the various challenges of today, Brunei
Darussalam believes that sport can act as a positive outlet
to counter social issues, such as drug abuse, violent
extremism and overcoming mental health problems.
Like other Member States, Brunei Darussalam
has always been active in celebrating the International
Day of Sport for Development and Peace every 6 April.
We commemorate the day with a nationwide running
sporting event, among other things, and a community
sporting event, with the collaboration and participation
of all sections of society through a whole-ofnation approach. Our objective is to inculcate the spirit
and value of sport for all, and to promote inclusivity,
family bonding, health awareness and the enjoyment of
sports by all in the Bruneian society.
The Government of Brunei Darussalam also
greatly prioritizes the promotion of sport for its
people. It has invested in recreational infrastructure,
such as a 12-hectare public park in the heart of the
capital, which provides people an outlet for enjoying
sports and recreational activities and has reinvigorated
Bandar Seri Begawan as a centre for such activities.
To encourage greater understanding and contribute
to the maintenance of a harmonious Association of
Southeast Asian Nations community in Southeast Asia,
Brunei Darussalam also hosted various regional sports
events that served as a platform to promote the value
of diversity.
Brunei Darussalam reiterates its commitment to
working with other Member States and related regional
and international bodies to advance sport, particularly
as those types of activities contribute to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals. We also welcome
the sharing of best practices in sport to promote
development and peace programmes with other Member
States. We believe that this will develop, enhance and
strengthen our relations with other Member States.
Moreover, it will help foster peace and sustainable
development by uniting the global community through
social lifestyles and youth development.
As the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser
on Sport for Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried
Lemke, said:

A/75/PV.32

“Sport builds bridges between individual and
across communities, providing a fertile ground for
sowing the seeds of development and peace.”
Ms. Hayworth (United States of America):
On behalf of, and as the guest of the United States
delegation, it is an honour to address the members
of the General Assembly as they consider sport for
development and peace.
My name is Dr. Nan Hayworth. I am a medical
doctor — the first female physician elected to a full
term as a member of the United States House of
Representatives. Germane to our shared purpose
here today, I am a member of the President’s Council
on Sports, Fitness and Nutrition, for which I am the
representative on its Science Board.
Since 1956, the President’s Council has educated
Americans about the life-long benefits of athletic
participation, physical activity and healthy eating. Our
members are athletes, physicians, fitness professionals
and entrepreneurs appointed by the President to work
with the United States Department of Health and
Human Services on diverse initiatives to inspire and
promote voluntary, citizen-led efforts to enhance the
well-being of every community in our country.
During the past two years, the President’s Council
has focused on youth sports by promoting the National
Youth Sports Strategy, which is a road map for unifying
our country’s youth sports culture around a common
vision — for all to motivated to participate in and to
have full access to sports and healthy physical activity
regardless of race, ethnicity, sex, ability or location.
Athletic participation develops sound bodies and
agile minds, capable individuals and productive teams,
vibrant communities and robust nations. In a year
in which every Member State here represented has
suffered from the disruptions and sorrows of a terrible
pandemic, the citizens of the United States surely
agree wholeheartedly with the words of the SecretaryGeneral, as contained in the report (A/75/155/Rev.1)
under consideration today, entitled “Sport: a global
accelerator of peace and sustainable development
for all”:
“Investment and innovation in sports and sportrelated policies is indeed a means of building global
resilience to counter future shocks.”
I extend congratulations to the Secretary-General
on behalf of the United States delegation. The report’s

20-3373011/14

A/75/PV.32

01/12/2020

focus on the role of physical activity and sport in
mitigating the impact of the pandemic on health and
well-being is both timely and crucial. The Secretariat’s
exceptionally effective Division for Inclusive Social
Development deserves praise as well for its tireless
work throughout the year, including its May policy
brief, titled “The impact of COVID-19 on sport,
physical activity and well-being and its effects on
social development”.

that States must join instruments that they have not
already joined or implement provisions of human rights
instruments that they have not accepted. In joining
consensus on the draft resolution, we do not recognize
any change in the current state of treaty or customary
international law. We also understand that the draft
resolution’s reaffirmation of prior documents applies to
those that affirmed them initially and, in the case of
international treaties, to their States parties.

The Organization’s virtual International Expert
Group Meeting on the Impact of COVID-19 on the
Security of Major Sporting Events, convened in July,
affirmed the consensus that dedicating policies and
resources to sport participation and to preventive
measures to protect health, safety and security is an
essential investment in resilience to current and future
threats to health and well-being throughout the world.

Regarding references to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we addressed our concerns
in our general statement, delivered on 18 November.
With respect to operative paragraph 9, we support the
focus on training, capacity-building and education
of teachers, coaches and community leaders, and we
emphasizes that the United States does so mindful of,
and consistent with, our limited authority at the federal
level with respect to education, which is primarily a
responsibility of our state and local governments.

Recent months have brought signs of hope that such
dedicated efforts to adapt to pandemic precautions are
bringing sports into our lives once again. On the horizon
is a bright light for the coming new year — the Games
of the XXXII Olympiad, now known as Tokyo 2021.
The draft resolution for the Assembly’s
consideration today, “Sport as an enabler for sustainable
development”, recognizes the invaluable contribution of
the Olympic and Paralympic movements in establishing
sport as a uniquely effective means of promoting peace
and development. The text importantly reaffirms the
autonomy of sport — a principle cherished by all who
value fair, rules-based play. International sports bodies
must be free to development their own good governance
and equitable dispute resolution mechanisms, free from
external influences that may seek to exploit sport for
other ends. The autonomy of sport can offer youth
positive and constructive avenues for engaging with
their peers and a safe space to avoid radicalization to
violence and extremism — benefits exemplified by this
year’s Football for Peace event at the United Nations.

On behalf of the United States, I am privileged to
express our great appreciation for the United Nations
Action Plan on Sport for Development and Peace, and
to convey our enthusiastic as aspiration to continue this
essential work with all stakeholders. As Member States
together envision the promising horizon that awaits
us beyond the pandemic, may all peoples refresh their
appreciation of, participation in, and joy in sport, and
benefit from its power to unite us in progress towards
ever-greater health, prosperity and harmony.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): Sport
is an important way to improve people’s health and
is a key indicator of social development and human
progress. In the face of the formidable challenges of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, sports
can boost our physical health, help shield us from the
virus, motivate us to strive for excellence and spur us to
prevail over the pandemic. Sports can help the people of
the world strengthen unity and thrive together.

The United States was pleased to join the State of
Qatar in co-hosting this great occasion, proving how
sport promotes tolerance and respect, perseverance and
equality — uniting youth from different backgrounds
via their shared zest for fair competition in an inclusive
environment. Here, the field of play becomes the
foundation for peace.

The Olympic spirit remains the common aspiration
and pursuit of people the world over. The modern
Olympic Movement has brought together people of
different countries, races and cultures, increased
mutual understanding, facilitated social integration
and contributed to the promotion of world peace
and development.

As the United States joins consensus on the draft
resolution before us today, we would like to make
clear our understanding that the text does not imply

The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to this athletic undertaking and remains a supporter
of, participant in, and contributor to, the Olympic

12/14

20-33730

01/12/2020

Movement. Beijing hosted a successful 2009 Summer
Olympic Games. In 2022, the city will host the XXIV
Olympic Winter Games, making Beijing the first city to
host both the Summer and Winter Olympics. The Winter
Olympics will be the first of its kind to deliver on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which will
govern the entire process, including the application,
bidding, preparation and celebration.
Despite the fallout of the pandemic, China will
overcome challenges to complete the construction of the
main stadium, sports venues and related infrastructure
by the end of this year. Other preparatory work is also
being carried out in a steady and orderly manner. China
will do all it can to present to the world a spectacular,
extraordinary and exciting Winter Olympics.
The Beijing Winter Olympics will be a green
Olympics that will prioritize ecological preservation,
the conservation of resources and environmentally
friendliness. All the newly built venues for ice sports,
as well as non-sports venues, will meet the three-star
standards for green building. All sports venues will be
using 100 per cent green electric power. Four venues
for ice sports will use the most environmentally sound
ice-making technology, with very low carbon emissions.
The Beijing Winter Olympics will be the product
of joint endeavours and benefits in order to promote
the coordinated development of Beijing, Tianjin and
Hebei provinces, and to speed up the development
of sports and culture and tourism, and to involve
300 million people with the winter sports so that people
can enjoy real benefits thanks to the popularization of
Olympics education.
The Beijing Winter Olympics will be a noble
Olympics. China warmly welcomes the active
participation of the delegations of all countries in
an effort to strengthen athletic cooperation and
interpersonal exchanges, carry forward the Olympic
spirit and promote exchanges that benefit our
civilization — marching together towards a goal of
“Higher, Faster and Stronger”.
The Beijing Winter Olympics will be a
corruption-free Olympics. We will boost efforts to
combat corruption, achieve good governance, exercise
monitoring and supervision of the entire process and
adopt a zero-tolerance policy for doping. China will
stage a spectacular yet economical and cost-effective
event, ensuring a winter Olympics as pure and clean
as ice and snow. Let us meet in Beijing in 2022. China

A/75/PV.32

looks forward to the support and participation of all in
the Beijing Winter Olympics.
The Acting President: We have heard the
last speaker in the debate on agenda item 11 and its
sub-items (a) and (b). We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.30.
In that connection, as the draft resolution was only
just circulated this morning, it will be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear an objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with my proposal to waive rule 78.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.30, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.30: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Czechia,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,

20-3373013/14

A/75/PV.32

01/12/2020

Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uruguay, Uzbekistan and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.30?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/18).

A/75/L.30

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
requested the floor in order to explain my delegation’s
position on resolution 75/18, entitled “Sport as an
enabler of sustainable development”.
At the outset, I wish to extend our appreciation
to the Permanent Missions of Monaco and Qatar as
co-facilitators of the discussion on this annual resolution.

14/14

My delegation joined the consensus on the
resolution. However, with regard to the adoption of
domestic policies, programmes and guidelines related
to sports and physical education, including, but not
limited to, the issues of “sport for development and
peace”, “sport for all without discrimination of any
kind”, as mentioned in paragraph 10 of the resolution,
as well as those reflected in paragraph 6, we would
like to reiterate that Iran’s national laws, regulations
and priorities, as well as national instruments, plans
and programmes, shall enjoy total priority and will
be considered as the sole and final source of action
and reference.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 11 and its sub-items (a)
and (b).
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

20-33730
