190

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

deavour to lessen the special vulnerability of women in
these circumstances, by ensuring their access to emergency relief and to health programmes, and their active
participation in decision making in centres or camps for
refugees or displaced persons;
3. Urges the international community to provide
urgent and adequate assistance to all refugee and displaced women and to developing countries providing
asylum or rehabilitation, especially the least developed
and most seriously affected countries;
4. Further calls upon all States and donors assisting
in the rehabilitation, resettlement or repatriation of
refugees and displaced persons to recognize the pivotal
role of the mother in the family, and thus in the provision of family welfare, to ensure women's rights to
physical safety and to facilitate their access to counselling services and material assistance;
5. Urges the High Commissioner to work with host
country Governments to encourage the participation of
women, including refugee women, in the administration of refugee assistance programmes, notably the
provision of essential food, shelter and medical services
in countries of asylum and to promote their participation in training and orientation programmes in countries of asylum and resettlement;
6. Urges the High Commissioner to draw upon the
expertise of all United Nations bodies concerned and, in
consultation with the countries concerned, to carry out
detailed studies and research to determine the extent to
which refugee and displaced women are especially vulnerable and to formulate and implement programmes
and projects based upon the results of these studies;
7. Recommends that the Office of the High Commissioner should co-ordinate with the United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations concerned
the collection and analysis of data and the conduct of
research and case studies on the critical needs of refugee
and displaced women;
8: Further recommends that the High Commissioner
should ensure that the number of women at all levels on
his staff, particularly in the field, is increased and that a
high-level staff position is designated as a co-ordinator
for women's programmes.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/136.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976 to
1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and decided to convene a world
conference at the mid-term of the Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 158 of 17 December
1979 on the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women,
Recalling further its resolution 34/ 180 of 18 December
1979, the annex to which contains the text of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Reaffirming the principles and objectives set forth in
the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women
and Their Contribution to Development and Peace,

1975, 111 and in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year,''
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind further the consensus achieved on the
text of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 72 in particular on the implementation of the objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women within the framework of the Strategy,
Having considered the Report of the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality. Development and Peace, 11
Convinced that the Conference, by adopting the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women and other relevant decisions and resolutions," has made an important and
positive contribution to the attainment of the objectives
of the Decade and permitted the maintenance of a policy
framework to deal with the concerns of women,
Recognizing the need for the active participation of
women in the achievement of a just and lasting peace
and social progress, the establishment of the new international economic order, complete respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms and the integration of
women into the development process so that the
equality of men and women may be affirmed and their
situation improved,
Reaffirming that the realization of equal rights for
women at all levels and in all areas of life will contribute to the struggle for the elimination of colonialism,
neo-colonialism, all forms of racism and racial discrimination and apartheid,
Considering that the recommendations made in the
Programme of Action and in other relevant decisions
and resolutions adopted by the Conference should immediately be translated into concrete action by States,
the organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the Report of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
2. Endorses the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women,
as adopted at the Conference;
3. Recognizes that the Conference made an important and constructive contribution by appraising the
progress achieved and the obstacles encountered in the
implementation of the objectives of the Decade and by
preparing and adopting a programme for the next five
years:
4. Affirms that the implementation of the Programme of Action should result in the complete in0
'
See Report of the World Conference of the International Women's
Year. Mexico City, 19 June-:! July /975 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.76.IV.1 I. chap. I.
·: Ibid .. chap. 11. sect. A.
·, See sect. V. resolution J:i/56, annex.
'United Nations publication. Sales No. L.80.IV.J and corrigendum.
., Ibid .. chap. I.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

tegration of women into the development process and
the elimination of all forms of inequality between men
and women and will guarantee broad participation by
women in efforts to strengthen peace and security
throughout the world;
5. Affirms, in particular, that the implementation of
the Programme of Action and of the relevant recommendations, decisions and resolutions of the Conference will contribute to the effective attainment of the objectives of the Decade;
6. Urges Governments to take appropriate measures
to implement the Programme of Action and other relevant resolutions and decisions at the national, regional
and international levels;
7. Requests, in particular, Member States when
preparing and evaluating the execution of projects,
programmes and plans of action at national, regional
and international meetings to pay special attention to
measures for the involvement and benefit of women:
8. Calls upon all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to intensify, at regional
levels, the dissemination of information and the exchange of experiences on the participation of women in
all relevant programmes and information activities with
a view to achieving the objectives of the Decade:
9. Requests the regional commissions to consider the
Programme of Action with a view to formulating appropriate programmes for implementing the recommendations contained therein, including the organization of seminars, symposia and meetings which will
contribute towards furthering the integration of women
into the development process and the achievement of the
objectives of the Decade;
10. Urges the regional commissions to report in full
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular
session of 1982 on the specific aspects of the situation
of women in all the sectors of their development
programmes, in order to strengthen and reorient the
reporting methods of those commissions so as to reflect
more adequately the regional concerns of women, and
thereafter to report on the same subject every two years;
11. Urges all the organizations of the United
Nations system to take the necessary measures to ensure
a concerted and sustained effort for the implementation of
the Programme of Action and of other relevant resolutions and decisions of the Conference in the course of
the second half of the Decade, with a view to achieving a
substantial improvement in the status of women and to
ensuring that all their programmes take into account the
need for the complete integration of women:
12. · Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 proposals for the implementation of the
Programme of Action, taking into account the need for
the speedy establishment of the new international
economic order and the implementation of the goals and
objectives of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
which are indispensable for the advancement of women:
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider
appropriate measures to enable the Commission on the
Status of Women to discharge the functions assigned to
it for the implementation of the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the I nternational Women's Year and the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for
Women, and also requests him to take immediate action

191

to strengthen the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat at Vienna;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General and international organizations to take all the necessary action to
establish, where they do not already exist, focal points in
all sectors of the organizations of the United Nations
system in order to co-ordinate questions relating to
women and integrate them into their work programmes;
15. Invites the Secretarv-General to circulate the
report of the Conference ani'ong Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
in order to ensure that it is publicized and disseminated
as widely as possible:
16. Also invites the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the measures taken to implement the present resolution:
17. Decides to convene in 1985, at the conclusion of
the Decade, a World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women:
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth sessi'on the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace··.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/137.

Voluntarv Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Worn.en

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 133 of 16 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for management of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women, and 34 / 156 of 17 December 1979
concerning the report of the Secretary-General on the
Fund,''
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/37 and 1980/42 of 2 May 1980 on the Fund,
Welcoming the support expressed for the work of the
FW1d by the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women in its Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development, Peace" and in its resolution 42
of 30 July 1980,"
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women,"
I. N ates with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women during its seventh
and eighth sessions:''
2. Welcomes the new procedures and increased use
of the Fund in relation to projects at country level;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the relevant organs
of the United Nations system, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
"A/34/612.
,,, Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. A.
'· /hid., sect. B.
'' :\ 'J) 1:,23 and Corr I
.,, lhrd., sect. I L
