246

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

(a) To list the proposals which have been made or will
be made in the Committee and to identify those which have
awakened special interest;
(b) To examine proposals which have been made or will
be made in the Committee with a view to according priority
to the consideration of those on which agreement seems
possible and to make recommendations thereon;
3. Also decides that the Special Committee shall convene its next session from 22 February to 19 March 1982;
4. Requests the Special Committee at its next session:
(a) To accord priority to its work on the proposals regarding the question of the maintenance of international
peace and security, including those relating to the functioning of the Security Council, with a view to continuing
its examination of the compilation of proposals contained
in its report on the work of the session it held in 19806 1 and
to considering the recommendations and proposals submitted during its session in 1981 or thereafter;
(b) To consider proposals made by Member States on
the question of rationalization of existing procedures of the
United Nations and, subsequently, any proposals under
other topics;
5. Also requests the Special Committee to finalize the
draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view to its consideration and
adoption by the General Assembly, and to submit it to the
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
6. Further requests the Special Committee, in the light
of the progress it has achieved concerning the question of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, to continue its work on
this question by considering the remaining proposals contained in the list prepared by the Committee in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 33/94; 62
7. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever that
has significance for the outcome of its work;
8. Urges members of the Special Committee to participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted
to it;
9. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation in its meetings of observers of Member States
and, paying due regard to its efficiency and the time at its
disposal, allow their participation in the meetings of its
working groups;
10. Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, if they deem it necessary, their observations and proposals in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3499 (XXX);
11. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an informal working paper containing an analytical summary of
the statements made on the item in the Sixth Committee
during the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly, and
to submit it to the Special Committee at its next session;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to render all assistance to the Special Committee, including the provision of
summary records;
61
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr. I). sect. II.A.
62
lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/34/33), para. 13.

13. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization''.
94th plenary meeting
11 December 1981

36/123.

Updating of the Repertoire of the Practice of
the Security Council and the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 602 (VI) of 1 February 1952 and
686 (VII) of 5 December 1952 concerning the preparation
and publication of the Repertoire of the Practice of the
Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 796 (VIII) of 27 November 1953
and 992 (X) of 21 November 1955 concerning the preparation and publication of the Repertory of Practice of United
Nations Organs,
Recalling also its resolution 2482 (XXIII) of 21 December
1968 on the budget for the financial year 1969 which provided new posts for the continuing work on the repertories
relating to the Charter of the United Nations, the practice
of United Nations organs and the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, to be undertaken by the General Legal
Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat,
Recalling further its resolution 35/164 of 15 December
1980 concerning the preparation and publication of the supplements to the Repertoire and the Repertory,
Taking note of paragraph 13 of the report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization on the work
of the session it held in 1981, 63
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the preparation and publication of the Repertoire and the Repertory, 64
Recognizing the importance and usefulness of the Repertoire and the Repertory as the principal sources of records
for the analytical studies of the application and interpretation
of the provisions of the Charter and of the rules of procedure
made thereunder,
Requests the Secretary-General to give high priority to
the preparation and publication of the supplements to the
Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council and the
Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs in order
to bring those publications up to date as quickly as possible
and to submit a progress report on the matter to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
94th plenary meeting
11 December /981

63

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/36/33).

04

A/C. 6/36/2.
