A/64/PV.16

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

16

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 8 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 136
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/482)
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Fifth Committee that is before it?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401 the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting a delegation should,
as far as possible, explain its vote only once, either in
the Committee or in the plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee. I remind delegations that,
also in accordance with General Assembly decision
34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes.

representatives that we shall proceed to take a decision
in the same manner as in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of the
Charter”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/2).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 136.
Agenda items 73 and 74
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/206)

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report, I advise
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-54853 (E)

*0954853*

A/64/PV.16

Report of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/205)
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to take note of the
fourteenth annual report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to take note of the
sixteenth annual report of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on
Mr. Dennis Byron, President of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Byron: I am greatly honoured to address the
members of the General Assembly today.
I extend my sincere congratulations to you, Sir,
on your election as President, and wish you a
successful tour of duty.
The year 2009 marks a sad anniversary. Fifteen
years ago, between April and July 1994, genocide was
committed in Rwanda; 800,000 or more people were
killed, and still more were mutilated, raped and
tortured. Fifteen years later, efforts on all levels
continue, in Rwanda and elsewhere, to cope with this
past and to prevent similar atrocities from happening
again anywhere in the world. Courts and tribunals, on
the national and international levels, make up just one
of many tools that are required in these efforts, but
they are essential for the aim of bringing justice to the
victims.
This year also marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which
was established by Security Council resolution 955
(1994). The resolution gave the Tribunal, an organ of
justice, a unique mandate, which included not only
conducting trials, but also assisting with the restoration
and maintenance of peace and contributing “to the
process of national reconciliation” (Security Council

2

resolution
955
(1994),
seventh
preambular
paragraph) — an ambitious political goal.
Looking back to where international criminal
justice was 15 years ago, I do not think I exaggerate if
I call the achievements of the Tribunal a milestone —
both for international law and for the international
striving for justice in the broader sense.
The fourteenth annual report, covering the
Tribunal’s activities from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
which I have the honour to present today, gives
evidence of the intense work continuing at the
Tribunal. Every effort is being put into completing the
first instance to the maximum extent possible in 2010
without compromising on strict standards of fair trial
rights for the accused.
Currently, seven trials involving 10 accused are
in the evidence phase. Four of them will be completed
this year. Two more trials will commence shortly. This
intense trial activity involved the rendering of over 800
written and oral decisions and orders.
In parallel, the Trial Chambers focus on the
delivery of judgements. Since 1 July 2008, they have
rendered final judgements in eight cases involving 11
accused. By the end of this year, four more judgements
will be delivered.
In 2010, we expect the judgements in nearly all
currently pending first-instance trials — that is, in 14
trials against 24 accused. Possible spillovers concern
mainly the Karemera et al. trial, which has been
delayed by the adverse health condition of one
accused.
While the Tribunal is putting every effort into
handling efficiently this enormous workload, three
judges, from Fiji, Argentina and the Czech Republic,
left the Tribunal at the end of last year. Three new ad
litem judges, from the United Republic of Tanzania,
Madagascar and Turkey, as well as a new permanent
judge from the Russian Federation, have since joined
us and have been assigned to a number of cases. Their
mandates have been extended until the end of 2010.
All judges work on several cases simultaneously.
Many hear the evidence in one case while working on
judgements in other cases. The judges have taken on
this challenging task with full commitment, and benefit
from the essential support of very dedicated legal and
administrative staff. For the Tribunal and its

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

completion strategy, it is essential to ensure that all
judges complete their current assignments.

that the conditions for a referral of their cases to
national jurisdictions are met.

The 11 ad litem judges and the seven permanent
judges at trial level handle a comparable workload and
responsibility. The remaining differences in their terms
and conditions of service, in particular concerning their
entitlement to a pension after many years of service,
are therefore a serious source of concern. I sincerely
hope that the Assembly will address this matter in a
resolution as soon as possible.

As the Assembly may recall, two cases were
transferred from the Tribunal to France in 2007, while
previous requests for referral to Rwanda were denied
by the Trial and Appeals Chambers because of fair trial
concerns. The emphasis of the Tribunal, supported by
many Member States, is now on technical support to
enable renewed requests for referral to the country
where the horrendous crimes alleged were committed.

The Chambers of the Tribunals continue their
efforts to improve the judicial management of trials,
but are always mindful that the ultimate limits to all
management efforts have to be, and indeed are, the fair
trial rights of the accused.

The Office of the Prosecutor also responds to an
increasing number of requests for cooperation from
national authorities that are themselves investigating
cases of genocide and crimes against humanity, and
wish to obtain, in particular, access to the
comprehensive archives of his Office.

From 1 July 2008 to date, the Appeals Chamber
of the Tribunal, which is shared with the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, has delivered two judgements
and more than 30 interlocutory and other decisions,
including three which confirmed the denial of requests
for the referral of cases to national jurisdictions.
Currently, eight appeals from judgement are pending,
with further appeals expected in most, if not all, cases
currently at first instance. In order to enable the
Appeals Chamber to handle this high workload,
Security Council resolution 1878 (2009), of last July, is
therefore of critical importance. It authorized an
enlargement of the Appeals Chamber over the coming
years by up to eight additional judges.
The high intensity of activity at both trial and
appeals level also involved a particularly high
workload for Prosecutor Hassan Jallow and Registrar
Adama Dieng and their respective offices.
The Office of the Prosecutor focuses on securing
the arrest of the remaining fugitives. As of today,
11 fugitives remain at large. I am pleased to report the
successful arrest and transfer of two accused from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda to
Arusha in recent weeks. Grégoire Ndahimana made his
initial appearance before a judge of the Tribunal last
week, pleading not guilty on all charges against him.
Idelphonse Nizeyimana, who was arrested last Monday,
will make his initial appearance next week. He is one
of the four fugitives who are considered high-rank
responsible in the genocide and who are to be brought
to trial before the Tribunal. For the other eight,
Prosecutor Jallow and Registrar Dieng continue
working with national authorities in order to ensure

09-54853

The Office of the Registrar coordinates all
matters of judicial and other cooperation between the
Tribunal and Member States. As the Assembly knows,
the Tribunal depends on State support and cooperation,
and not only financially. I should only mention that
indictees have been arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal from 26 countries, in Africa, Europe and
North America. Seven countries have concluded
agreements with the Tribunal allowing those convicted
to serve sentences in their prisons.
In the reporting period, I have rendered decisions
for the transfer of 18 convicts to Mali and Benin for
the enforcement of their sentence. Two acquitted
persons remain for the time being in Arusha while the
Registrar continues his efforts to find a country of
relocation. I call once more for the support of all
Member States to find, as in previous cases,
sustainable solutions in this matter.
In the pre-closure phase, the downsizing process
has begun. At the end of September, the contracts of
over 50 staff members were not extended in sections
where services were no longer considered essential. At
the same time, it is critical to ensure an adequate level
of competent and experienced staff for the core
activities of the Tribunal — the conduct of trials and
the preparation of judgements. We are confronted with
a high departure rate in the face of the forthcoming
closure. The importance of the December 2008
Assembly resolution 63/256, which encouraged the
extension of contracts “in accordance with the relevant
prevailing trial schedules, in order to remove
uncertainty with regard to future employment”

3

A/64/PV.16

(resolution 63/256, para. 5), can therefore not be
overestimated. It has been a key political guideline for
providing staff with contract security and facilitating
staff retention.
While we work on meeting the targets of our
completion strategy, we also prepare the closure of our
Tribunal. Closing down an international court means
navigating in uncharted waters. We have been working
intensively with United Nations Headquarters — in
particular, the Office of Legal Affairs — and the
Member States in the Security Council, in discussing
and assisting the drafting of the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council on the residual
mechanism that will take over remaining and
continuous tasks after the Tribunal has closed down.
Such tasks could include trials if remaining fugitives
are arrested, but also the supervision of witness
protection orders, the enforcement of sentences and,
very importantly, the management of the Tribunal’s
vast archives.
But, beyond the structure that will follow the
Tribunal in its concrete tasks, we will have to look and
think further past the legal achievements. What legacy
will the Tribunal leave to the victims, to the Great
Lakes region and to the international community?
The answer must be a continuous and
comprehensive fight against impunity for those who
committed genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Rwanda in 1994. The Tribunal was
established by the Security Council to prosecute those
most responsible for the genocide. Those at lower
levels must be dealt with by national jurisdictions, in
Rwanda and third countries where genocide suspects
are still residing.
Closure of the Tribunal must not send the wrong
signal to the many suspected of the worst crimes still
on the run that they can now breathe more easily.
Rather, national jurisdictions need to ensure that
genocide suspects are not finding sanctuary. The
Tribunal stands ready to assist national jurisdictions in
their efforts to ensure that impunity does not prevail.
Therefore, the Tribunal continues to work on capacitybuilding, in particular through the opening of
information centres, training activities and awarenessraising in Rwanda, but also, for example, through
conferences with national prosecuting authorities and
other prosecutors of international crimes from all over
the world.

4

I thank the members of the Assembly for their
support for the Tribunal over the last one and a half
decades. Recently, we submitted our budget request for
the next biennium, 2010-2011, and I call upon the
international community to continue its support for our
efforts to complete our mandate by providing us with
the necessary funds. I also ask for support in our
efforts to ensure equity in the terms and conditions for
all our judges.
I say to the members of the Assembly: “Your
Governments have been our faithful and trustful
supporters, even in difficult times. We will not cease
our efforts to deserve your trust and support, because
your support and our efforts have the same goal: to
ensure that impunity of those who commit genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity is not
acceptable for an international community that is based
on the rule of law.”
The ad hoc Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia were the starting point of an amazing
development of international criminal justice in the last
15 years, followed by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and the
permanent International Criminal Court. At the same
time, more and more countries have changed or
enacted national legislation so as to allow dedicated
prosecutors and judges in their own jurisdictions to
bring to justice the perpetrators of horrendous crimes,
even if they are former prime ministers, military or
religious leaders or wealthy businessmen.
Let us continue working together, nationally and
internationally, to make the ambitious goal of ending
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity more and more of a reality every year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I thank the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
I now call on Mr. Patrick Robinson, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Robinson: At the outset, Mr. President, I
take the opportunity to congratulate you on your
election to the high office you now hold in the
Assembly and to wish you every success.
It is an honour to appear before the General
Assembly today in my capacity as President of the
United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

Former Yugoslavia and to present to the Assembly the
Tribunal’s sixteenth annual report.

to do all within their power to ensure the apprehension
of those fugitives as a matter of urgency.

I am proud to speak on behalf of an institution
that has had an unprecedented impact upon the
development of international humanitarian law,
international criminal law and international criminal
procedure. During the nearly 16 years of its operation,
the Tribunal has shown that international justice works,
and it has led the way in putting an end to the culture
of impunity. The Tribunal’s achievements would not
have been possible without the support of the members
of the Assembly, and I take this opportunity to convey
my gratitude to them for the support they have given to
the Tribunal, support that remains essential to the
completion of our work.

During my presidency, I have taken measures to
ensure the orderly completion of our work. A
comprehensive assessment of all present and
anticipated appellate work has been carried out, and
mid-2013 has been identified as the completion date of
our proceedings. It is important to bear in mind that the
downsizing of the Tribunal, which commences in 2010,
will result in a reduction of staff by 40 per cent by the
end of 2011.

The Tribunal’s commitment to its completion
strategy remains steadfast, and all our efforts are aimed
at finishing the Tribunal’s work as quickly as possible
in accordance with our mandate.
During the reporting period, three appeal
judgements were rendered, bringing to 86 the number
of appeal cases fully completed. Additionally, three
trial judgements were rendered, bringing to 50 the
number of trials that have been heard. At our peak, we
ran eight trials simultaneously in three courtrooms,
taking advantage of gaps in trial schedules.
In that regard, I wish to give a special
commendation to the indefatigable efforts of the newly
appointed Registrar and the staff of the Registry for the
very competent support they provide to the Chambers
of the Tribunal and to the Office of the Prosecutor.
Without translation and interpretation, both in and out
of court, without the support for victims and witnesses,
without the technical assistance and the endless
number of other services that are quietly and
consistently delivered by the Registry, the Tribunal
would immediately cease to function.
Currently, only two cases remain at the pretrial
stage, and they will commence this year. Our current
estimates are that all but four of our trials will
conclude in 2010, with three finishing in early 2011,
and the final trial, that of Radovan Karadžić, ending in
early 2012. Unfortunately, there are two fugitives still
at large: Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. Failure to
bring them to justice will leave a stain on the historic
contribution of the United Nations to peacebuilding in
the former Yugoslavia. I therefore urge Member States

09-54853

At the same time, the Tribunal is continually
looking for new and creative ways to increase the
productivity of our work. While it is impossible to
foresee all causes of delay in a judicial environment,
responsible management dictates that potential
obstacles be identified, controlled, and ultimately
dispelled.
One specific factor of critical concern to the
Tribunal is the retention of its highly qualified staff.
This I wish to stress because it is a factor that is not
entirely within the Tribunal’s control. The importance
of retaining the staff necessary for completing the
Tribunal’s work, while downsizing those whose tasks
have been discharged, places the Tribunal in an
extraordinarily difficult position.
Upholding the morale of an institution during the
final stages of its lifespan is a great challenge. Many
staff members will be tempted to seek more permanent
employment elsewhere, long before their posts in the
Tribunal are abolished. This is a great risk to the
productivity of our work. In fact, many have already
left, and currently we are losing staff at a rate of one a
day. If that rate of attrition continued, by the end of the
year we would have lost 30 per cent of our staff.
In that regard, I am extremely grateful to the
General Assembly for its adoption last year of
resolution 63/256, which recognizes the difficulty and
allows the Tribunal to offer contracts to staff, in line
with the dates of planned post reductions and in
accordance with trial schedules. However, while that
measure is beneficial, it is not enough. Highly qualified
and professional staff, essential for the completion of
the Tribunal’s work, continue to depart at alarming
rates. When a staff member who has served at the
Tribunal for a number of years decides to leave, the
problem that arises involves more than just filling a

5

A/64/PV.16

vacant post, a process that, incidentally, consumes
precious Tribunal resources in and of itself.
Our jurisdiction is a very specialized one,
requiring a high level of expertise and hands-on
experience, so that even a very knowledgeable and
experienced professional person needs time to obtain
the skills required to successfully function at the
Tribunal. The flow of essential staff away from the
Tribunal needs to be stemmed now. Failure to take
swift action in this regard will extend the time needed
for the completion of the Tribunal’s mandate, because
of its impact on the efficiency of our work.
The Tribunal has long been active in bringing this
matter to the attention of Member States, but, other
than in resolution 63/256, to which I referred earlier,
no further supportive action has been taken. I am aware
that significant changes to the contractual regime in the
United Nations are on the Assembly’s fall agenda,
changes that could be of great assistance to our efforts
to retain staff. In particular, the continuing
appointments will offer some of the stability that we
sorely need. The end-of-service grant is another
initiative that could help us to slow our attrition rate
and ensure that we can complete our mandate as
expeditiously as possible. I also urge the Assembly to
assist the Tribunal in devising other measures to retain
its highly qualified staff.
Another matter that I wish to bring to the
Assembly’s attention is the work the Tribunal is
carrying out to ensure that it fulfils its mandate of
contributing to the maintenance of peace and security
in the former Yugoslavia and to ensure that local
jurisdictions have the capacity to continue with the
prosecution of war crimes cases in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004).
While working full speed on its trials and
appeals, the Tribunal has enlisted the expertise of other
international organizations and engaged in a series of
capacity-building initiatives. I am happy to report that
the projects brought to the Assembly’s attention last
year by my predecessor have now been concluded,
resulting in the publication of a manual that describes
the practices of the Tribunal in unprecedented detail, as
well as giving a comprehensive assessment of
capacity-building efforts in domestic jurisdictions
throughout the former Yugoslavia.

6

On the basis of that assessment, the Tribunal is
deepening its cooperation with the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Office for Democratic Institutions. And,
together with them, we are preparing an ambitious
project to guarantee that the national justice systems in
the region have the capacity to deal with their growing
war crimes caseload, as the Tribunal heads towards the
completion of its core activities. Generous funding
from the European Commission is expected for this
timely undertaking.
The Prosecutor’s Office has also been active in its
capacity-building efforts, forging strong partnerships
with its counterparts in the region. To this end, the
Prosecutor — again, with funding from the European
Commission — has established a visiting professionals
programme, under which prosecutors from the region
work with the Office of the Prosecutor on cases at the
Tribunal in The Hague.
There is another matter that I feel obliged to
bring to the Assembly’s attention, one that I strongly
believe must be addressed if there is to be lasting peace
and reconciliation in the region. I refer to
compensation to victims for the atrocities they suffered
during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. As
President of the Tribunal, I have met on numerous
occasions with victims’ groups, which have expressed
their anguish at the failure of the international
community to provide any kind of compensation for
their suffering.
In many respects, the victims feel that they have
been forgotten by the international community and that
their rights have been disregarded. With respect to their
right to compensation, I must agree that the
international community has forgotten them. Currently,
there is no effective mechanism by which victims can
seek compensation for their injuries, despite the fact
that their right to such compensation is firmly rooted in
international law.
I need only refer to the Assembly’s 1985
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims
of Crime and Abuse of Power (resolution 40/34,
annex), but reference can also be made to the “Basic
principles and guidelines on the right to a remedy and
reparation for victims of violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law”, referred to by the
Commission on Human Rights in its resolution

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

2000/41, adopted in April 2000. The Statute of the
International Criminal Court provision addressing
victim compensation contrasts sharply with the absence
of comparable provisions in our Statute.
Those instruments were established by the
international community because justice is not only
about punishing perpetrators, but also about restoring
dignity to victims by ensuring that they have concrete
means to rebuild their lives. The Declaration itself
identifies sources of compensation, including the
offender, or national funds, but in circumstances where
the State is unable to compensate the victim it proposes
that other funds be established for the purpose.
Former Tribunal President Jorda brought the
matter to the attention of the Security Council in
November 2000, in a letter suggesting that
“the President of the Security Council
recommend to the Council and to the SecretaryGeneral that methods of compensating victims of
crimes in the former Yugoslavia, notably a claims
commission, be considered by the appropriate
organs of the General Assembly”. (S/2000/1063,
appendix, para. 48)
But, sadly, to date nothing has been done, and I fear
that failure by the international community to address
the needs of victims of the conflicts that occurred in
the former Yugoslavia will undermine the Tribunal’s
efforts to contribute to long-term peace and stability in
the region. That is why I implore the Assembly to
support the establishment of a claims commission as a
method of complementing the Tribunal’s work by
compensating victims of crimes in the former
Yugoslavia.
In closing, I would like to reflect once again upon
the tremendous achievements of the Tribunal. Its
establishment in 1993 ushered in a new era in
international affairs and led to the establishment of
other international criminal justice institutions. In that
regard, the impact of the Tribunal on the development
of international justice has been profound. I urge the
General Assembly to ensure that this work is not
unnecessarily tarnished by the continuing flight from
justice of the remaining two fugitives.
I would also like to re-emphasize that the
Tribunal is doing all it can to complete its work
expeditiously and fairly, while upholding the highest
standards of a United Nations international court. But

09-54853

if the Tribunal is to meet its current target dates it
needs the help of Member States in ensuring that the
orderly completion of its work is not hampered by the
departure of its highly qualified and still very
necessary staff.
Together we strive towards the same objective:
fighting impunity and bringing justice to victims of
gross violations of international law. As the Tribunal
completes its mandate, the torch will be passed to the
judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in the former
Yugoslavia to continue this ambitious endeavour.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in his remarks on 17 July 2008
at the commemoration here at United Nations
Headquarters of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, stated that the
“fight against impunity started in earnest with the
establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. These courts pioneered the emergence
of international criminal justice, and the
enforcement of international humanitarian law”.
It is our hope that the entrenchment of justice and
the rule of law will lead to lasting peace and prosperity
in the former Yugoslavia, a peace and prosperity so
justly deserved.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Assembly, I thank the President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.
This year, once again, the European Union
reaffirms its unwavering support for the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). As Judge Patrick L. Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and Judge Charles Michael Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, have just shown in their presentations, the
Tribunals are making invaluable contributions to our
shared goal of ending impunity for serious
international crimes. The European Union thanks them

7

A/64/PV.16

both for their excellent reports, and commends them
for their efforts to successfully complete the work of
the Tribunals. The European Union also pays special
tribute to the relentless work of all the staff of the
Tribunals.
Since their establishment the Tribunals have
served as an inspiration to the international community
by refusing to let perpetrators of heinous crimes escape
justice. This sends a clear signal that war crimes,
genocide or crimes against humanity will not go
unpunished, and fosters a culture of accountability.
The Tribunals have played key roles in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting long-term
stability and reconciliation, and not only in the Balkans
and Rwanda. Their work has had far wider effects than
that. The Tribunals have been forerunners and groundbreakers in their development of case law and
jurisprudence, making invaluable contributions to
international humanitarian law and international
criminal law. Their contributions span from making
essential definitions regarding the reach of
international humanitarian law to the important finding
that rape and sexual violence with the intent to destroy
a protected group as such can constitute genocide.
The work of the two Tribunals has shown that
international criminal law is an enforceable body of
law. This contributed to and accelerated the elaboration
and adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in 1998, to which the European
Union reaffirms its strong commitment. Neither the
Tribunals nor the ICC were ever intended to replace
national courts. This principle has guided them and the
international community also to engage actively in the
strengthening of national judicial systems.
In recognition of strengthened domestic capacity,
the Security Council in its resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004) called on the ICTY and ICTR to transfer
all lower and mid-level accused back to competent
national jurisdictions in the region for trial by domestic
courts. The ongoing strengthening of the Rwandan
legal system and its ability to adjudicate cases from the
ICTR will, hopefully, permit the ICTR to transfer such
defendants to the Rwandan courts and thus allow the
Tribunal to fulfil its completion strategy. These
strengthening efforts have been fully supported by the
European Union. We note with appreciation the efforts
made by Rwanda to meet the demands regarding the
right to a fair trial.

8

Despite continuing appeals by the international
community, 13 accused remain at large, 2 indicted by
the ICTY and 11 indicted by the ICTR. The failure to
arrest these accused remains a grave concern to the
European Union. Among those still at large are key
indictees allegedly responsible for the most serious
atrocities, such as Ratko Mladić and Félicien Kabuga.
The EU commends the cooperation of the
Ugandan authorities and INTERPOL which led to the
very recent arrest and transfer to the ICTR of one of
the top accused who is facing multiple charges of
genocide and crimes against humanity. While there are
many commendable instances of cooperation, the
European Union continues to urge all States to
cooperate immediately and unconditionally with both
Tribunals in full adherence with their obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions regarding the
arrest and surrender of remaining fugitives, and the
transfer of any documents requested by the Prosecutor.
The European Union remains committed to
ensuring that all indictees face justice. In this regard,
the EU recalls that cooperation with the ICTY is
essential in relation to the EU stabilization and
association process.
The EU encourages States to conclude
agreements on the enforcement of sentences and on the
relocation of witnesses, indispensable for the effective
implementation of the Tribunals’ work.
The Tribunals are approaching the end of their
work. They were not intended to be permanent, and
will cease to exist when the Security Council deems
that the work for which they were set up has been
accomplished. We look forward to that moment, as it
will mark the end of the Tribunals’ mission and
confirm their undisputed success.
The European Union takes note of the estimated
delay in meeting the original completion strategy
deadlines due to a number of factors, including the late
capture and transfer of fugitive indictees. The EU urges
the Tribunals to continue to identify further measures
to complete their work as efficiently and promptly as
possible. We acknowledge the importance of the
Tribunals’ being granted appropriate resources to
enable them to complete the proceedings as soon as
possible without compromising due process.
The European Union is committed to preserving
the legacy of the Tribunals after their closure. As

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

already stated, their contribution has not been limited
to the development of case law. Their practice and
experience on how to prosecute and prevent crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes have been
equally extensive, and should be transferred to
international and national jurisdictions.
The European Union therefore warmly welcomes
the publication by the ICTY, assisted by the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, of a manual of its developed practices for use
by other domestic and international courts. We also
welcome the report produced collaboratively by the
ICTY, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the United Nations on the capacitybuilding needs of the local judiciaries dealing with war
crimes proceedings in the region concerned.
The EU further welcomes the work on residual
issues by the Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, including identifying
which functions need to continue after the two
Tribunals have completed their work. We highly value
the open and transparent discussions under Austrian
chairmanship on those issues. The EU fully supports
the establishment of mechanisms to deal with residual
functions. We stand ready to work with the Council to
find the most appropriate, cost-effective solutions to
the residual and legacy issues.
Mr. Morrill (Canada) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and
New Zealand — the CANZ delegations.
First, Canada, Australia and New Zealand pay
tribute to the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), whose
pioneering work has made a significant contribution
towards ensuring accountability by those responsible
for the most serious international crimes: genocide,
crimes against humanity, and war crimes.
By bringing to justice the perpetrators of such
crimes, the Tribunals have helped to strengthen the rule
of law and to promote long-term stability and
reconciliation in the Balkans and in Rwanda. Their
work shows that peace and justice can go hand in hand.
The jurisprudence of both Tribunals also forms a
significant part of their legacy, one which will be
drawn upon for many years to come.

09-54853

CANZ welcomes the capture of Idelphonse
Nizeyimana and his transfer to the ICTR, and commends
the remarkable cooperation of the Government of
Uganda in that endeavour. In order for the Tribunals to
complete their work it is imperative that all the
remaining indictees be surrendered, particularly Ratko
Mladić, Goran Hadžić and Félicien Kabuga. States that
continue to help these fugitives escape international
justice undermine not only our common fight against
impunity, but their own commitment to the rule of law.
(spoke in English)
CANZ appreciates the efforts being made by both
Tribunals towards achieving the goals outlined in their
respective completion strategies. We note as well the
recent Security Council resolutions extending the terms
of office of the judges of the ICTY and the ICTR.
CANZ continues to urge both Tribunals to identify
measures that will enable them to complete their work
as efficiently and promptly as possible, including the
transfer of cases to national courts where appropriate.
We hope that the further steps that Rwanda has taken
over the last year to strengthen its judicial system will
see the first cases referred to Rwanda in the near
future.
With both Tribunals working towards the end of
their mandates, a vital aspect of concluding the
Tribunals’ work is how to address the associated
residual issues of completion, including enforcement of
sentences, the continuing protection of witnesses,
detention issues, future applications by convicted
persons, and the preservation and protection of archives.
CANZ welcomes the important steps that have
been taken already by both the ICTR and the ICTY to
deal with residual issues. In fact, residual issues
flowing out of the ending of the work of the
ICTR/ICTY are the subject of an informal meeting
convened by Austria as the Chair of the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals that is taking place on this very day.
While every situation is different, CANZ believes
that lessons learned and solutions found in the
ICTR/ICTY context may also be applicable to other
tribunals, such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Equally, the
work being done in other tribunals on residual issues
can help to inform the discussions relating to the
ICTR/ICTY. We note past and current efforts of

9

A/64/PV.16

exchange between the tribunals. We also encourage
further discussion within the international community
to ensure that the lessons learned and the mechanisms
developed in one tribunal are examined for potential
application to others. We are also pleased to note that
Canada will support a workshop on residual issues to
be held here in New York early next year.
The ICTY and the ICTR continue to contribute
significantly to the fight against impunity. The
successful completion of their work relies on the
cooperation and support of all States. We call upon
States to give practical effect to their commitment to an
effective system of international criminal justice. For
our part, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand will
continue to offer the Tribunals our full support and
cooperation in this vital dosing stage of their existence.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Having heard the
presentation of the annual report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
by its President, Judge Patrick Robinson, I would like
to express my satisfaction with the comprehensive
approach taken in the report, as well as with the
appraisal given to the efforts of my Government. In
this connection, I once again pledge Serbia’s full
commitment to fulfilling its international obligations
with regard to cooperation with the ICTY. A successful
conclusion of cooperation with the ICTY remains one
of the utmost priorities of the Government of Serbia. In
that respect, we attach importance to the visit of Judge
Robinson to Belgrade last July, the first such visit of a
President of the ICTY to Serbia. The visit provided
additional impetus and encouragement to the efforts
that my country is making.
The level of cooperation with the ICTY, especially
as regards access to archives and provision of
documents to the Tribunal, witness protection and the
provision of waivers for testifying in the proceedings,
provides ample proof of the commitment of the
Government of Serbia and its relevant authorities to
full cooperation with the ICTY.
We also note with appreciation the assessment
that the professionalism and efficiency of our services
involved in the search for fugitives has generally
improved. Cooperation with, and monitoring by, the
Office of the Prosecutor, as well as other relevant
international factors, give further testimony that every
effort is being made in tracking down the last two
remaining fugitives, apprehending them and bringing

10

them to justice. The capture of Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić, for my country, remains not only an
international obligation, but also an indication of our
acceptance of international standards with respect to
individual responsibility for war crimes and other
violations of international humanitarian law.
Let me express our firm conviction that the fight
against impunity is in the common interest of all the
peoples of the former Yugoslavia. Having witnessed a
trend of increased regional cooperation in the processing
of persons indicted for war crimes, we are convinced
that further strengthening of national judicial capacities
contributes in the best way to the realization of
universal principles of justice and fairness.
In that sense, it is important to acknowledge that,
15 years following the conflict, new realities have
emerged in our region, especially improved relations
and cooperation between States, as well as restored
administrative capacities. We therefore believe that
what is needed is that the competent organs of the
United Nations reconsider and revise their position on
the serving of prison sentences by convicted persons in
their home countries. We hope that the ICTY will lend
its support to the aspirations and intentions of the
countries of the region in this regard.
Speaking about cooperation within our region, I
would also like to remind the General Assembly of one
negative example. Media in Serbia and neighbouring
countries have widely reported that documents,
including United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo documents, pertaining to the
existence of clandestine clinics where abducted Serbs
from Kosovo were taken to suffer the worst fate of
being subjected to the forced harvesting of organs till
death, the practice highlighted in the book of former
ICTY prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, were destroyed. The
legal bodies of Serbia issued an appeal for assistance,
including by the ICTY, in the conduct of its
investigation of this grave matter.
Serbia’s unequivocal support for the Tribunal was
demonstrated by the adoption of an official position by
the Government of the Republic of Serbia on 13 March
2009 in relation to the residual mechanism and
completion strategy of the ICTY. That position has
been duly circulated to the members of the Security
Council. We also remain committed to our position on
the issue of ICTY archives, circulated in November

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

2008, and stand ready to support all initiatives that
could expedite the remaining work of the Tribunal.

Tribunal, and look forward to additional agreements
being concluded.

Mr. Wetland (Norway): I start by expressing
Norway’s continuing support for, and full recognition
of, the achievements and high standards of the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
Former Yugoslavia, as reflected in the Tribunals’ wellreasoned judgements and the annual reports before us.
We thank the Presidents of the two Tribunals, Judges
Byron and Robinson, for their detailed and informative
reports, which describe the progress made during the
last year.

The failure to arrest remaining fugitives
continues to be of concern to us. It is not acceptable
that perpetrators of serious international crimes are
evading legal proceedings. We therefore welcome the
arrest this week of Idelphonse Nizeyimana, one of the
remaining accused by the Rwanda Tribunal, and his
prompt transfer to Arusha from Uganda. This is an
important step forward. We urge the continued
cooperation and support of all Member States in order
to fulfil their obligation to arrest and transfer fugitives
to the Tribunals without delay.

The Tribunals’ work has been crucial in
advancing justice and the rule of law in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia. The Tribunals will leave a
legacy of international jurisprudence that can guide
courts and deter the future commission of grave
crimes, as well as prevent impunity.
As the completion dates for the Tribunals draw
nearer, I would like to focus on three specific issues,
all of which are significant for the successful
completion of the Tribunals’ work: continued efforts by
the Tribunals to implement their completion strategies;
the cooperation of Member States; and the agreement
in the Security Council concerning residual issues.
Both Tribunals are continuing the hard work to
complete their mandates. The Yugoslavia Tribunal has
concluded proceedings against 120 of the 161 indicted
persons. The Rwanda Tribunal has delivered judgements
for 45 of the accused at the first instance, and for 27 of
the accused at the appellate level. We commend both
Tribunals for their commitment to meeting the
completion strategies, while ensuring that due process
standards and fundamental legal principles are fully
respected. We urge the Tribunals to continue their
efforts in this regard.
The Tribunals cannot successfully complete their
mandates without the full cooperation of States. It is
crucial at this point that States give both Tribunals their
unreserved support. All States must honour their
obligations with regard to requests for full and
effective assistance to the Tribunals. This applies with
regard to witnesses, financial and material support and
practical assistance in the enforcement of sentences.
Moreover, the important responsibility for enforcing
sentences must be shared by more States. We welcome
the conclusion of new agreements by the Yugoslavia

09-54853

Lastly, I draw the Assembly’s attention to the
issue pending in the Security Council, namely, how the
residual issues should be dealt with after completion of
the Tribunals. We have read with interest the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/258), dated 21 May
2009. While we are fully aware of the ongoing
deliberations in the Council’s Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, we urge the Council to
conclude its work on these important issues as soon as
possible. This will help to ensure a proper transition
from two Tribunals to one or possibly two mechanisms
that can perform the necessary tasks after the closure
of the Tribunals.
One of the key outstanding issues concerns the
location of such a mechanism or mechanisms. Norway
would support an approach which also fully
incorporated the needs of other United Nations-assisted
courts.
One should take full advantage of possible
synergies. As we all know, the International Criminal
Court is expected to move into its permanent premises
in 2014. According to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the current relocation plans for the Court
could still be adapted to accommodate the needs of a
residual mechanism. Without prejudice to the outcome
of the discussions in the Security Council, I suggest
that that is one of many issues that indicate the need
for expeditious action by the Council.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I begin by welcoming
President Robinson and President Byron and thanking
them for presenting the Tribunals’ respective reports.
Croatia continues to support the Tribunals’ efforts
to ensure early and orderly completion of their work.
We recognize that they have entered a critical period in

11

A/64/PV.16

which it will be necessary to begin to downsize while
continuing to work on remaining cases and
transitioning towards an appropriate infrastructure that
will take up their residual issues in the future.
Allow me to make a few remarks regarding the
activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) over the past year, given
the importance that my country attaches to its work.
For Croatia it remains imperative that the
transition towards the Tribunal’s closure leave no
impunity gaps. Notwithstanding the impressive trial
figures quoted in the report by President Robinson, the
mandate of the ICTY cannot be declared completed
without bringing to justice two remaining fugitives —
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić — who bear
responsibility for some of the gravest crimes
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia:
the massacres in Srebrenica and Vukovar. The arrest
and trial of high-level fugitives must be a priority, not
just for the Tribunals, but for the international
community. We therefore welcome the recent arrest of
high-level fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and hope to see
an early beginning of their respective trials.
More than a year ago another high-profile
fugitive, Radovan Karadžić, was arrested. We regret to
note that his case is still in the pretrial phase, despite
the fact that more than a dozen years have passed since
his indictment.
We take note of the anticipated dates for the
closure of the Tribunals, which will slip well into the
next decade. While we share concerns expressed about
lengthy trials, we also recognize the need to be
realistic. The early closure of the two Tribunals is a
legitimate objective, but not at the expense of the fair
trial guarantees.
Croatia welcomes steps that the Tribunals are
taking towards redeploying resources and personnel in
order to better respond to new circumstances after
2010, when an influx of appeals is expected. We are
also aware of the problem of the attrition of personnel,
as highlighted by Presidents Byron and Robinson. In
order to bring their mandate to an orderly closure, the
Tribunals have to have sufficient capacity and
resources.
We are cognizant that justice, and in particular
international justice, is costly, complex and, sometimes,

12

slow. While the Tribunals’ mandates are slowly coming
to a close, the trials before national courts will
continue. It is the courts of our region that will
continue the work started by the ICTY. The Croatian
judiciary has clearly demonstrated its ability to conduct
trials of even the most sensitive cases, including the
one case that was transferred to it by the ICTY.
As the processing of war crimes is likely to
continue in the foreseeable future, Croatia has a special
interest in finding sustainable, just and practical
solutions for discharging the Tribunals’ residual
functions, notably those related to the future of the
Tribunals’ archives, liaising with the Prosecutor’s
Office, and the modalities of serving the sentences.
Croatia will continue to insist on, and fully
support, the fulfilment of the mandate of the ICTY,
recognizing it as a key force in a process of restoring
the victims by providing justice, which in turn paves
the way for a better future, a future of peace, security,
cooperation and prosperity, for the whole region.
We are glad that the present report has confirmed
Croatia’s overall good cooperation with the ICTY.
Croatia’s commitment to full, open and unequivocal
cooperation with the Tribunal is unwavering, including
in the Gotovina et al. case, as demonstrated by the
close and intense working relationship developed
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Croatian
Government on all levels. In the case that I have just
mentioned, the Croatian authorities have continued to
take concrete administrative, investigative and judicial
measures, in close consultation with the Prosecutor, in
order to meet to the maximum extent possible the
Office of the Prosecutor’s requests regarding missing
documents. We believe that recent steps, in conjunction
with the earlier measures undertaken as part of an
administrative investigation, and the ensuing criminal
proceedings, will prove once again that the cooperation
with the Office of the Prosecutor is full and open.
The crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda over the past decade continue to haunt our
collective conscience. The two Tribunals have already
made a profound impact through the process of
individualizing guilt for crimes committed and
building a body of law as their lasting legacy to the
regions affected and to the world, not least as a
precursor to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court.

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

The Tribunals’ success and their legacy will be
judged by their credibility. That is why it is essential
that there be no closure without a credible strategy
which will ensure that impunity cannot outlast justice.
The Tribunals’ mandates should not be terminated
before putting in place appropriate structures for
managing residual issues, including trials of the
remaining high-profile fugitives. Croatia will continue
to work with others to that end.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): My delegation congratulates
you, Sir, on your election to preside over the
Assembly’s deliberations, and also congratulates the
other members of your Bureau. We assure you of our
full commitment and support as you discharge the task
before you.
I begin by thanking the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Dennis Byron, and the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, Judge Patrick Robinson, for their
comprehensive annual reports submitted to the
Assembly in conformity with the respective Statutes
establishing the Tribunals.
Kenya notes the numerous challenges facing both
Tribunals, which include unprecedented judicial
workloads during their winding-up phase. We are,
however, encouraged that, due to exceptional leadership,
commendable progress has been made towards
achievement of their respective completion strategies.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the measures
taken by both Tribunals, including amending their rules
of procedure, with a view to expediting the delivery of
justice. That is a positive step towards reducing the
pending workload.
Enforcement of sentences by the ICTR is a matter
of concern. In this respect, my delegation is pleased
that some countries have agreed to host persons
convicted by the Tribunal for purposes of serving their
sentences. Kenya believes this support and assistance
helps ease congestion in the Tribunal’s detention
facilities, and is critical to the proper discharge of its
functions. We continue to urge Member States to give
enhanced cooperation, and in this connection welcome
the positive development noted in paragraph 54 of the
report, where we learn that during the reporting period
the ICTR continued to receive a number
“of requests for mutual legal assistance from
national jurisdictions conducting investigations,

09-54853

with a view to the prosecution or extradition of
Rwandan fugitives appearing on the INTERPOL
wanted list”.
Kenya will consistently continue to support the
international criminal justice system. Through the
relevant Government departments and agencies, my
country has been working closely with both the ICTR
and the International Criminal Court in all areas.
I am happy to inform the Assembly that on
30 September Kenya signed an extradition treaty with
Rwanda. That is a positive development as the ICTR
draws closer to completion of its mandate, because it
will facilitate further cooperation between the two
countries during the Tribunal’s post-closure period.
My country believes that both Tribunals have
contributed immensely to the development of
international criminal law. Their jurisprudence provides
useful reference material for various stakeholders.
My delegation encourages the efforts to promote
dissemination of information on the activities of the
Tribunals. The issue of providing safe custody of the
records and material emanating from both institutions
is a challenge that needs to be resolved. The
Government of Kenya is looking very favourably into
this question with respect to the ICTR.
The official visits to both Tribunals by highranking officials from Governments and other
organizations, in our view, reflect the recognition
conferred on the Tribunals. We also believe that they
play an important role in enhancing the image of both
institutions as central organs for international disputeresolution. We encourage such visits as part of the
awareness programmes, and appreciate the measures
put in place to educate officials from Member States.
Kenya supports the case put forward by the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda on behalf of the ad litem judges, who
discharge the same functions as the permanent judges
of the Tribunals. We urge the Assembly to resolve the
matter.
Finally, my delegation appreciates support for
training provided by the EU to both Tribunals. We are
convinced the training will promote understanding of
international criminal law and the need to prevent
future occurrences of the heinous crime of genocide.
We urge the EU and other development partners to

13

A/64/PV.16

consider extending the training programmes to wider
regions.

efforts of the ICTR and the Government of Rwanda to
ensure that the requirements for transfer are satisfied.

I once again reaffirm my country’s commitment
to the ideals and principles of the international criminal
justice system.

Recent suggestions by the ICTR that domestic
justice in Rwanda is somewhat below standard are
unacceptable. The Government of Rwanda has
undertaken wide-ranging reforms of legal instruments
to accommodate and clarify aspects of the law that
were hindering the transfer of cases to Rwanda.
Whereas the Tribunal’s Office of the Prosecutor has
been transferring files of unindicted suspects to the
Rwandan Public Prosecution Authority, recent requests
by the ICTR Prosecutor to transfer outstanding cases
involving lower-rank accused to Rwanda were denied
by the Trial Chambers. Those decisions are not
encouraging for our future collaboration and
cooperation.

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): My delegation thanks the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the presentation of his report to the
General Assembly.
The Government of the Republic of Rwanda
appreciates the contribution of the international
community to justice and reconciliation in Rwanda in
the aftermath of the 1994 genocide, and recognizes the
contribution the ICTR has rendered to this end. I also
take this opportunity to commend the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government of
Uganda and INTERPOL for their concerted efforts in
arresting genocide fugitives Grégoire Ndahimana and
Idelphonse Nizeyimana, both of whom are now in
Arusha, Tanzania, awaiting justice.
My delegation is of the firm view that the best
way to give the strongest impetus to justice and
reconciliation in Rwanda would be by justice being
done, and being seen to be done, where the crimes took
place. Rwanda on its part has done everything within
its modest means to provide justice to its people,
through a combination of traditional and more formal
systems of justice. It is for that reason that my
Government insists that no residual mechanism of the
ICTR should have a trial capacity after 2010.
All cases for which trial has not begun by the end
of 2010 must be transferred to the national courts of a
State in whose territory the crime was committed or in
which the accused was arrested, or to any other State
willing and able to accept them. That is the only way
for the international community to ensure that the
global fight against impunity for the remaining
fugitives is carried on while achieving the stated
objective of putting an end to the work of the ICTR.
Rwanda has long called for the transfer of
accused in the custody of the ICTR for trial before our
domestic courts. Public administration of justice in
Rwanda is clearly preferable to any form of justice
outside Rwanda, either in third-party States on the
basis of universal jurisdiction or before an international
tribunal. The international community has a singular
opportunity to achieve this through adequate joint

14

We look forward to the ICTR reviewing its
rulings that resulted in preventing domestic courts in
other countries from extraditing fugitives to Rwanda
for trial. From experience, it is noticeable that the
usefulness of international prosecutions is limited. The
ICTR has prosecuted a handful of cases, and, with the
exception of the few cases in Belgium, Switzerland,
the Netherlands, Canada and Finland, there is a total
lack of interest and enthusiasm in prosecuting
Rwandan genocide suspects abroad. Those countries
that have the appropriate laws perhaps lack the
resources, but mostly lack the political will to do so.
As I have mentioned, Rwanda has over the years
modernized its domestic justice system, modelled on
international standards, including prison conditions,
training of judicial personnel and promoting judicial
independence and impartiality. Because the Tribunal
was never meant to provide justice for the masses,
genocide justice has been essentially a domestic
process.
Rwanda is of the view that the ICTR residual
mechanism must be entrusted with unfinished or
ongoing business that relates back to proceedings
already conducted or ongoing at the cut-off date of
31 December 2010, bearing in mind that, for consistency
and fairness, no new trials should commence past the
first quarter of 2010.
All other matters must be transferred to national
systems. Hence, should the defence of an accused
transferred within a national system seek access to
records in a previous case which are material to its
case, and, of course, which are not available to the

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

public, the residual mechanism would be competent to
handle the request.
The same goes for variations of protective
measures and so on. It should be borne in mind that
just because some cases have been conducted before
the ICTR that does not create a requirement that the
accused in other cases must have access to ICTR
archives for them to have a fair trial. Those that have
been tried before our domestic courts did not have such
access, nor was it necessary or required.
The Government of Rwanda has also expressed
its preference that those convicted by the ICTR should
serve their sentences in Rwanda, a call which thus far
has gone unheeded, despite our willingness and efforts
to meet all the conditions required for Rwanda to
accommodate ICTR convicts, in accordance with
international standards. Rwanda, with the support of
members of the international community, has invested
resources in the legal, physical, professional and
logistical infrastructures to meet the requirements of
international judicial standards.
Rwanda maintains that if the work of the ICTR is
to have any significance for Rwandans, at least some
of the convicts ought to serve their sentences in the
country where the crimes were perpetrated. That could
go a long way to demonstrate the importance of
international accountability in a manner that most
Rwandans can understand and relate to.
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government, I
commend the representative of Sweden, who said,
speaking on behalf of the EU, “We note with
appreciation the efforts made by Rwanda to meet the
demands regarding the right to a fair trial.”
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): First, I join other
delegations in expressing our appreciation for the work
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and their respective
Presidents Judge Patrick L. Robinson and Judge
Charles Michael Dennis Byron. We all agree that their
work throughout the years has been and remains of
vital importance in creating a legacy for the future of
international criminal justice and international law as a
whole.
My delegation aligned itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. In addition, in my national
capacity, I would like to emphasize the following.

09-54853

Albania strongly supports all efforts to strengthen
international criminal justice. We must ensure that
those responsible for serious crimes are held
accountable and brought to justice. In this regard, we
commend the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for their irreplaceable
role in combating impunity in fulfilment of their
mandates and at the same time establishing standards
for global justice in the interest of peace and security.
Albania supports the efforts of the Tribunals to
complete their work at the earliest date and accomplish
the completion strategy pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) by adopting
concrete measures to enhance the efficiency of the
proceedings. The courts must have full support from
the Security Council and the international community
in order to maintain high dedication and efficiency in
prosecuting and bringing to justice the remaining
fugitives.
On the other hand, we also consider the referral
of cases to competent national jurisdictions an essential
part of the completion strategy. In this regard, we
welcome the improvements of domestic judicial
institutions in conducting fair trials for all lower and
mid-level accused in the respective regions. We take
note of the efforts made by Rwanda in order to meet all
the benchmarks for fair trials.
Albania has signed an agreement with the ICTY
and offered its prison facilities for the sentenced
persons to serve their prison terms in Albania as a
concrete measure of support for the ICTY.
Albania considers that the arrest of the remaining
fugitives — Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić as well as
Félicien Kabuga — should remain a top priority for the
successful accomplishment of the Tribunals’ work. We
call on the States in the region, especially those where
fugitives are suspected to be at large, to fully cooperate
with and render all necessary support to the Tribunals.
The arrest of the fugitives will mark the ending of a
tragic period in the history of the Balkan region and the
region concerned in Africa, and at the same time pave
the way for long-term reconciliation. We owe this to
the victims and their families, and we owe it to
ourselves, as there can be no peace and prosperity
without a resolute fulfilment of justice.
My delegation also wishes to echo the particular
concern of President Robinson regarding compensation

15

A/64/PV.16

of the victims. We fully subscribe to his concern and
remarks, and believe that the matter needs to be
properly addressed as an important part of making
justice.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, I express my gratitude to the Presidents
of the Tribunals for their reports.
The Tribunals set up by the Security Council
more than 15 years ago, as temporary courts,
undoubtedly have done considerable work in order to
bring to justice those persons guilty of international
crimes on the territories of the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda. The history of their creation shows that the
Security Council considered their function in a broader
context, as one of the measures designed to maintain
international peace and security, and for post-conflict
settlement in the regions. By its very nature, the
international, ad hoc tribunal cannot and should not
endlessly take the place of the existing courts and
tribunals of individual countries.
The position of principle of the Russian
Federation is that the Tribunals should keep within the
time limit for a completion strategy. Both should be
guided by the time frames laid down by the Security
Council and do everything possible to ensure that their
substantive work is concluded by the end of 2010.
Unfortunately, the language of both reports
suggests that the Tribunals, for various reasons, offer
discouraging prospects of their observing those time
frames. Security Council resolutions 1877 (2009) and
1878 (2009) once again extended the functions of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), this time until
31 December 2010. We stress the exceptional nature of
those measures, which were made necessary by the
need to bring cases already under way to their logical
conclusion.
We welcome the Tribunals’ efforts to locate
fugitives from justice. In this context, we note the
success of the Rwanda Tribunal, which, together with
INTERPOL and the law enforcement agencies of
various States, has succeeded in arresting two suspects
over the last few months. We share the concern of the
international community that two suspects in the ICTY
dossier still remain at large, as well as eleven suspects
of the ICTR.

16

However, the real difficulties in finding and
arresting fugitives should not be used to drag out the
Tribunals’ work for an indefinite period. Completion of
their work is closely connected with the transfer of
cases to national jurisdictions, which is the thrust of
Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). Unfortunately, the Tribunals approach the
matter with caution, the grounds for which are not
always solid. We call on them to activate their
mechanisms for bringing national courts into taking
over outstanding cases.
In this context, we note the work done by the
Tribunals to develop the potential to transfer to local
courts their accumulated experience and carry out legal
research which will make it possible to adapt
international precedents to national criminal court
procedures. We would also encourage the efforts of the
Tribunals to accelerate the tempo of the judicial
processes and to attempt to rationalize the work of
courts for parallel consideration of a number of cases.
This year the General Assembly and the Fifth
Committee will have to discuss and adopt draft
resolutions on the budget for the Tribunals for the next
two-year period. We believe that during a universal
financial crisis the Tribunals’ attention should be drawn
to the need to stay within the indicated budgetary
limits, and to take into account in forthcoming
expenditure the need to preserve their heritage,
particularly their archives, and transform themselves
into mechanisms of their own residual competence.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, I thank both Judge Charles Michael Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and Judge Patrick Lipton
Robinson, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for
presenting their annual reports to the General
Assembly. Tanzania appreciates their ability to lead the
Tribunals and ensure that the purposes for which they
were established are fully met.
Furthermore, we commend the Presidents’ efforts
in implementing the completion strategies for both
Tribunals, and express our strong support for their
important work in ending impunity in Africa and the
world over. The ICTR and the ICTY have
demonstrated their significant role in fighting impunity
and promoting the rule of law. They have further
shown that genocide, crimes against humanity, war

09-54853

A/64/PV.16

crimes and other crimes under international law cannot
be tolerated, and that perpetrators of such atrocities
must face retribution.
As the host State of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, Tanzania has continued to
perform its inherent obligation in ensuring the smooth
running of the Tribunal’s activities. That support has
taken the form of making logistical arrangements,
issuing visas and permits, processing applicable tax
exemptions and ensuring the security of both the
premises of the court and its staff.
We extend our condolences over one of the
judges who met his death in Tanzania. Investigations
were properly carried out, and the results were shared
with the United Nations and his home country.
Tanzania reaffirms its commitment to continuing
to discharge its duties as the host State of the Tribunal
until the completion of its work in the remaining few
years.
Having thoroughly gone through the reports of
the two courts, we have noted with appreciation the
achievements so far in ensuring that the purposes of
their establishment are fully met. Tanzania appreciates
the difficulties of the two Tribunals, as reflected in the
reports before us, and we are prepared to continue
cooperating with the ICTR to overcome any
inconvenience or difficulties that may persist.
As we are all aware, the smooth running of the
court, and thus delivering justice to both the acquitted
and the convicted, largely depends on the mutual
cooperation and assistance of Member States. Tanzania
has noted with concern the hurdles which the court
faces with regard to the relocation of acquitted persons
to third States and of convicted persons to serve their
sentences. Since the court is one of our own creations,
and since it is our desire and common goal to ensure
that the ends of justice are met, we call on all Member
States to cooperate with it by accepting convicted
persons to serve their sentences in States’ detention
facilities, as part of international responsibilitysharing.
We note with concern that there remain at large in
our region a number of fugitives who are still to face
justice for crimes alleged to have been committed in
Rwanda. We call on the Member States in our region
on whose territory those fugitives have been located to
cooperate with the court by assisting in their arrest and

09-54853

transfer as soon as possible to face justice at the ICTR
in Arusha. We commend the efforts and initiatives,
prompted by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda, to arrest and transfer the fugitives who
were apprehended in those countries two weeks ago,
and who are already in Arusha facing justice before the
ICTR.
As the Tribunal is now implementing its
completion strategy, the issue of maintaining its
archives and the residual function are of the utmost
importance. Tanzania is willing and ready to continue
hosting the Tribunal’s archives with the same
dedication and commitment as we did throughout the
operation of the court from its inception more than 10
years ago. We strongly believe that the infrastructure
already in place makes Arusha an ideal location to keep
the records of the court as an important historical
learning institution for the benefit of future generations
in the subregion and the African continent as a whole.
Already the court archives have been made available to
many universities in our region, and they are an
integral part of capacity-building and the training of
future generations of lawyers in our region.
Tanzania has been designated by the African
Union as the seat of the African Court on Human and
Peoples’ Rights. The cases to be handled by that Court
will benefit immeasurably from the precedents of cases
and judgements handled and rendered by the ICTR in
Arusha.
We are following with interest the deliberations
of the Security Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, chaired by Austria, with regard
to the Tribunals’ residual mechanisms. We trust that
consideration will be given to preservation of the
archives, and access to them, in order to support
successful mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The experience of the African
Tribunal, preserved in the archives in Arusha,
Tanzania, would offer ready-made facilities to support
the ICC, should that be one of the recommendations of
the Informal Working Group.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration
of agenda items 73 and 74?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

17
