United Nations

S/PV.5729

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5729th meeting
Friday, 10 August 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Christian
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Soler Torrijos
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Matulay
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Khalilzad

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-45560 (E)

*0745560*

S/PV.5729

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/482, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Italy, Panama, Slovakia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America. I also wish to draw the
attention of the members to document S/2007/481,
which contains the text of a letter dated 9 August 2007
from the representative of Iraq addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
I welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
morning’s meeting.
As this is the last time that Ambassador Emyr
Jones Parry will participate in a Council meeting in his
capacity as Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, I wish to take this opportunity to express to
him, on behalf of the members of the Council, our
appreciation of him, both as a colleague and as a
friend. Ambassador Jones Parry has represented the
United Kingdom at United Nations Headquarters since

2

July 2003, a period during which the Security Council
has taken many important decisions. He will be
remembered as a very active ambassador who
successfully led several missions to various parts of
Africa and also led many rounds of negotiations on
difficult and delicate draft resolutions. The most recent
such resolutions are 1769 (2007), which authorized the
establishment of the African Union/United Nations
hybrid operation in Darfur, and the draft resolution on
which we are going to take action this morning.
In bidding Ambassador Jones Parry a warm
farewell, the other members of the Council and I wish
him every success in his new undertakings.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1770 (2007).
I shall now give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to take
part in this important meeting of the Security Council
this morning on the situation concerning Iraq. I
welcome the Council’s decision today to renew and
strengthen the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq through the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1770 (2007).
The United Nations is deeply committed to
helping the people of Iraq, and I am pleased to have the
opportunity now to enhance, where possible, our
contributions in crucial areas such as national
reconciliation,
regional
dialogue,
humanitarian
assistance and human rights.

07-45560

S/PV.5729

A peaceful and prosperous future is for Iraqis
themselves to create, with the international community
lending support to their efforts.
The United Nations looks forward to working in
close partnership with the leaders and people of Iraq to
explore how we can further our assistance under the
terms of this resolution. I take this opportunity to
express my profound appreciation and respect to the
people and Government of Iraq for their courageous
efforts to make their country more stable, democratic
and prosperous.
As we remember our colleagues who died in
Baghdad four years ago, I also take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the brave men and women who continue
to serve the United Nations in Iraq. As we move
forward, their safety and security will remain a
paramount concern.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
vote.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I wish
to extend a warm welcome to the Secretary-General
and thank him for his statement.
I would like to begin by expressing my deep
gratitude and sincere thanks to Ambassador Jones
Parry for our work together in the Security Council. He
will be missed. I would also like to warmly welcome
Ambassador Ripert. I look forward to working with
him and the rest of the French Mission on the many
issues before the Council.
Today’s adoption of the resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq marks an important new phase in the role of the
United Nations in Iraq. It expands United Nations
involvement in three ways.
First, it will provide increased assistance to the
Iraqi people and their Government on domestic
reconciliation that leads to a national compact. Clearly,
domestic reconciliation is the responsibility of the Iraqi
people and Government, but the United Nations can
lend specific expertise to help this process.
Secondly, the United Nations can also help
promote regional understanding that supports Iraqi
reconciliation. This updated mandate marks another

07-45560

important step along the road to increased support for
Iraq from the region and the international community.
This process is already underway with meetings in
Baghdad, Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere.
Thirdly, as the Secretary-General said, the United
Nations will help marshal resources to assist those
Iraqis affected by the humanitarian crisis. In fulfilling
the tasks set out in this resolution, United Nations staff
members in Iraq are making, have made and will make
a vital contribution to Iraq’s future stability, and we
deeply appreciate their sacrifices and their dedicated
and selfless work. The United States, as part of the
multinational forces in Iraq, will do its part to ensure
that the United Nations security and resource needs are
met so that the United Nations expertise can be fully
deployed to help address the challenges in Iraq.
We are indeed grateful for the expanding United
Nations role in helping the Iraqi people shape their
future. However, let me be clear. The United States will
continue to shoulder all of its responsibilities to assist
Iraq’s Government and people. We are fully dedicated
to success in Iraq, and our commitments to Iraq, to the
region, to the United Nations and to the rest of the
international community remain.
The United States looks forward to standing side
by side with the Iraqi people for a stable, secure Iraq at
peace with itself and its neighbours, and we intend to
continue our considerable efforts to help build that new
Iraq and to help the Iraqis overcome the challenges of
sectarianism and terrorism.
Without a doubt, we in the international
community have had our differences with regard to
Iraq. Despite those differences, I believe that we all
share the same vision for Iraq’s future. That is clearly
the case today. Today’s forward-looking resolution,
adopted unanimously by the Security Council, is an
important signal that the page has turned. The
resolution underscores the widespread belief that what
happens in Iraq has strategic implications not only for
the region, but for the entire world. I thank my fellow
members of the Security Council for their commitment
to the people of Iraq and to the United Nations
important role.
We hope that today’s resolution will be a
springboard to greater international support for Iraq’s
Government and people. The United States stands
ready to work with other countries in the region and
elsewhere to support the Iraqi Government and people

3

S/PV.5729

as they build a democratic, prosperous and stable
society.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
welcome the unanimous vote to adopt resolution 1770
(2007) and the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral.
Success in Iraq will depend on a collective effort
by the entire international community. It will be Iraqiled, with our support, primarily through the
International Compact with Iraq. We heard a candid
and comprehensive assessment of progress on the
Compact from Deputy Prime Minister Saleh on
20 July. The United Kingdom, for its part, will
continue to stand by Iraq as its close friend and, as the
United Kingdom Prime Minister actually termed it in
the United Nations last week, we will continue to
discharge fully our responsibilities.
Within that context, the United Nations has
played a significant and valuable role, offering
consistent support to Iraq’s transition since the fall of
the former regime in 2003. In its work, it has gone
through dark and difficult times, notably the horrific
attack on the Canal Hotel in August 2003, which
resulted in the loss of Sergio Vieira de Mello and 21
United Nations personnel. As we approach the fourth
anniversary of that tragic event, we offer once more
our condolences to the families of those dedicated
officers and express our gratitude to the United Nations
for its steadfast commitment to its mission in Iraq and
to all those others who work in the field, day in, day
out, for the United Nations.
The original role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq was described in resolution
1546 (2004). The Mission has made progress on much
of it, supporting the Iraqi Government and people, but
it is clear that, while some tasks set out in that mandate
remain necessary, others have been completed. And
there are still other tasks that the United Nations
should be doing but which are not in fact provided for.
Of those new tasks now set out in today’s resolution,
the United Kingdom would highlight a supporting role
for the United Nations in furthering reconciliation and
dialogue and, in due course, reintegration programmes;
in helping Iraqis tackle the remaining challenges which
come under the rubric of the constitutional review and
the implementation of constitutional provisions; and in
facilitating dialogue between Iraq, its neighbours and
States in the region.

4

In addition to those political roles, there are
humanitarian challenges with which the United Nations
can assist both inside and outside Iraq. The United
Nations will continue to have a significant role in
assisting the process of economic reform, capacitybuilding, reconstruction and service delivery, and in
helping to coordinate the donor effort. It will also play
its part in promoting the protection of human rights and
in helping to take forward judicial and legal reform.
The United Kingdom fully understands and
shares the sense of importance that the United Nations
attaches to the security of its personnel within Iraq. It
respects the duty of care to deployed personnel, and
therefore supports the Secretary-General’s plans to
build an integrated secure facility within Baghdad from
which the United Nations can deliver on its
commitments on a long-term basis. We also hope that
the United Nations will soon be able to redeploy a
contingent to Basra, where its expertise would be
helpful in delivering capacity-building in Iraq’s SouthEast.
In all its tasks, it is vital that the United Nations
role be coherent and coordinated both internally and
with others’ efforts. I emphasize once more that a
democratic and stable Iraq at peace with itself and with
its neighbours can be delivered only through a
collective effort by all, and the burden of delivering
that must be a shared one.
May I thank you personally, Sir, for the kind
words which you addressed to me on this, my last
appearance in the Chamber. With your permission, I
should like to say a few words to the Council.
It has been an honour and a privilege for me to
represent the United Kingdom for more than four years
in the United Nations in order to defend the positions
of my Government and to put forward the thinking of
the United Kingdom. It has been a rewarding task.
Under the Charter, this Council has the specific
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That encompasses crises, internal
and regional conflicts, the scourge of terrorism, the
protection of civilians, tackling the risks posed by
proliferation, and so on. There are countless tasks.
The Council cannot and does not shirk its
responsibilities, even though those tasks are difficult.
For the United Kingdom’s part, we seek to apply
ourselves assiduously, working for the best solutions
and outcomes. Consensus among all Council members

07-45560

S/PV.5729

is a very desirable outcome. It can only strengthen the
impact of our decisions, but — and I say this also to
the Secretary-General — adopting resolutions and
statements is not enough. We must always work for
implementation on the ground and for a real impact on
people’s lives to deliver security and peace, but
remembering, too, that that requires parallel progress
on the political and the economic tracks.
Cooperation among colleagues and between
States is crucial, as are good relations between the
Council and the other organs of the United Nations. So
may I thank my colleagues and their missions for their
cooperation and their friendship over these years. I
should also like to thank the Council’s secretariat,
which supports us in our work, including the unseen
translators and interpreters for all they do, and more
generally the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for
the work that they do, day in, day out, and particularly
outside New York.
Lastly, I break with custom, but my particular
thanks go to my team in the United Kingdom mission
for all their support and their endeavours.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
1770 (2007), adopted today, on the extension of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the expansion of the scope of its activities. Over
the past few years, Russia has been in favour of the
maximum possible involvement of the United Nations
in the process of the settlement of the Iraq issue,
actively using its independent mediating potential to
overcome the profound military and political crisis in
Iraq and advance the political process there. The draft
resolution adopted today reflects to a great extent our
concept of the role of the United Nations in Iraqi
affairs.
We expect the United Nations Mission to deal
more broadly now with the political and socioeconomic problems of Iraq and to help the Iraqi
political factions to complete the tasks of achieving
national reconciliation and agreement, preserving the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the State.
We hope that UNAMI, as it is assigned new
prerogatives, will become a tangible element in
regional diplomacy, creating an atmosphere favouring
the normalization of the situation in Iraq.
Of course, increasing the potential of the United
Nations in Iraq must be ensured through appropriate

07-45560

security measures. UNAMI must be assisted in this by
the Multinational Force and the Iraqi, the army and
police.
UNAMI will be able to successfully complete the
task before it only if the Iraqi Government is in a
position to work on establishing peace in the country
and returning it to the road to stability and
development.
Greater participation by the international
community is also necessary for the resolution of the
Iraqi crisis. Initial steps in this direction were taken in
the Sharm el-Sheikh conference and the work just
started in the regional working group. We feel that the
well-known Russian proposal on carrying out a broadscale and comprehensive international meeting on Iraqi
issues fully meets the requirements of an accelerated
settlement to the Iraqi problem.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation supports and welcomes
Security Council resolution 1770 (2007). It is a very
important resolution, for both Iraq and the United
Nations. Over the past four years, the Security Council
has been holding regular reviews of the Iraqi
settlement in the hope of playing its due role in
pushing through a resolution to the situation in that hot
spot. At this time, significant progress has been
achieved in the political process.
However, in other areas, especially in the security
sector, grave challenges remain. The international
community is gravely concerned with the situation.
Achieving stability and tranquillity as soon as possible
is central to the Iraqi settlement. It is also the common
aspiration of the Iraqi people and has a bearing on the
peace and stability of the Middle East as a whole.
China has always believed that the key to the
ultimate and proper solution to the Iraqi issue lies in
achieving an Iraq governed by Iraqis. Of course, this
cannot be achieved without the earnest assistance of
the countries in the region and the international
community.
By adopting resolution 1770 (2007), the Council
has entrusted the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) with new responsibilities, including
providing assistance to Iraq for conducting the process
of national reconciliation, encouraging regional
dialogue, coordinating economic reconstruction and
intensifying humanitarian assistance. History has

5

S/PV.5729

shown that the United Nations has a comparative
advantage and abundant experience in those areas, and
the United Nations should have a lot to do. We should
not fail to recognize that UNAMI playing a role in the
country is a gradual process, and that this process also
depends on myriad other factors.

difficult situation by all of the personnel of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The
tragic death of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
colleagues, mentioned by several of my colleagues,
demonstrates the context in which the United Nations
works in Iraq.

We hope that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force will provide the United Nations
with the necessary security guarantees so as to enable
UNAMI to accomplish its mission as mandated by the
Council. We also hope that the parties concerned will
actively support the United Nations in its efforts and
create the necessary conditions for the United Nations
to play a role.

Since the Secretary-General is present, I would
also like to warmly thank his Special Representative
for Iraq, Mr. Qazi, whose mission is coming to an end
and who has done so much to advance the political
process for national reconciliation there.

The Chinese Government and people have always
closely followed the situation in Iraq. We have
maintained that Iraqi sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity should be preserved and have
always encouraged the Iraqi people to put their longterm national interests in perspective, strengthen their
unity and overcome the difficulties they face in their
national reconstruction process. China will continue to
support Iraq in its reconstruction process, and we hope
this war-affected country will embark on the road of
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of France, Mr. Jean-Maurice
Ripert. On behalf of the Council, I would like to
warmly welcome Ambassador Ripert, who is joining us
today as the new Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations. The other members of the
Council and I look forward to working closely with
him.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your words of welcome. I am
most honoured to represent France in this Council,
which has such an important role. You and all my other
colleagues here will find me ready to listen and
cooperate. On behalf of the entire French delegation, I
would like to express to Emyr Jones Parry our feelings
of friendship and our admiration for the remarkable
work he has done in the Council, representing and
defending the interests of the United Kingdom, a
country that France and the French people hold close to
their hearts.
To return the subject that the Council is
considering today, I would like to welcome the courage
and the remarkable work carried out in a particularly

6

The situation in Iraq continues to be of great
concern in several respects. First, in terms of security,
Iraq remains plagued by violence and the Iraqi people
continue to pay a very heavy price in that regard.
Secondly, on the humanitarian front, the situation
created by the increasing numbers of internally
displaced persons and refugees should command our
attention. It constitutes a grave threat to Iraq and to
regional stability.
In view of those facts, we must now more than
ever work collectively to find solutions. The Iraqi
people themselves must, of course, lead the way in
searching for those solutions. The key, as we know, is a
true national reconciliation process that is as inclusive
as possible and that will isolate the forces that seek the
failure of Iraq.
Efforts must also be made by the States of the
region. The Sharm el-Sheikh conference of 4 May was
a useful step in that direction, since it brought
neighbouring countries together around important
principles such as the stability and unity of Iraq and the
rejection of interference in its internal affairs. All three
of the working groups established by the conference
have already held their first meetings. This momentum
should be maintained and strengthened and should lead
to concrete actions.
Finally, — and this is the purpose of today’s
meeting — the international community, through the
United Nations, should strengthen its efforts in support
of the current internal and regional momentum. That is
the focus of the commitment of the United Nations,
which continues to play an important part in the
process of rebuilding Iraq in very difficult conditions.
France has consistently favoured strengthening the role
of the United Nations in Iraq, a strengthening that
should take into account limitations related to the

07-45560

S/PV.5729

situation on the ground and the need to ensure the
security of United Nations personnel in the field.
We hope that the various areas of United Nations
intervention in Iraq will be involved in such
strengthening. I am thinking about action that can be
taken in the political area to contribute to the process
of dialogue and national reconciliation, as well as
everything that can be done to ease the severity of the
humanitarian situation. I recall, in that regard, the
responsibility of the Iraqi Government to protect
affected populations as well as United Nations and
associated personnel. Finally, at the economic level, I
am thinking about the implementation of the
International Compact with Iraq and activities to
coordinate
humanitarian
assistance
for
the
reconstruction of Iraq.
The text adopted today by the Council enables us
to make progress in that direction. France thus voted in
favour of it and welcomes the Council’s unanimous
support for this approach.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the Secretary-General
and to thank him for his statement.

to rebuild Iraq and its institutions, to resolve its
problems and to support its national sovereignty,
without interference in its internal affairs.
Since this is the last Council meeting to be
attended by our colleague Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, I should like to take this opportunity to wish him
every success in the future. My delegation was
delighted to be able to work with him. He has always
been able to address issues in a professional and
balanced manner in order to achieve consensus.
I also wish to welcome Ambassador Jean-Maurice
Ripert, Permanent Representative of France. We are
certain that we will be able to work with him in fruitful
cooperation, and we wish him every success in his new
duties.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for taking part in our meeting today.
I am also pleased to pay tribute to Ambassador Jones
Parry for his high dedication to the work of the United
Nations during the past four years, as well as to
warmly welcome Ambassador Ripert to the United
Nations and the Council.

My delegation voted in favour of the present
resolution, convinced that there must be convergence
of all international efforts if stability is to be achieved
in Iraq for the benefit of its people, who have suffered
greatly in the past and who continue to suffer from
daily acts of violence, which have repercussions on the
stability of the entire region.

Italy sponsored the present resolution, which, we
believe, provides the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) with the stronger mandate it
needs to carry on its important tasks for the Iraqi
people after the completion of the process outlined in
resolution 1546 (2004), setting out a key element of the
much-needed support of the international community
for Iraq.

Indeed, the State of Qatar has a sincere desire for
peace and prosperity in Iraq, given our geographic
location and the historical social ties linking us to that
fraternal country. That is why we stress the need to
implement this resolution in close cooperation with
Iraq and without undermining the mandate of the
coalition forces in Iraq, which have the responsibility
to ensure peace and stability in the country in
accordance with international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, relative to the protection of
civilian persons in time of war.

There are several elements in the present
resolution that we believe to be important. The first is
the fact that it acknowledges the full sovereignty of
Iraq and the existence of a constitutionally based
Government. This is important, as we are convinced
that the solution to Iraq’s problems lies first and
foremost in the hands of the Iraqi people and
Government. Secondly, it sets out a broader mandate
for UNAMI, a mandate that covers all the areas of
action that we believe to be relevant, and that thus
enables the mission to play a central role.

We attach particular importance to the need not to
endanger the civilian population during military or
other types of operations so that the Iraq people do not
once again find themselves caught between terrorist
acts
and
counter-offensive
operations.
The
international community must understand that it is vital

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
commend all the United Nations staff of UNAMI, both
local and international, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Qazi, for the
important and outstanding work that they are doing in
Iraq through their high professionalism and personal

07-45560

7

S/PV.5729

commitment in the face of a difficult situation and
great personal risks.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
join others in welcoming the Secretary-General and
thanking him for his statement.
After years of hardship, including living under
harsh sanctions, the Iraqi people deserve peace,
stability and progress. My delegation therefore believes
that the Government of Iraq, in cooperation with the
international community, should redouble its efforts to
find a viable solution that will ensure stability and
security in the country.
The current security conditions in Iraq have also
had serious humanitarian consequences. The problem
of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced persons has
become one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing,
but least known, humanitarian crises.
While restoring security is a matter of urgency, it
is also critical to address friction based on ethnicity
and religion. Unity is vital to achieving a peaceful Iraq.
We therefore believe that Iraqis must stand shoulder to
shoulder at all levels, put aside all their differences and
work together to respond to the challenges that
continue to confront the country.
Iraq cannot go it alone in embracing
transformation to meet the innumerable challenges
ahead; it needs partnership and support from various
quarters. Therefore, the role and the contributions of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) are essential in helping the Iraqis to achieve
their goals. My delegation thus supports the extension
of its mandate and the addition of new responsibilities
to its tasks. That is why we voted in favour of
resolution 1770 (2007).
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his presence, his
statement and his efforts to help and assist Iraq and the
Iraqi people.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting, at which the Council has
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), concerning the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for another year.
The resolution expands UNAMI’s mandate to take new

8

developments into account, especially following the
Baghdad meeting for neighbouring countries held on
10 March 2007 and following the launch of the
International Compact with Iraq on 3 May 2007 as well
as the expanded Sharm el-Sheikh conference held in
Egypt on 4 May 2007.
We all know that the Government of Iraq is
currently confronting several challenges, especially at
the national, regional and humanitarian levels. Of
prime importance at the national level is the issue of
dialogue and reconciliation, which requires a review of
controversial laws, the constitution, the adoption of the
hydrocarbon law and other debatable issues. We are
keen to proceed in that direction in an attempt to
overcome all obstacles by all available means.
On the regional level, we believe that the
expanded neighbouring countries meetings held in
Baghdad and in Sharm el-Sheikh and the establishment
of the three committees — namely, the committees on
energy, on security and on refugees — have placed a
number of obligations on neighbouring countries. The
most significant obligation is to assist Iraq and the
people of Iraq in overcoming the difficulties facing
them, especially with regard to reconstruction, the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people residing in
recipient countries, the establishment of security and
stability and combating terrorism.
On the humanitarian level, Iraq’s present
circumstances and the consistent attempts of terrorists
to provoke sectarian strife have a negative impact on
the humanitarian situation, which has led to an increase
in internal displacement and to the flow of Iraqi
refugees to some countries in the region. We thank
those countries that have shown generous hospitality.
Such situations have created a national, regional and
international responsibility to coordinate and deliver
assistance to all people in need.
We are aware that these challenges should be
addressed by the Government and the people of Iraq.
The Government of Iraq is working hard to fulfil this
responsibility and to proceed in its efforts in spite of all
difficulties. While we realize that this is, in principle, a
national responsibility, we, however, cannot achieve it
without the assistance of the international community,
represented by the United Nations, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. For three
years, UNAMI has stood by the Iraqi people and
successive Iraqi Governments during that period,

07-45560

S/PV.5729

especially the current democratically, constitutionally
elected national Government. It has stood by Iraq upon
its request and has accomplished immense
achievements in cooperation and coordination with the
Government of Iraq.

Thus, we further reiterate that UNAMI still has a very
active role in assisting us to reach the goals we seek in
order to build a productive and prosperous Iraq living
in peace with itself, with its neighbours and with the
world.

We now look forward to a greater role for
UNAMI, consistent with the expanded mandate set out
in the resolution adopted by the Council today. We
reaffirm the need of the Government and the people of
Iraq for that assistance. As His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Iraq mentioned in his letter
addressed to the Secretary-General on 6 August 2007,

I wish to thank all the members of the Security
Council, and especially the sponsors of today’s
resolution, for their understanding of the situation in
Iraq and for their help and assistance.

“During the coming period, the interests of
Iraq require that the role of UNAMI should be
expanded and activated on both the humanitarian
and political tracks, at home and in the region,
and that the specialized United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes should be brought back to
work, each in its area of specialization, to
reconstruct and stabilize the country, to
contribute to the coordination and delivery of
humanitarian assistance pursuant to the
obligations contained in the Charter and to launch
comprehensive campaigns to address the
deterioration of the infrastructure”. (S/2007/481,
annex)

07-45560

Before concluding, I would like also, since today
is his last day in the Security Council, to extend my
sincere thanks and appreciation to His Excellency
Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for his excellent work
and for his assistance to Iraq and to the Iraqi people. I
wish him the best in his future personal and
professional life.
I would like finally to welcome Ambassador
Jean-Maurice Ripert of France. We look forward to
working with him in the service of our friendly
countries.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

9
