SECURITY COUNCIL

o FF.I,C I A- L· RE C 'OR OS '

-

SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DESECURITE

-

\

-P'R OC ES - V ER B AUXOF f I Cl EL;S
DEUXIEME ANNEE

12geme seance .
14 avril1947

129thmeeting
14 April 194?

Lake Success
New York
;

I

.'

TABLE 'OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred
and twenty-ninth meeting
,

Cent-vingt-neuvieme seance '

Page.

Pages

130.. ProvisioIuil agenda •............. 753
131. . Adoption of the agenda ..... : .... 753
132. Continuation of the discussion on theGreek Question
753

130.. Ordre du ,jour provisoire
753
131. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
753
132. Suite de la discussion sur la question
/.. 753
grecque

\ .

.1

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SEC,U,RITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

, PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

"

SECOND YEAR

,

No. 36

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 36

HUNDRED AND TWENTYnNINTH
MEETiNG

CENT·VINGT.NEUVIEME
,'SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 14 April 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

T enue a Lake Success, New-York,
le lundi 14 avril1947, a 1Oh.30.

President: Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China).

President: M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine).

, Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United KingC:om,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, 'Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne, Royati:me-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

, 130. Provisional agenda (document
5/326)

130.

'1. Adoption of the agenda.'
2. The Greek Question.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. La question grecque.

131.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Ordre du iour provisoire (document
5/326)
,

131. Adoption de I'orcllre du iour
L'ordre du jour est adopU.

132. Continuation of the discussion on
the GreleK Question

132. Suite de la di~cii5sion sur la
question grecque

At the invitation of the President, Mro Kahreman Ylli, representative of Albania; Mr. Atha':'
nilssov, representative of Bulgaria; Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece and Mr. Krasovet, representative of Yugoslavia took their seats
at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President,' M . .Kilhreman
Ylli, representant de l'Albanie, M. Athanassov,
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis, representant de la Grece, et M. Krasovec, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.
'
.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais signaler au Conseil que, pour la s~ance
d'aujourd'hui, M. Kahreman Ylli, Ministre d'AI..
baniea P.:'xis, remplace M. Kapo; M. Nisot
suppIee M. van Langenhove, et M. Katz-Suchy
siege en lieu etplace de M. Lang~.
,

The PRESIDENT: I should like to announce
that at today's meeting Mr. Kahreman Ylli~A1banian Minister in Paris, is taking Mr. Kapo's
place; Mr. Nisot is taking Mr. van LangeIihove's
. place; and Mr. Katz-Suchy is replacing Mr.
h. J,~nge. ..
...',

_~8W!C@!lj~)l§!Y.J!1!@!l.feM!!i!i~~~n'!WI;;;;~,!M.".'
I Jnaflqfl

7

1.,We

Tt-.

tr

754
Before the last meeting· was' adjourned, I had
four speakers listed, one of whom has with.drawn his name. Therefore, I shall call on the
remaining three speakers in the order listed,
unless they express their unwillingness to speak.

A la fin de la seance precedente, quatre ora·
teurs eta,ient encore inscrits; I'un d'eux a, depuis,
retire son nom. Je donnerai done la parole, dans
I'ordre prcvu, aux trois orateurs qui restent ins·
crits, it. moins qu'ils ne desirent pas parler.

. This morning I call on the representative of
Albania as the first speaker.

Ce matin, je donne la parole au representant
de l'AIbanie, qui est le premier or.l!tel!!' iIlscrit.

Mr. KAHREMAN YLLI (Albania) (translated
from French); I thank you, Mr. President, for

M. KAHREMAN YLLI (Albanie): Je vous re·
mercie, Monsieur le President: d'avoir bien voulu
me donner la parole pour exprimer le point de
vue de ma delegation a regard du probleme que
le Conseil de securite etudie en ce moment. La
delegation albanaise aurait d'ailleurs fait con·
naitre son opinion des la seance du 7 avril si elle
avait ete informeequ'elle allait participer au
debat.

permitting me to ~press my delegation's views
on the probl~m now being considered by the
Security Council. I ought to say that the Albanian
delegation would have made its opinion known
at the meeting held on 7 April, had it been infOlmed that it was to participate in the debate.
The decision of the Government of the United
States of America to give assistance to Greece
and Turkey has attracted my Government's notice not because the Albanian people does not
wish to see Greece rehabilitated and its economy
restored, but because, hL this case, the initiative
taken by the Gow'.mnent of the United States
of ~America seems JUS to be contrary to the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and
io refl~ct. a method which cannot be regarded as
a.dequate for the solution of such problems.

La decision du Gouvemement des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique d'accorder une aide it. la Grece et a
la Turquie a attire I'attention de mon Gouveme·
ment, non parce que le peuple albanais ne desire
pas particulierement voir la Grece recoIlStruite
et son economie relevee, mais parce que, en roc·
currence, I'initiative du Gouvemement des EtatsUnis d'Amerique nous semble etre en contradiction avec I'esprit de la Charte des Nations Unies
et refleter une methode qui ne peut etre consi·
deree .. comme efficace pour resoudre de tels
problemes.

Small nations are most anxious to see international institutions healthy and strong j this will
not be achieved unlt.ss.problems of special im..;
portance are considered and solved by these institutions in accordance with their purpose: the
maintenance of peace and security.

Les petites natio~ ont un tres grand interet
it. voir les institutions mternationales sain~ et
fortes; et ces institutions vie sauraient devenir
telles que si les problemes d'importance particuIiere sont etudies et resolus par elles conformement it. leur but: le maintien de la paixet deJa
securite.

Assistance given to Greece and Turkey outside
the United Nations cannot contl~Otite to strength.ening me Organization; on the contrary, it is
detrimental· to its authority and prestige. It was
therefore, not merely necessary, but indispensable
that any assistanc~ given on such a . large scale
mould, under the present circumstances, have
been considered and, if required, granted by
the United Nations, the principal organ for safegttardmg the peace.

L'aide accordee it. la Grece et i~ la Turqui~ en
dehnrs de I'Organisation des Nations Unies ne
peut pas contribuer it. renforcer cette derniere;
au contraire, elle porte atteinte it. son autorite et
it. son prestige. n etmt done necessaire, indispensable meme, que toute aide sur une aussi grande,
echelle, dans les circonstances actuelles, flit
etudiee et, au besoin, accordee par l'Organisation
des Nations .Unies; (jrgane principal pour ]a
sauvegarde de la paix.

Seveml peQF~'es which suffered from enemy
occupation were left, at the er.d of the last war,
with. an extremely debilitated economy and were
confronted ~ith apparently.insurmountable difficuities; thanks to their will-power and their spirit
\ of organization ~clself-sacrifice, they have nevertheless been able fo· create better conditions and
to return to more or less nOnilal condition~ of

Plusieurs peuples, ayant souffert de l'occupation· ennemie,. se sont trouves, a la fin de la:
derniere guerre, avec \me economie extremement
faible et en face de difficultes qui paraissaient'
insurmontablesj. grace a leur volonte et a leur
esprit d'orgariisation et d'abnegation, ils ont ee·
pendant pu creer. des conditions plus favorables
et retouver une vie plus ou moins notmale.

The Greek peopleharo also suffered and made
great sacrifices. It. needed. help: But the . Greek
~Governmentwas 'not withotlt such help: the
fUJIdS received dfrectfrom· abroad Were consid,..
erable, f?..r exceedi.'lg those given to other nations
equally devastated by the w~r. 'And yet, Greece's
eccn,omic situation remains deplorable, though

'::h pt!\;.1e grec;lui aussi, a"souffert, a consenti
,.ie Kri,tnds sacrifices. 11 a eu besoin d'aide. Cene-e~
i:outefois, n'a pas manque au Gouvememr,n~
gree: les fonds· rec;us directement de- I'etranger
ont e::eassez importants,beaucoup plus que celU,·
qui on.t ete accoides a d'autres nations egalement
devastees .par la· guerre.. Pourtant, la. situation . '

life.

.....",

~ :',";''UY_ _lIIItl'll';}:~_liIiilil'til£WliliII~'
~""'·j,'!!jM!jjjIjf)IlliI··!\'IOj'*IIloHI"'"",""·

.

.....""r.....
..
. ..
._ -

......

~

",....... rt

;,,;,............

~~_.

;.

rtt"'I

755
of course the Greek people cannot he blamed for
that, since the assistance received has been used
for ends other than those of ecollomic reconstruction.

economique grecque reste deplorable, sans qu'on
puisse, nature11ement, en imputer la faute au
peuple grec, l'aide re!tue ayant ete employee a
d'autres fins que ce11e de la reconstruction economique.

The experience of the last few years has clearly
shown everyone that, in the Greek Question, a
far more important cause is at th~ root of the
existing situation.

L'experlence des dernieres annees montre elairement aux yeux de tous que, dans la questio!'
grecque, une cause beaucoup plus importante est
a l'origine de la situation actue11e.

It is consequently absolutely necessary that an
n est, par consequent, plus que necessaire
organ of the United Nations should guarantee qu'tm organe des Nations Unies garantisse que
that the help to be given is used in ·the true in- ~ l'aide envisagee sera utilisee dans l'interet venterests of Greek economy.
table de l'economie grecque.
Moreover, in view of its economic and military
aspects and under the aforementioned conditions,
the assistance given by the United States of
America constitutes interference in Greece's
internal affairs. We all know that similar inter_ventions have failed in the past; they are not conducive either t~ the stabilization of the Greek
.situation or to good r~lations between Greece
and its neighbours.

Par ailleuis, l'aide apportee par les Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, etant d01me ses aspects economique
et lnilitaire,\ et dans les conditions precitees, constitue une intervention dans les affaires interieures
de la Grece. On sait deja que de te11es interventions ont fait faillite et ne peuvent aider nia la
stabi1!sation de la situation grecque,. ni aux
honnes relations de la Grece avec ses voisins.

Despite the explanations given here by the
representative of the United States of America,
the assistance to Greece cannot be co~idered as
either co-ordinating or supplementing the work
of the Commission of Investigation i'l Greece.
-On the contrary, it prejudges the results of the
Commission's work.

Malgre les explications donnees id meme par
le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amenque, l'aide
accordce a la Grece ne peut etre consideree
comme constituant une coordination du travail
de la Conun~siGnd'enquete en Grece ou un
complement a ce travail. Elle preju~e, ~u cOIltraire, le resultat de l'reuvre de la Comniission.

The statements of a number of representatives
of the. United St.ates of America, the wide publicity given to the question by the pres.'! and the
stir-it has caused, show that thil:: is not a case of
.purely economic assistance, but a political and
nillitary action of great importance"

Lesdeelarations de maints representants des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, la large publicite accordee par la presse et le bruit fait autour de la
question monttent qu'il ne s'agit pas id d'une
simple aide economTI ..;le, mais d'un acte de
caractere politique et militaire .particulierement
important.

For these reasons the problem before us is of a
different nature than the former Greek Question.
- Moreover, assistance to Turkey is also involved.
It is obvious that this assistance cannot be considered in connexion with the former Greek
Question, for the simple reason that Greece and
Turkey are two different nations.

Pour c~ raisons, le probleme devant. lequel
nous nom: trouvons est d'une nature differente de
ce11e de l'ancienne question grecque. n s'agit
aussi, d'autre part, d'une aide a la Turquie. n
est evident que 1'0n ne peut pas considerer cette
aide comme lice a l'angenne question· grecque,
po~r la simple raisonque-Ia Grece et la Turquie
sont deux nations differentes.

The proposal to leave a subsidiary group of the
Commission of Investigation 'in the frontier re·. gions of Greece seems pointless to Albania, since.
Greece's neighbours are innocent of the alleged
. violations of Greece's fronti~..,s. The present situation in Greece is due to quite. different caus~, a
fact which cannot. be concealed.. Moreover, the
Security Council has not yet received the report
of the Commission of Investigation and, I think,
has as yet no idea of its work. The proposed
commission would anticipate. the results of the
work of·the Commission of Investigation. These
are
:;:easons which prompt the Albanian delegation to oppose such a proposal.
.

La proposition tendant a laisser un groupe
subsidiaire de la Commission d'enquete dans les
regions a proximite des frontieres de la., 9rece
parait inutile a l'~banie, etant donne que les
voisins de la Grece sont innocents des pretendues
violatioi.tS· de ·frontlere.. La· situationd~~ -laquelle
se trouve la Grece a une tout autre ori.gine, cela
ne peut etre .dissimuIe. D'autre part;,He Conseil
de securiten'a pas encoredevant lul le J;apport
de la Commission d'enquete et je crois qu'il n'a
encore ~ucune idee de se~ travaux. Laproposition
qui nous est soumiseprejuge Ies. resultats .des
travaux de cette Commission. C'est pourquoi la
delegatiOl:" albanaise se prononcecontre une telle
proposition.
~

Mr. GROMY~O (Union of SoViet Socialist Repllblics) (translated from Russia1f) : The position
'of th~ USSR delegation on this question was ex, . "pressed' in. my statement jn the Security Council

M. GROMYKO (UniondesB.epubliques socialistes:sovietiques) (traduit durusse); Dans la
declaration que j'ai -faite le 7avr;;ldevant le
Conseil de securite, j'ai deja eul'occasion de

the

hi i - .. _._~'.""" ." . " . "

q

756
on 7 April1• The position of the USSR delegation
on the concrete proposal of the United States
representative to leave representatives of the
Commission of Investigatiol1 in northern Greece
was also explained in my statement in the Secur\ty Council on 7 April. Today I shall confine
myself to a few remarks in conn~on with the
United States proposal and also in connexion
with the· USSR' proposal regarding the creation
by th~ Security Council. of a special commission
which would ensure, by means of appropriate
supervision, that,any aid received by Greece from
without wonld indeed be med.i.'1 the interests of
the Greek people.
At the"hundred. and twenty-eight meeting of
the Security CouncU Yfe heard a second statement by Mr. A~tin,.the United States representative. I feel obliged to say that every paragraph,
almost every sel)tence, in this statement confirmed the ,accuracy of the conclusi~ns reached
by the USSR d~Jegation in connexion with the
discussion of 'this problem and contained in my
. stateme-nt of 7 April. For this reason I shall confine myself to a few remarks, connected with the
United States proposal and the USSR proposal
regarding the creation of a special commission.

vous fail'e connaitre rattitude de la delegation de
l'URSS a l'egard de cette question1• J'ai egalement fait connaitre, dans la declaratioll que j'ai
faite le 7 avrll devant le Conseil, l'attitude de la
delegation de l'URSS l'egard de la proposition
des Etats-Unis qui tendait a maintenir en Grece
septentrionale des representants de la Commission
d'enquete. Aujourd'hui, je me bornerai a que1ques observations sur cette proposition des EtatsUnis, ainsi que sur la proposition de l'URSS qui
tend a: la creation, par le Conseil de securite,
d'une commission speciale chargee de veiller, par
un controle approprie,
cc que l'aide que la
Grece pourrait recevoir de l'ctranger soit vraiment utilisee dans l'interSt du peuple grec.
Au cours de la cent-vingt-huitieme seance du
Conseil de securite, nous avons entendu une'
deuxiem~ declaration de M. Austin, le representant des Etats-Unis. Je dois dire que chaque alinea de cette declaration, je dirai meme presque
chacune de ses phrases, confirme le bien-fonde
des conclusions auxquelles etait parvenue la delegation de I'URSS la suite de I'examen de cette
question, cOllcll.lsions dont je VOu\; ai fait part
dans ma declaration du 7 avril. C'est pourquoi
je me bomerai faire quelques observations portant essentiellement sur. la proposition des EtatsUnis ainsi que sur la proposition de l'URSS
tendant creeT une commission spckiale.
Dans la declaration qu'il a faite au cours de
la cent-vingt-huitieme seance du Conseil de securit6, le representant des Etats-Unis a dit: "ll
y a, semble-tail, un manque de logique dans la
positiQn du representant de I'Union sovietique,
telle qu'll l'a exposee. D'une part, il a souleve
des objections contre une proposition tendant
laisser en Grece un groupe subsidiaire de la Commission d'enquete, proposition qui repond precisement aux buts que le Conseil de securite
avait en vue en creant cette Commission. D'autre
part, il a propose que le Conseil de securite institue une nouvelle commission chargee de surveiller
I'execution du .progr2.mme d'aide a la Grece.211

a

a

a

a

a

In his s~at~~ent at the hundred and twentyeighth meeting of the Security Council, the
United Stateslrepresentative said: ~'There is an
apparent inconsistency in the position of the
Soviet representative as he exposed it. On the one
hand, he raised objections to a proposal to carry
out the obvious purposes of the Security Council
in creating its· Commission of Investigation by
leaving a subsidiary group in Greece. On the
other hand, he proposed that the Security Council
establish a new commission to supervise the carrYing out of aid to Greece.,,2

a

Tlie remark that there waS inconsistency in the
position of the Soviet representative with regard
to these questions is, of course, incorrect. The
Soviet representative said that the question raised
in the Security Council by the United States representative was a quite· s~parate question, far
b~oader t!laIlJhat· of the work of the Commission
of i Investigati~n collceming Greek Frontier Incidepts. The question of this Conuriission's work is a
ore!ltricted one, bearing no relation to the measures
wlUch the United States Government has decided
to'take with respect to Greece. As you know, the
Se~urity Council's decision on the question raised
eatlier by the present Greek Government, of incidbnts on the Greek frontiers was confined to
a commission to investigate
the!appomtment
the' actual situation along the northern frontiers
of:!Gree~e. That was the specific purpose for
which the CommissioIl,"/2S set up; tha.t was the

Que la delegation sovietique, en cette matiere,
manque de suite dans les idees, c'est la, bien
entendu, une remarque denuee de fondement.
Le representant de i'Union sovietique a declare
que le probleme souleve au Conseil de securite
par le representant des Etats-Unis constituait une
question bien part, beaucoup plus etendue que
la question des travaux de la Commission d'enquete chargee d'etudier les incidents qui se sont
la frontiere nord de la Grece.· La
produits
question des travau,~ de cette Commission est
limitee et n'a rien de commun avec les mesures
que le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a decide
de pren<:lre a l'egard de la Grece. Comme vous
le savez, la decisiOn du Conseil de securite sur la
question des incidents a la frontiere gr.ecque,
question qui avait ete sou]evee par le Gouvemement grec actuei, se bornait simplement a la formatio d'unecommission chargee d'etudier la

Of the, Stitut it} Cotmcil, Second

t Voir les Proce~''lJerbau~ o(Jiciels du Conseit de st!curite~
Deuxieme Annce, No, 83.
, .
2 Citation faite en anglals dans l'original.
Voi.r les
Proces''lJerb(Ju~ o(Jiciels cllt Conseil ell! secttrite, Deuxieme
.
Annee, No lI5. '

of

_._'l/ee Official Records
t

,

Yella~u:~d. ~:. Eng1ish.~~ O/fidfl( Rtl'cttcs· of the· Sec~rity
C!,uncil, Second yeal', No. 85.'

,

~1'Il!_,11II1..
· iIlIIIIaflj~I._lIiIt_. ._ _nillle"__
IIIII'··"_'' ' (it_ _
*~!a'"

a

a

'

d'!II

. ,~,=.~.. ~.~..__ ,~'.. ,_._._.~._ . -. .

757
specific task laid upon it. The Security Council
laid no other ta.cik upon the Commission.

situation reelle aux frontiet-es nord de la Grece.
C'est precisement pour cela que la Commission
a ete creee; c'e;s!' precisement cette tache qui
lui a ete confiec. ..!-le Conseil de securite ne lui a
pas assigne d'autre tache.

We are now witnessing an attempt on the part
of the United States representative to connect in
some way two completely different questions:
the measures which the United States Government has decided to take in relation to Greece
and Turkey, and the Security Council's decision
to establish the COIll..mission of Investigation.

Nous assistons maintenant a une tentative du
representant des Etats-Unis de rattacher l'une
al'autre, d'une fa~on quelconque, deux questions
absolument distinctes; a savoir: les mesures que
le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis envisage de
prendr~ a l'egard de la Grece et de la Turquie,
et la decision du Conseil de securite de ereer une
Commission d'enquete.

The question naturally arises: what is the
On ne peut que se demander: comment expliexplanation of the fact that two completely dif- quer le fait que deux questions absolument disferent questions are being connected? I have tinctC"..s sont rattachees l'une a l'autre? J'ai deja.
already pointed out in my statement of 7 April indique dans ma declaration du 7 avril QU'it n'y
that there could be only one explanation possible; avait qu'une seule explication posSible: l~ reprenamely, that the United States representative sentant des Etats-Unis veut non seulement expliwishes not only to explain to us, but also some- quer son attitude a l'egard de la Grece, mais
how to justify his actions in relation to Greece encore il veut la justifier; il veut erect I'impression
and to create the impression th'at there is some qu'il existe un rapport quelconque entre cette
I:onnexion between this question and the work question d'unepart, et les travaux de la Commis, of the Conunission of Investigation. If such a sion d'enquete de l'autre. Si nous prerJons une
decision were taken, the United States represen- telle decision, le reprenentant des Etats-Unis nous
tative would tell us that, since the Security Coun- dkait que, puisque le Conseil de securite a decide
cil hrd decided to leave representatives of the de maintenir en Greee septentrionale des repreCommission in northern Greece,· this could be sentants de la Commission, on peut interpreter
interpreted.to mean that tllere was some con- cettc decision comme se rattachant d'une fa~on
nexion between that decision and the question quelconque a la question soulevee par le Gouraised by the Unif:~d States Govemment in the vemement des Etats-Unis au ConseiI de securite:
Security Council and the measures which it has et aux mesures que ce Gouvernement a decide d~
decided to take in relation to Greece. Only a wish prendre a I'egard de -la Grece. Seul, le desir de
to create the impression that a connexion exists donner l'impression qu'il existerait un rapport
between these two different questions can explain . entre ces deux questions distinctes peut expliquer
why a proposal has been submitted to leave the pourquoi l'on a songe a nous proposer de mMnCommission of Investigation in northern Greece, tenir la Commission d'enquete en Grece septenand why this proposal is being defended. What trionale et pourquoi I'on veut· defendre cette
other interpretation can be given to this proposal proposition. Comment interpreter' autrement cetand to such a decision, if it were taken? This can te proposition et la decision· que l'on prendrait
only be interpreted to mean that it was necessary dans ce sens? On ne pourrait les expliquer que
for the United States to create the impression that de la fa90nsuivante: les Etats-Unisont besoin
its actions, which are im. fact unilateral, bear the . de donner I'impression que leurs actes, qui. sont
en realite unilateraux, portent~ l'estampille de
stamp of the Vnited' Nations.
rOrganisation des Nations Unies.
Certain l'epresentatives on the Security COQnCertains membres du Conseil de securite"~1tt
cil have stated ana have attempted to prove that declare, et· ont tente de demontfer, que les methe measures which are being taken by the United '. sures envisagees par les Etats-Unis l'egard de
, States in relation to Greece are in accordance la Greee etaient conformes aux principes et aux _
with the principles and purposes of the United buts de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. TIs ont
. Nations. They have pointed out that a committee 'so:.Jligne qu'une commission clu Senat des Etatsof the .United. States Senate has adopted an Unis avait apporte un amendement a la loi qu'U
amendment to the bill on the so-called United est convenu d'appeler ''1o.i sur raide:americaine
States aid to Greece and Turkey ~,d t.ltat this ala G~ece et a la Turquie". et qu'aux tennes. de
amendment provides that such aid t.;allbe stopped cet amendement, cette aide pourrait @tre suspe.,riby a decision of the Security Council or the Gen- due a la suite d'une decision du Conseil de
~ral Assembly.
securite oude!s}-~~bMegenerale.

a

I feel obliged to state that whatever amend- ,
Je dois dire que, quelsCJ.l1.e:soient les.amendementsare adopted by the United'States Copgress, ments votes, F( . ~., Cong~ des Etats-Unis ou les .
whatever corrections ·are· made in the plan an- correctifsa.PP· ,:.,., an planahnonce par le Gounounced by the United States Government, un-_vemement des Etats-Unisd'Alnerique, ilsJ,1e
less these corrections and· amendments, cha.n,ge . changent rien a la situat!Ot!"a~moins qu'ils .ne
the..sub.st.a..n.ce' of. the official plan of-action in con- .1. · modifieIJ,t·leiond m@m'~·)~p -.p
. . •. ~. an
•. ~.:;' .d'actionetabli
nexxon· With Greece and Turkey, they can not. pour la Grece et la Turq'Q~e!,;>\. i-;~
.
alter the situation in the least.
.
,
- .-'"r

lilt .••.~.

.

,.

. . .-.

ta

tf

Moreover, I should like to point out that such
an amendment emphasizes even further the unilateral nature of the United States action in this
matter and the fact that the United States has
decided to disregard the United Nations. Such a
. conclusion seems to be the more obvious if we
bear in mind that this amendment even settles
the question of how the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations should
vote, if they were to decide to take any decision
on the substance of this question, that is to say
on the United States action in relation to
Greece and Turkey.

Je ti.cns m8me a. souligner que l'amendement
en question fait ressortir encore davantage le
caractere unilateral de l'action entreprise dans
ce domaine par les Etats-Unis; cet amendement
fait ressortir la decision des Etats-Unis de ne pas
tenir compte de I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Cette conclusion nollS paraitra tout particulierement juste, si nous nous souvenons que cet amendement tranche meme la question de savoir
comment devront voter le Coriseil de securite et
I'AssembIee generale des Nations Uriies au cas
Oll Us dccideraient de se proncncer, quant au
fond, sur la question qui nous occupe, c'est-a.-dire
sur l'action des Etats-Unis a. l'cgard de la Grece
et de la Turquie.

Thus one State is taking a decision which will
determine the line of action and the method
which the United Nations is to follow. It seems
to me that this decision can only be understood
as meaning a continued disregard of the United
Nations. That is the only explanation of such disdain for the United Nations and its authority.
No one Member State ofthe United Nations, be
it the United States, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom or any other State, has the right to decide for the United Nations how that Organization should act, still less, how it shoUld vote in
taking a certain decision. This applies ail the
more to a State which at one time took the initiative in establishing the United Nations. If such
a: State ignores the United Nations, it is impossible to tell where the latter·is to seek support.
Thus, the amendment mentioned here - by the
Australian representative in particular - alters
nothing. It even aggravates the situation and, in
a certain sense, emphasizes both the unilateral
nature of the United States a~tion in this question and the harm done by such action to the
United Nations.

Ainsi donc, un pays prend une dp.cision qui
doit determiner la ligne de conduite et les methodes que devrait suivre I'Organisation des
Nations Unies. n me semble que cette decision
ne peut etre interpretee que comme illustrant le
fait-que 1'0n continue d'ignorer les Nations Unies.
On ne saurait expliquer autrement ce dedain
vis-a.-vis de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
ce mepris de son autorite. Aucun Etat Membre
des Nations Unies, quece soient les Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, rUnion sovietique, le Royaume-Uni
ou n'importe quel autre pays, n'a le droit de decider, ell lieu et place de rOrganisation des Nations Unies,quelledoit etre la lign~de conduite de
I'Organisa,tion; a fortiori, aucun Etat Membre
n'a le droit.de decider de la fa~on dont 1'0rganisation devra voter en prenant une decision
a. ce suj..:t. Cela s'applique tout particulierement
au pays qui, naguere, a pris l'initiative de creer
I'Organisation. Si ce pays lui-m8me en vient·a.
ignorer l'existence de I'Organisation, aupres de
qui celle,.ci devrait-elle chercher appui? Ainsi
donc, l'amendementdont il a ete question iciet dont a parM, notamment, le representant de
l'Australie - ne change rien a. ·la situation. n ne
fait memeque l'aggraver,en soulianant en quel:'
que sorte le caractere unilateral de la mesure
prise par les Etats-Unis dans ce ·domafue et le
tort qu'une telle mesure cause a. I'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

In my statement of 7 April I pointed .<;lut that
Greece, as one of.the allied nationswmch have
s1.!ffered greatly from enemy occupation, has a
right. to assistallce from without, but that ~
assistance, if it is ,to be effective, .must be given
in such a manner as to help: Greece to stand on.
its own feet, and help the Greek people to mainta4l their stalldard of JiVing at an adequate
level; in brief, that it must be used in the interests of the Greek people. With this end in view,
tile .USSR delegatioif' submitted the proposal
for the establishment of a special commission to ensure, .by .means of appropriate supervision, the use of such assistance in the interests
of tile Grelek people.. Is it notobviollS that this
proposal is in full confol'lnity withthemterests
of Greek people? And how isit possible to ()bject
tQthe United Nations ensuring that assistance
received by Greece from without should be used
in the interests of the Greek people?
.

Daus ma declaration du 7 avril, j'ai deja. eu
1'0ccasion d'indiquer' qu'en sa qualite de pays
allie qui a beaucoupsouffert de l'occupation ennemie, la· Grece avait le droit de recevoir des
secours de l'etranger. Mats, ai-je dit, il faut que
cette .assistance, pour· etre efficace, soit fournie
d'une fa~on .qui·permette a. la Grece de se retablir et au peuple grec de maintenir un niveau
de vie convenabl~ - autrement illt, qu'elle soit
utilisee conform~ment aux interets dupeuple
grel. J\. ,,~tte fin, la delegation de l'URSS a
~
£.
• ••
'·al·h
'
pro'f!';>:l'c d;
Ct'c·~;-une
COIUn1lSSlon
specl
e c argee
de vd3~er" ~u mcyen d'un controle approprie, a
ce q\J~' le!> :11':;,; secours soient utilises dans l'inter@t
du peupii:; gl'~C. N'est-il pas clair que cette proposition est entierement conforme aux interets du
peuple grec? Comment· d'ailleurs pent-oIl s'opposer a. ·l'idee .que .• I'Organisation des Nations
Unies devrait veiller a.ce que les. secours etrangers· foumisa. la .Grece .soient utilises dans l'inte-

W" C

$

,~~~_~~p~uple grec?

""""

759
It would seem that such a proposal should
meet with universal support, and in particular
that of the United States of America; if the aid
which the Ul'Jted States pr,oposes to give is to be
effective, how can any objection be raised to the
USSR proposal?

n semblerait que tout le monde - et, au
premier chef, les Etats-Unis d'Amerique - devrait appuyer cette proposition; en effet, si l'on
veut que l'assistance qui, ainsi qu'on nous le
propose, doit etre fournie a. la Grece par les
Etats-Unis soit vraiment efficace, comment peuton s'opposer ala proposition de l'URSS?

From the United States representative's second
Cependant, le representant des Etats-Unis,
statement it is obvious, however, that the USSR .com,'ne il appert de sa deuxieme declaration, ne
proposal does not as yet meet with his approval. semble pas, pour le moment, vouloir appuyer la
Althougb Mr. Austin has not made a clear decla- proposition de l'URSS. Bien que· M. Austin ne
ration on the substance of the USSR proposal, se soit pas prononce clairement quant au fond
his remarks with regard to this propos~ lead us de cette proposition, les observations qu'il a faites
to conclude that it is not entirely acceptable to a. ce sujet permettent de conclureque la proposihim. The United States r~presentative suggests tion ne lui selnble pas entierement satisfaisante.
that for the time being no decision should be Le JZ.epresentant des Etats-Ums voudrait que,
taken on the USSR_proposal and that the Secur- pour l'instant, le Conseil de securite n~ prenne
ity Council should postpone taking such a de- aucune decision sur hi proposition de l'URSS;
cision. The reason he gives for this thesis is that it il propose que le Conseil ajemrne sa decision.
would be undesirable to take a decision before fait valoir a. l'appui de sa ~ese qu'il serait inopthe United States Congress takes a definite deci- portun de prendre une decision avant que le
sion regarding the action of the United States Congres des Etats-Unis ne se soit prononce sur
Government in relation to Greece and Turkey. les mesures que le Gouvemement de ce pays
I cannot agree with this kind of argument. The entend prendre a l'egard de la Grece et de la
fate of the USSR proposal cannot be made de- Turquic. Je ne puis accepter ce raisonnement.
pendent upon a decision by the United States n ne fau~ pas que le sort de la proposition de
Congress or the congress of any othei country. l'URSS depende d'une decision du Congres des
Etatll-Unis ou du corps Iegislatif d'aucun autre
Wh~ should we wait until a decision is taken by
the legislative body of a single State before taking pays. Pourquoi faudrait-il atten.dre la decision de
a decision on the USSR proposal? These are two l'organe Iegislatif d'un sew Etat, avant de nous
prononeer sur la proposition de l'URSS? n s'agit
altogether different matters.
la de deux chases parfaitement independantes
IJ une dt: l'autre.

n

'Furthermore, in his statement, the United
States representative expressed the wish that l:£
decision on the USSR proposal regarding the
'establishment of a special commission should b(';
considered in conneJdon with the discussion by
the Security Council of the report of the Cornmission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents. I am unable to agree with such a
s~ggestion and with such arguments. They prove
that there is a, continued attempt to connect
these two absolutely different problems: the problem of the Commission of Investigation and the
problem of United States action in relation to
Greece and Turkey.

En ou.tre, le representant des Etats-Unis a
exprime 1~ vreu, dans sa declaration, que le
Conseil de securite discute de la decision a prendre, en cc qui concerne la proposition de l'URSS
de creer une conunission speciale, au moment de
l'examen du rapport de la Commission d'enquete
sur ·les incidents qui se sont produits. a. la frontiere grecque. On ne saurait accepter cette proposition, ni cette fa~on de raisonner. Elles montrent que 1'0n s'efforce encore de rattacher l'une
a. l'autre deux questions absolument distinctes:
la question de la Commission d'enquete et celle
des mesures prises par les Etats-Unis a l'egard
de la Grece et delaTurquie.

Indeed, what happens if we follow the arguEn dfet, si nous analysons le raisonnement du
.• ments of the United States representative and ,representant des Etats-Unis, si nous approfondisclU'e~~y'~, consider his suggestion? On, the one ~ons sa proposition, ou ce1a nous m.ene-t~il?
"hand, a decision on the proposal submitted by D'une part, il Y est question d'ajourner la decithe USSR delegation in connexion with the ques- sion a prendre sur la proposition. de l'URSS
tion of United States action in relation to Greece concernant les mesures prevues par les Etats,.Unis
must be postponed un,til the Commission of·.In- a l'egard de la Grece et de la Turquie, jusqu'a
vestigation submits its report. Thus, the question ceque la Commission d'enquete ait presente son
relating to the plan of action of the United States rapp0rt.Onveut donc r~t~a£l.ter1ePI'oblemede
Government must be considered in connexion l'action envisagee par les IEtats-Unisalaquef,ltion
with another· problem, that of the Conmtission de la Commission d'enqucte. D'autre part, on
of Investigation. On 'the other hand, it is pr~- propose au· Com;eil de securite de prendre ·une
posed that regarding the worlDf the Commis-~~cisionSl]]'J~travaux de la Commission d'ension of Investigation, the SecurityCoundlcshouid - quete, c'~t-a.qire sur lemaintien de representants
take a decision to leave its rep~atives in decette •Commission .en Grece 'Jeptentrionale.
northern Greece; this question bears no rcla- Cette question est sans rapportavec leprobleme
·tion to the one we are discussing in the Security que nous sommes .en train,d'etudier au Conseil
Council. Thus, in the opinion· of the United de securite. Ainsi done" leI'epresentC\nt des EtatsStates . representative, the proposal connected Unis.estime qu'il n'y au~ait pas lieu d'etudier
. . . .!le· . .-.

"

~~"'~"""*-~ ~ ~.", , ~, ,.·, , . . :.-.n. .,=~·~ -· · ·~
.....

...

...i;..A·",r>r

j~,,,,

. ......._

~~~~~

........

760
with the question under discussion must not be
considered now and no decision must be takeri on
it. On the other hand again, in the opinion of the
United 'States representative, a proposal, on a
question which is not now being discussed in.the
Security Council should be considered and a
decision on it should be taken. Everything is
turned. upside down. Such logic, such arguments
are, to say the least, strange and the Soviet representative is unable to accept them.

maintenant une proposition qui se rattache au
probleme que nous sommes en train d 3examiner,
et qu'il ne faudrait pas prendre de decision a ce
sujet. Par contre, ce meme representant voudrait
que n.,9us examinions une proposition qui a trait
a une question que nous n'etudions pas id, et
que nous nous prononcions sur cette proposition.
C'est defier le bon sens. Ce genre de logique, cette
fa~on de raisonner sont pour le moms b~arres, et
le representant de l'Union sovietique ne saurait
les accepter.

In his nreceding statement, the United States
Au COUl'S de sa demiere intervention, le reprerepresentative hinted that the question of giving sentant des Eta:ts-Unis a laiss6 'entendre que la
assistance to Greece was one in which other or- question de l'assistance a la Grece devrait integans should be interested rather than the Security. resser non pas le Conscil de securite, mais d'autres
Council. Although he did not say so explicidy organes des Nations Unies. Bien qu'il ne l'ait
that is the interpretation which might be given, . pas dit explicitement, c~est ainsi qu'on pourrait
for,instance, to Mr•. Austin's remarks regarding comprendre la declaration de M. Austin concer- . .
the request transmitted some time ago by the nant la requete qui avait et6 adressee par rOr"
Food and Agriculture Organization to the Eco- ganisation pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture au
nomic and Social Council. The FAO apparently Consei1 economique et social. L'OAA aurait, en
expressed the wish that the, Economic and Social quelque sorte, exprime le souhait que le Conseil
economique et social envoyat une mission en
Council should send a mission to Greece.
Grece.
In connexion with this request, it is essential
Ace propos, il convient d'indiquer ce qui suit.
to give the following explanations. In t4.e first Tout d'abord, mmme vous le savez, l'Organisaplace, as you know, this decision of the Food and tion pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture a pris
AgricultureOrgcmization' Waljl taken before the cette decision avant que le Gouvemement des
United States Government published ~ts plan of Etats-Unis n~eo.t f~t connaitre son plan d'action
actUtIlm J:el~ti9n to Greece. and Turk,ey. At that a l'egard de la Grece et de la Turquie. On poutime it was possible to consider the question of vait alors envisager I'assistance a la Grece d'un
aid to Gr~ece from a puretyeconomic point of point de vue purement economique; ou, dn
view - at least there were some grounds for this. moins, un tel point de vue n'etait pas d~nue de
Now this is no longer sufficient. The question tout fondement. Mais aujourd'hui, cela ne suffit
has now assumed a political significance; this is plus. La question a acquis desorinais une signishown clearly enough by the fact that the Secur- fication poUtique; pour s'en persuader, il suffit
ity Council is concemed with· it and th~t the de se rappeIer qlte c'est le Conseil de securite
United States Govemment ha.c; raised this nroh- qui s'en occupe, et que bs Etats-Unis ont saisi,
lemnotin the Food and, Agriculture .Organi- de cette question non pas l'Organisation pOUf
zation~ not even in the' Economic and Social ,l'alimentation et l'agriculture, ni meme le Conseil
economique et social, mais bien le Conseil de
Council, but in the Security Council.
securite.
What were the intentions of the United 'States
Que1les etaient les mten~ons du GouvemeGovemment in referring the question to the Se- ment des Etats-Unis en s'adressant au Conseil de
curity Council? That is another matter. We know securite? C'est
une tout autre question. Nons
that it referred the question to the Council with savons que ce Gouvemement s'est adresse an'
the intention of explaining and justifying·.itsac- Conseil dans l'intention d'expliquer et de .iustitiQns; NevertheleSs, it did 'bring this qUe&tion be- fierses actes. Le fait deme,ure, neanmoins, qU'il
fpre the. Security. OouncU. COn$equently, as we a so~mis cette question au Conseil de securite. En
are considering the whole of this qUb1ion after consequence, puisque nous etudions l'ensemble de
the United. States Government hat: published its ce . probleme apres que le Gouvemement des
plan of aciionin relation to Gteec,e and Tut:~ey Etats-Unis ait annonce son plan d'action al'e~ard
and after lHias raised this question in the Security de la Grece et de la' Turquie et apres qu'il ait
Council, it pr.oves that it WQuId be" incorrect to souteve cette question au Conseil de securite;
gloss over thepoliticalcontelit of this question ne serait pas juste de le depoui1ler de son cdntenn
or to refer it to the Ecpnornicand So.cial Council politiqu~) ni' de le renvoyer au Conseil economior, worse still, to some specialized agency.
qU,e et social, ni, ,a fortiori, de le confiera quelque institution speciaIisee.

la

n

Thisquestionattract$, and (laMot but aura<.:t;
the attention of the ,whole of the United Natjons,
and the. Security Council in particular; it could
not .be. otherwise, since theaction'which the
UIrlted States Govemment has decided to take in
relation to' Gree~andrrurkeyis contrary to the
purposes and. principles of the· United Nation~.

.. " .1

1

•

S.liUr ?

1

z:

Cette question attire necessairementl'attention '
de toute' l'Organisation des Nations Unies, et en
particulier du Conseil de securitcS. n ne saurait
en etreautrement, ,puisque les mesures' que le,
Gouvemement dl".8 Etats..Unis a decide de
prendre a l;egard de la' Grece et de .la. Turquie
sont eontraires aux buts et. au~ principes" des '.,
. 'MC

'

,. CUim . .

't"!It

761

It is fraught with serious consequences with re..
gard to the independence of these countries, of
Greece in particular, and everything, that arises
therefrom.

Nations Unies. Ces mesures entratnent des consequences graves pour l'independance de ca
pays, et en particulier pour l'ind6pendance de la
Grece, avec toutes les suites que cela comporte.

If the United States Government really intends
to give assistance to Greece, it carinot refuse its
consent with the USSR proposal for the estab..
lishment by the Security Council of a special c0Il!mission. If the Governments of other countries
represented on the Security Council are aDxious
that assistance should indeed be given to Greece
, in the interests of the Greek people, they cannot
but support the USSR proposal. It provides that
the assistance which' may be given to Greece
should be real assistance, and not a tool of for~
eign influence over the internal. affairs of Greece
OJ' of foreign interference ill Greek affairs.
The fact that the United States representative
has not yet expressed a positive attitude to the
USSR proposal, and has given indications to the
contrary, leads me to think that the United States
Government does not intend to support the. proposal which would ensure the utilization of the
aid received by Greece in the interests of the
Greek people. This is understandable, in the light
of the plan the United S~ates have conceived in
relation to Greece and Turkey; but in no drcumstances could such a plan be accepted.

Si le GouvemeJ;nent des- Etats-Unis veut reel.
lement secourir la Grece, il ne peut refuser son
accord a. la proposition de l~URSS tendant a ce
que le Conseil de securitc eree une commission
speciale. Si les Gouvernements des autres pays
representesau Conseil de securite veulent reellement aider la Grece et servir les interets du
peuple gree, its ne peuvent f~ autrement Que
d!'appuyer la proposition de l'URSS. Cette pro.
position envisage une assistance a la Grece qui
soit effective et qui ne serve pas d'instrument
l'influence ou a l'intervention etrangeres dans
les affaires interieures de la Grece.

Cannot the suggestion for the postponement
of a decision on the USSR proposal be interpreted to mean that it. is not convenient for the
United States representative to vote on the substance of the USSR proposal in the Security
Council? I put this in the form of a question,
but it does not necessarily require an answer.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Yugoslavia.
Mr. KRASOVEC (Yugoslavia): ,Allow me to
express, briefly, my concrete opinion. on the two
resolutions which are before the Council; at the
last meeting 1 made only general observations.

La proposition .d'ajournement de la. de~on
~ur le projet .de resolution de' 1'{JRSS s'expli-

, As the represmtative of Yug~avia, :i: am in
favour of economic aid to Greece.. I must emphasize .this to prevent any misunderstaruling. I
atn in favour of aid to Greece for both humanitarian and traditio~a1 reasons.
The majoritY ohhe Yugoslav people ~e o~ the

s~e religion ~ the Gn,:ek people, and have sim-

jIar cultural traditions. They were bound wi,th
the Greek people in a common struggle not only
during the last four yeaI'S of the war against th,e
fascist and n~ occupational forces and in the
Balkan wars of liberation of 1913 and 1920, but
also for centuries when they fought side by side
to re~ht the Ottoman oppression.

Moreover, whole generations of our intellectuals have studied the ancient language of the
Greek people. We have thus had the opportunity

h....- .

a

Jusqu'a present, le r.epresentant des Etats-Unis
n'a pas pris line attitude favorable a i'egard de
la proposition de l'URSS; son attitude est meme
plutot defavorable; aussi dois-je considerer que _
le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis n'a pas l'inten·
tion d'appuyer une proposition qui garantirait'
que .les secours accordes a la Grece seiont em·
ployes conformement aux interets du peuple grec.
On peut comprendre ceci a la lumiere des plans
que forment les Etats-Unis en ce quiconceme
la Grece et la Turquie, mais on ne saurait, en
aucun cas, l'accepter.

querait-e11e par la\ repugnance du representant
des Etats-Unm avoter au Conseil de securiM sur
le fond de cette resolution? G'est une question
que je pose, mais eUe n'exige pas necessairement
de reponse.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Je donne
la parole au. representant de la Yougoslayie.
M. ·KRASOVEC ('Yougoslavie) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Permettez-moi d'exprimerbrievement
mon opinion precise sur les deux resolutions qui
sont devant le Conseil. Aucours de ·la derniere
seance je m~etais borne a faire' des observations
generales.
.
En tant que representan~.dela Yougoslavie, je
suis partisan de l'aide eCOD:omique a la Greee.
J'insiste sur ce point pour' pr~venir tout Illalentendu. Je suisp~an de l'aide a la Grece,tant
pour des raisons humanitairesque pour des raisons d'ordre traditionne1. '
La majorite· des YougQS!aves. pratiquent le;,
meme religion que les' Grecs et iI$ ont des traditions cuItureUes analogues.D'autre part,le·peupIe gree et le. peuple yougoslave se sont trouves
lies par la'lutte commune qu'ils ont tnenee, non
seulement aucours des quatre dernieres annees de
guerre contre les forces occupantes fascistes et
nazies et pendant les guerres de liberation des
Balkans des annees 1913 et 1920, maisencoreau
cours des siecles de lutte et de resmance. communes contre l'oppression ottomane.
En outre, des' generations eritieres d'intellectuels yougoslaves ont et,udie l'aritique langue du
peuple hellene; nous avons pu ainsi jouir des

762
of enjoying the w(ialth of their ancient literature,
oftb,eir poets and philosophers in the original.
These are traditional loves and sympathies.. which
link the -Yugoslav people with the whole Greek
people,' and which remain unaffected by the
chara~ter of their different regimes.

tresors de la litterature classique et lire les poetes '
et les philOlilophes dans leur langue originale.
Ces liens sentimentaux et ces sympathies du peupIe yougoslave pour l'ensemble du peuple gree
ont un caractere traditionnel et n'ont pas cte
alteres par les differents regimes politiques.

Pour ces raisons seuIes, nous accueillerions avee
satisfaction des mesures assurant vraiment au
peuple grec le, benefice de l'aide qui lui serait
afPort~e. C'est pourquoi j'appuie le projet de
resolution du representant de I'Union sovietique.
Je l'appuie poUr les raisons que j'ai exposees dans
mon dernier discours, ou j'ai tente de demontrer
que l'assistance envisagee devrait etre apportee
par l'intermediaire de 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies et que celle~ci devrait en avoir le, controle.
S'il n'enetaitpas ainsi, nos efforts seraient vains
co~e l'ont ete toutes les tentatives fait~s jusqu'~
mamtenant. pour apporter une aide economique
ala Grece, tentatives que j'ai enmnerees aV.,COlh'"'S
de la derniere seance et dont M.Den..:iramis doit
avoir connaissance.
n me semble que la conclusion 10ID-oue du
It seems to me that the logical conclusion to be
drawn from Mr. Dendramis' last speechi is that dernier discours de M. Dendramis1 est qu'une
a United Nations commission, as proposed by the commission des Nations Unies, comme celle qu'a
Soviet representative, would result in a threat to proposee le representant de l'Union sovietique.
Greek independence. H the present regime in constituerait une menace a l'independance grec:
Greece is really as democratic as Mr. Dendramis que. Or, si le regime actuelde la Grece est
would have us believe - arid democracy covers vraiment aussi f,.locratique queM. Dendramis
everything .which is for the benefit of the people essaie ~e nous :,e representer - et le mot demo- then why would it be dangerous for. Greek crane englobe tout ce qui est fait dansl'interet
democracy and independence to accept United ,du peuple -.pourquoi donc un controle exerce
Nations control, while to accept only United par l'Organisation des Nations Unies mettrait-il
States control andexperts,or United Kingdom en danger la democratie et l'independance grec·troops and experts would not be dangerous? I qu~, si 1'0n estime que la surveill\lUlce des seuls
should like to know how this refusal to accept a experts des Etats-Unis, ou la pr.esence d~experts
United Nations commission can be compatible et de troupes britanniques ne lesr,nettent pas en
with the devotion which' Gr~k leaders profess danger. J'aimerais qtte 1'0n m'explique comment
cette repugnance a accep~er une commission des
to the .lJnited Nations.
.JlNations Unies peut etre compatible avec le devouement a 1'0rganisation des NatiofiS Unies
que professent les dirigeants grecs.
D'autre part, le projet de resolution presente
On the other hand, the United States resolution·to leave in Greece apart of 'the· Commission par les Etats-Unis ettendant a laisser en Greee
of -Investigation concerning Grc-ek Frontier Inci- une partie des membres de la Commission d'er.dents d~es not seem to me to provide a guarantee quete chargee. de proceder a l'examen des incithat the generously granted relief would be used dents de frontiere ne me ,semble pas, en verite,
for the benefit of the Greek people. Therefore, I constituer une garantie· que le peuple ,grec benec::annot agree with that resolution, even in the ficiera i'eellement de l'aideq9i lui est genereusement o,fferte. En consequence, je ne' puis apamended form now presented to us.
prouver cette resolution, 'ileme avec lesamendements qu'on nous iJropose.
I appreciate the fact that the United States
Je n'oublle certes pas que les Etats-Pnl.'.l ont
finally brought the matter before this Council," fini par porter la question devant ce Conseil,
but with all respect for' the explanations which mais; tout en accordant toute la consideration
the United States representative gave on both voulue aux e'Xplications foumies par le represenoccasions, I still fail to understand what the pro- tant des Etats-Unis a deux reprises, j'avouene
posed prolongation of the stay of the Commission pas voil' quelle relation il peut exister entrel'aide
of Inves~gation of the Security Council has in accordee a l'economie politique de la Grece et
common with relief to Greek political economy. un sejoul' prolonge de la Commission d'enquete
A Commission whose terms of reference are to du Conseil de securite. La t~che d'une CommisiI;lvestigate the' origin of the border" incidents, a. sion dont le mandat est de faire une e:~quete sur
Commission composed of legal and military ex.. f l'origine des incidents de frontiere, d'une Comperts and not of eCQnomists~ not of monetary and mi~ion composee d'experts juridiques et millFor these reasons alone, we should welcome
provisions ensuring that this relief would really
be used for the benefit of the Greek people. That;
is why I support the draft resolution submitted
by the Soviet representative. I support it for the
reasons given in my last speech, when I argued
that relief should be administered through the
United Nati9ns and be under itS supervision, or
else the effort would be futile, as has been the
case with the efforts made thus far to extend economic aid to Greece which· I enumerated at the
last meeting and which cannot be unknown to
Mr. Dendramis.

1 See. Official Reeords ,Jf re) S!icurity Cot'ncil, Second
Ye;lr. No. 35. '.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux .officiels du Conseil de securiitJ,
Deuxieme Annee, No 35~

763

.financial experts, such a Commission is one thing. I taires et non pas d'economistes, ni d'experts finanTo prevent starvation in Greece, to check infla- ciers, est une chose; la lutte contre la famine
tion, to help the Greek economy is another thing. et l'inflation, l'aide economique a la Grece, en
.I shall not say that this has not also got a politi- est une autre. Je ne dis pas que cette seconde
'cal aspect, but it is a different matter altogether. tache ne comporte pas, elle aussi, d'aspect poliWhat has the Commission of Investigation con- tique, mais il s'a~t bien d'un tache differente.
'cerning Greek Frontier Incidents to do with the Qu'est-ce que la Commission d'enquete sur les
United States proposal which recommends super- incidents de frontiere a a voir avec la proposition
vision of economic aid to Greece? 1 believe that des Etats-Unis recommandant que l'aide econono one at tI'Us table anticipates allY danger that mique apportee a la Grece soit soumise a un
relief goods may be sent from G-reece over the controle? Je crois que personne, autour de cette
border into Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Albania, or into table, ne craint que lesmarchandises expediees
Turkey, that relief goods may be smuggled by en Grece a titre de secours ne traversent subreptiblack marketeers over the borders thus p.revent- cement les frontieres. de Yougoslavie, d'Albanie,
ing consumption of these goods within Greece de Bulg;arie ou de Turquie, ni que des trafiquants
du matche noir ne passent ces marchandises en
itself. That danger does not exist.
contrebande, en empechantainsi la consommation aJ'interieur du pays. Ce dangern'existe pas.
On the contrary, the question is really an economic onc; it is a question of equitable distri.. bution. of relief within Greece itself. I. ask you,
gentlemen, what has the Commission of Investi:gation concerning Greek Frontier'Incidents to do
with the distribution and use of relief goods
within Gree~e itself, with decisions regarding the
proportions to be allocated for l'ailways, shipping,
agriculture, financing, etc., and with a system of
rationing ~md equitable distribution of goods?

n s'agit bien, au contraire, d'un~ question essentieliement economique: il s'agit de proceder,
a l'interieur meme de la Grece, a une repartition
equitable des sec,mrs. Je vous le demande, Messieurs, quel rapport la CommisSion chargee de
1'enquete s~ les incidents de frontiere peut..elle
bien avoir avec la distribution et 1'utilisation des
secours a 1'interieur de la Grece, .avec les decisions qu'il s'agira de prendre quant aux credits
a accorder pour les chemins de fer, la marine
marchande, l'agriculture, lefina..'1cement! etc.,
avec 1'etablissement d'un systeme de rationne. ment et de distribution equitable des marchandises?

My people, as well as the peoples of other liberated nations of Europe, have acquired some
experience during the last war. These peoples
, have become thoroughly familiar with t..lte language of, for instance, Joseph' Goebbels and
Virginia Gayda. Their countries were invaded by
nazi and fascist occupying forces under the pretext of protecting their national independence
from what they used to call "the western plutocracies", and from so-called "communism", etc.

Le peuple· de .mon pays et les peuples des
.mtres nationsliber~ de 1'Europe ont acquis
une certaine experience au CQurs de la derniere
guerre. lis ont pu ainsi se familiariser avec le
langage employe, par exemple, par Joseph Goebbels et Virginio Gayda. Les forces d'occupation
nazies et fascistes ont envahi leurs tenitoires sous
le pretexte de sauver leur independance nationale
de l'emprise de <:e qu'ils appelaient "les ploutocraties occidentales", "le communisme", etc.

During a period of four. to five years, these
Pendant quatre ou cinq ans, ces peuples ont
peoples saw what such protectionreallynieant. pu voir ce que signifiait une telle protection. Cette
Their experience has made them politically and experience a muri leur jugemer. en matiere
socially more mature, and has raised them to. a politique et sociale et les a fait progresser dans
higher level. They could not. be cO~.1vbc~d that ces domaines. n serait impossible de les conv:¥nthe provision for a more or less pelL:",.lnt stay ere que des dispositions tendant a prolonger, de
of a part of t.he Co~sion of Investigation in . fa:~on plus ou maius permanente, le sejour d'une
Greece .could be interpreted to .mean that the partiede la Commission d'enquete .sont une
economic re1:ief to Greece was being extended preuve que l'aide .economiqueaccnrdee a la
through the United Nations~and for the benefit Grece lui est apportee par 1'intermediaire. de
of the Greek people. A critical economic situa- 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et qu'elle pro- .
, tion, substantially different {x'om that in other fitera au peuple grec. La situation de l'economie
liberated countries, has existed in Greece during' grecque, essentiellementdifferentede cene des
the past two years, no matter whether so-called autres pays liberes, n'a cesse· d'etre critique penincidents were occurring on 1he border or not, . dant les deux dernieres annees, que de pretendus
whether. a frontier commissio)rJl was on the spot incidents de frontiere eussent lieu· on non, qu'une
or not, whether a civil war was being fomented commission d'enquete fUtou '. non sur place,
qu'une guerre civile fUt fomentee ounon.
or not.
At the same time, many other liberated countries' have had to contend with grave border ind. dents. It should be sufficient to .refer to the Julian
M"a,rCh~. But this did not· have any effect on
the:economic
condition
of those countries. The
it...
.

D'autres pays liberes ont eu, au mememoment,

a faire face a de graves incidents de frontiere. n
suffit de rappeler l'affaire des Marches Juliennes.
Ces incidents n'ont en cependant aucune repel'':'
cussion sur la situation economique, de ces pays.

..................
764
'-

economic condition of France, Poland, C~echQ­ : La situation econonUque de la France, de la
slovakia, Italy, Austria, Hungary and othercoU:Jl- Pologne, de la TcMcoslovaquie, de 1'!talie, de
tries, are, on the whole, becpming better from , l'Autriche, de la Hongrie, d'autres pays encore
day to day in spite of all shortages arid diflicul- s'ameIiore de jour. en jour, a tout bien considerer'
ties, and we do no~ see their representatives ap- en depit de toutes les insuffisances, de toutes l~ .
pearing here with claims against an alleged small difficultes qui subsistent, et nollS ne voyons anminority or formulating such allegations.
cun de leurs representants se presenter deva.nt
, le Conseil pour porter plainte' contre les agisse,ments d'une pretendue faible "minorite", ou
formuler des allegations analogues.
Je rappellerai enfin les termes de la resolution
May I refer, finally, to the terms of the Gen· eral Assembly resolution of 11 December!, and ' de l'AssembIee generaledu 11 decembre1 et les
to the words spoken by the representative of the paroles prononcees pal' le representant du
United Kingdom and others. I thank the repre- Royaume-Uni et d'autres orateurs.. Je remercie
~J'ltative of Poland, Mr. Lange, for his brilliant le representant de la Pologne, M. Lange, de la
clarification of the issue, and I should like to re- fa~on brillante dont il a eclairci la question et
frain from repeating it. As I' have already de- je m'abstiendrai de repeter son expose. Comme
clared, my country remains true to the principle je l'ai deja dit, mon paysreste fideJ.e au principe
of international· co-operation .and solidarity in de la cooperation et de la solidarite internatiorelief action; for its part, it will m~e every pas-. nales dans l'reuvre d'assistance~ et lui apportera,
Bible contribution. As regards general aid to . poursa part, toutes les contributions qu'il pourra
Greece and Turkey, or to either Greece or Tur- lui fournir. En ce qui conceme le principe d'une
key, no one can prevent anyone State from aide ala Grece et ala Turquie, ou a1'un seuIe- ,
granting it. That is a sovereign right of the State ment de ces deux pays, personne ne peut empeconcerned.·But attempts have been made to prove cher un Etat de leur porter assistance. C'est un
that the action of the United States is in coriform- acte qui decoule du c..il'oit souverain de 1'Etat
ity with the resolution of the General Assembly interesse. Mais on a Cl!lSaye de prouver que les
of the United Nations of 11 December.mesures prises par les Eitats-UTlis sont conformes
a la resolution de l'Ass,emhMe generale des Nations Unies du 11· decelll1bre.
I am only speaking of !.he economic aspect of
Je n'envisage ici que l'aspect economique de
the matter. I should like to emphasize that the la question. Je me permets de souligner que la
.resolution in' question appeals' for relief when. resolution de l'AssembIee demande que des seand where needed, 'without discrimination -of cours soient foumis chaque foill que le besoin s'en
race, .creed or political belief. That resolution fera sentir, sans aucune distinction fondee sur des
furtliermore provid~d for a special technical com- considerations de race, de 'religion ou d'opinions
mitteeoftbeUnited
Nations to investigate and to politiques.: De plus, cette resolutil:>n prevoyait la
•
I ·
· recommend to which country relief should be creation d'un Comite technique special des Nagi~en. The findings of that, committee are suf- tionsUnies, charge d'examiner quels sont les pa)lll
ficiently well-known. They recommend relief for qui peuvent avoir besoin d'aide et de' faire des
Italy~ Poland; Austria, Hungary, Greece and recoJ:m.11andations a cet effet.Les conclusions de
l'enquete menCe p~J' ce Comite sont bien conY~goslavia~ but not for Turkey.
\;
nues:· le, Comitereconimande que des secours
soient accordes a l'ltalie, a la Pologne, a I'Autriche, ala Hongrie, ala Grece.et a la Yougoslavie1
mais non pas a la Turquie.
,
.
Je repete qu'il est du droit souverain des EtatsI repeat, ~t is the sovC?reign right of the United
States to decide to whom'it will grant relief,but Unis de decider a quels pays ils accorderont leur
nnbQdy can prove that its proposal is along the assistance, mais personne ne peut prouver que
lines of' the resolution of 11 December of the leur proposition est conforme. a Pesprit de la
General Assembiy. "The UmtedStates proposal in resolution prise par l'AssembMe g~erale le 11
'its original form bY.I10 means contributes to en- decembre..,Cette proposition, sous sa, forme orilarging .the reservoir •of sympathy·. which the ginale, ne contribue enaucune fa~on a renforcer
·United States, through its past generous.contribu- Ies sentiments de sympathie' que 'les Etats-Unis.
tions to UNRRA, haS accumulated .all 'over the grace 'a leurs genereuses contributions. !I.
world, and especially in the'liberated countries, l'UNRRA, se sont acquis dans le monde enner
et, ,en particulier, dans Ifs pays liberes, y com· inclucling myown~
.pris
la Yougoslavie.
.
. ,
Je deplore un tel etat de cho~es car Ies· senti- ,
I regret such facts, because sympathies among
, nations are independent of governments that ments de 'sympathie qui unissent les nations, loin
· come and' go; they require centuries to ripen and de dependre des gouvemements passagers, se
forment au cours des siecles, et n importe de les
should always be nurtured.
entretenir.'
. . ,
.~ See Resolutions adopted by th.e General Assembly during the second part of its first session, pages 74 to 76
inclusive. .
.
!!!!It
2
iilii2& . - 4_

. . . - . .

. .-

. 1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par l'AssemblBe generare
pendant la seconde partie de la premiere session/page!
'14 a 76.

_ . Wlf

' 1 " IlllUlIlI1 1111

R

.

'tt··

. "

....

...

765

I am compelled to say a few words in repl,y to
the observations made by the representative of
the Greek Government, who employed here a
vocabulary which is unusual at international conferences. He referred to some countries as "Russian satellites". I wonder why he considered himself best qualified to deal with the ~ubject of
"satellites". This word has been in vogue since
the beginning of the Second World War and cannot be dissociated from the presence of foreign
troops in the satellite countries.

Je me vois clans fobligation de repondre brievement aux observatiQns du representant. du
Gouvemement grec: il a employe id un vocabulaire qui n' est pas d'usage dans les conferences
internationales. ~ a qualifie certains pays de
"satellites de la Russie". Je me demande pourquoi le representant de la Grece se erait particulierement autorise a entamer la question des
"satellites". C~ mot, qui est a la. mode depuis
le debut de la seconde guerre mondiale, ne saurait
s'employer qu'en parlant des pays ou se trouvent
des troupes etrangeres~

Now, of the countries to which Mr. Dendramis
referred, my country had foreign troops in it during the nazi and fascist occupation. But even in
those very difficult conditions it did not become
a satellite of the occupying regime. Our people
waS, and remained, independent. The love and
devotion of all our people for the great Russian
nation and the other nations of the Soviet Union
are the result of the experience of one hundred
years during which, in the most difficult situations, our people has never been abandoned by
the Russian people. This can be said especially
of the years 1941, 1942, and 1943, when the
Soviet Union was the only cOllmtry which, by
fightmg on the battlefields suostantially eased the
pressure of the fascists occupation in our count.ry.

Or, panni les pays dont M. Dendramis a
parle, le mien a ete occupe par les armees
etrangeres des nazis et des fascistes. Mais, m~me
dans ces circonstances difficiles, notre pays ri'est
pl:}S devenu un satellite du regime de l'occupant.
Notre peuple a toujours ete independant et l'est
teste. Son amitie et SOD attachement al'egard de
lagrande nation russe et des autres peuples de
l'Union sovietique sont fondes sur l'experience
d'un siecle au cours duquel, dans les situations
les plus difficiles, le peuple russe ne l'a jamais
en a ete a.fusi en particulieren
abandonne.
1941, en 1942 et en 1943, a une epoqueou
I'Union sovietique etait le seul pays qui, 'en
luttant sur les champs de bataille, diminuat co~·
sidemblement la pression de 1'0ccupant fasciSte
sur notre pays.

Today too, our experience demonstrates that
the Soviet Union is, of the major Powers, the
country which has shown the most sincere under. standing of Yugoslavia's sacrifices in the war and
has acted accordingly. We are not threatened by
the Soviet Union with a strategy of exploiting our
economic and food dHnculties.

Aujourd'hui encore, l'experience prouve que
I'Union sovietique est celle·des grandes Puissances
qui a montre la comprehension la plus sincere des
sacrifices faits pat la Yougoslavie pendant la.
guerre et a agi en consequence. L'Union sovietique ne nous menace pas d'une politique qui
tendrait exploiter nos diffictl1teseconomiques
et allmentaires.

I

n

a

I apologize again~ aut I could not have left
Je m'excuse a nouveau, mais je ne pouvais me
without making observations on the question retirer sans' avoir formule mes observations sur
which is on the agenda of this meeting. Also, on .la question qui se trouve a l'ordre du jour de
this occasion, I wish to thank you, Mr.. President, . cette seance. A cette occaSion, je voudrais egaleand all the members of the Council for inviting ment vous remercier, Mo~ieur le President,
me to take part in this discussion and for accord- ainsi que tous les membres de ce Conseil, de
m'avoir invite a prendre part a ees d6bats et de
ing me an opr,rtunity to express my opinion.
m'avoir procure ainsi l'occasion d'exprimer mes
vues.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Il reste
The PRESID~NT: I have one more speaker on
my list, but, owing to the late hour, he has ex- . un orateur inscdt sur ma liste, mais en raison tie
pressed his .willingness to speak at the next meet- l'heure tardive, il accepte de ne prendre la
ing.
.
parole qu'au cours de la prochaine seance.
I understand· that there is· to be no meeting
tomorrow, and Wednesday is all taken up. I
therefore suggest that we should Infeet next on the
. Greek Question on Thursday morning at 10;30;
if that is agreeable to everyone present.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

Je crois comprendre qu'il n'y a pas seance
demain et que la journee de mercredi est entie
rement prise. Je· propose donc que notre pro-.
chaine reunion pour discuter de la question gtecque ait lieu jeudi matin, a lOh.30, si personne
n'y voit' d'objection.
c

La seance est levee

a13 h. 10..

..
