S/2020/1078

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 2 November 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 23 July 2020 from the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/766), in which the Council requested me to provide, no later than 31 October
2020, a written report with recommendations assessing the challenges facing Burundi
and the scope and modalities of United Nations engagement in the country, alongside
the African Union and the region, to support Burundi in achieving sustainable peace,
reconciliation and development.
On 29 June 2020, I had a telephone conversation with the President of Burundi,
Évariste Ndayishimiye, to extend my condolences following the death of the former
President, Pierre Nkurunziza, and to congratulate him on his election as President.
We also discussed modalities for future United Nations support for Burundi.
Mr. Ndayishimiye welcomed my offer to dispatch a multidisciplinary mission to
assess the situation in the country and identify areas of potential United Nations
support.
I asked my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Huang Xia, and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Bintou Keita, to jointly lead a strategic
assessment mission to Burundi. The multidisciplinary team was deployed to the
country from 14 to 19 September 2020 and included the participation of members of
the United Nations country team. The delegation held consultations with national and
international stakeholders on all issues relevant to relations between Burundi and the
United Nations. I transmit herewith my report (see annex), which contains
recommendations for enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
Burundi.
As outlined in the report, the desire of Burundi for positive change is genuine
and strong. The international community has the opportunity to support the
Government and people of Burundi to seize that momentum, by actively assisting
them in achieving the desired transformation of the country, whi le also facilitating
reconciliation, the establishment of an inclusive political system and the promotion
of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all Burundians.
The openness of President Ndayishimiye and the Government of Burundi to
collaborate with regional and international actors, in a spirit of mutual respect and
collaborative partnership, is commendable and will greatly help in achieving full
reconciliation and the desired transformation. To that end, I reiterate the commitment
of the United Nations to support the Government and the people of Burundi in their
path towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

20-14139 (E)

061120

*2014139*

S/2020/1078

I am grateful to the Government of Burundi for the support extended to the
strategic assessment mission, which enabled its deployment to the country in full
compliance with coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic preventive arrangements,
and to all stakeholders for their active participation in the mission.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

Annex
Report of the Secretary-General on the strategic assessment
mission for United Nations engagement in Burundi

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted in response to the letter dated 23 July 2020 from
the President of the Security Council (S/2020/766), in which the Secretary-General
was requested to provide the Council, by 31 October, with a written report with
recommendations assessing the challenges facing Burundi and the scope and
modalities of United Nations engagement in the country, alongside the African Union
and the region, for sustainable peace, reconciliation and development. The letter was
issued in the context of recent developments, including the elections of 20 May 2020
and the evolution of the peace and security situation in the country. On 29 June, prior
to the Council’s request, the Secretary-General had a telephone conversation with the
President of Burundi, Évariste Ndayishimiye, during which Mr. Ndayishimiye
welcomed the Secretary-General’s offer to dispatch a multidisciplinary United
Nations mission to assess the situation in the country and identify areas of potential
United Nations support.

II. Background
2.
Following the 2015 crisis triggered by the bid of the late President, Pierre
Nkurunziza, for a third term in office, the situation in Burundi was placed back on the
agenda of the Security Council. Pursuant to Council r esolutions 2248 (2015), 2279
(2016) and 2303 (2016), the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi was established, succeeding the Office of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Conflict Prevention, including in Burundi, to support the
country and the region in finding a peaceful and lasting solution to the c risis.
3.
In implementing its mandate, the Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi
extended technical and substantive support to the facilitator of the East African
Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue, the late President of the United Republic
of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa. A joint technical working group, comprising the East
African Community, African Union and United Nations, helped to facilitate five
dialogue sessions. However, subsequent rounds of the dialogue process never
materialized, despite efforts made by the facilitator and by the Special Envoy, the
former Transitional President of Burkina Faso, Michel Kafando. In February 2019,
having announced the end of his assignment, the facilitator submitted his final report
and a road map for sustainable peace in Burundi to the mediator of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, for consideration by the
twentieth Ordinary Summit of Heads of State of the East African Community, held
that same month. The Summit decided to discuss the matter further and is yet to
provide a way forward.
4.
From 20 May to 24 August 2020, general elections were held in Burundi, in a
relatively peaceful environment, leading to changes in the leadership of key State
institutions, including the Office of the President, Parliament and communal and local
councils. As a result, Mr. Ndayishimiye was sworn in as President on 18 June. The
Prime Minister, Alain Guillaume Bunyoni, was appointed on 24 June, and the new
Government was named on 28 June. Furthermore, on 25 August, Gélase Ndabirabe
and Emmanuel Sinzohagera were elected as Speaker of the National Assembly and
President of the Senate, respectively.

20-14139

3/17

S/2020/1078

5.
It was in that context that the strategic assessment mission, jointly led by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Huang Xia, and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Bintou Keita, visited Burundi from 14 to
19 September. The multidisciplinary mission also included participants from the
United Nations Sub-Regional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa, the United Nations Resident Coordinator Office and the United Nations
country team, including representatives of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nation s High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of (UN -Women)
and the United Nations Population Fund. Members of the strategic assessment
mission met with key stakeholders in the country, notably the President of Burundi,
government officials, leaders of political parties, the Ombudsman and representatives
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Independent National Human
Rights Commission, as well as of civil society groups, including religious groups,
women’s organizations, youth groups, human rights organizations and the media. The
team also met with representatives of regional and international organizations,
including the African Union, the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, heads of diplomatic missions accredited to
Burundi and representatives of other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and of international financial institutions and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), among others.

III. Findings
A.

Political and peacebuilding situation
6.
The 2020 electoral process was considered to be generally peaceful, despite few
incidents of overt violence between the ruling party and the opposition and claims of
irregularities. Burundian stakeholders consulted during the strategic assessment
mission signalled their acceptance of election results, affirming their readiness to
move forward and to give the Government a chance to fulfil its electoral promises. In
his inauguration speech on 18 June, Mr. Ndayishimiye presented the six principal
priorities of his Government for the next seven years, namely: (a) good governance;
(b) public health; (c) agriculture and cattle breeding; (d) youth unemployment;
(e) social protection for pensioners; and (f) peace and reconciliation. In addition, on
several occasions, the President has publicly expressed his openness to dialogue,
referring to the inherent culture of dialogue present in Burundian society.
7.
However, the prevailing context remains fragile. Some stakeholders raised
concerns over the overwhelming control of the ruling party, the Conseil national pour
la défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD),
in State institutions (with 86 of 123 seats in the National Assembly and 33 of 39 seats
in the Senate) and at all levels of the administration. Another concern expressed by
stakeholders was the perceived militarization of the administration through the
appointment of military and police officers to key ministerial and gubernatorial
positions. Concerns noted by stakeholders consulted were also centred on the
perceived tendency of the new administration to unilaterally impose its views on
contentious issues. The fact that the Government has set conditions for the return of
political figures and civil society activists perceived as hav ing participated in the
2015 coup attempt was given as an example by some stakeholders. Many interlocutors
expressed the urgent need to see concrete signs of the stated openness of the new
Government and stressed the importance of building confidence among Burundians
and with partners.

4/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

8.
Moreover, several stakeholders noted that challenges to peace and stability in
Burundi and the region remained unaddressed, including issues pertaining to security,
exclusion, marginalization, refugees, reconciliation, soc ial cohesion, political space
and freedom of speech. Stakeholders continue to disagree on the best mechanisms for
moving forward. It also appears that a sizeable segment of the population remains
traumatized by past experiences, including with regard to violence, civil war and the
2015 crisis, which continue to influence their sentiments towards the new
administration. That situation could explain the persistent and widespread mistrust
among citizens and communities and between the opposition and the Govern ment.
9.
During his meeting with the strategic assessment mission, Mr. Ndayishimiye
reiterated his six priorities and the importance of the national development plan. He
underscored the progress made by the country since 2015, highlighting improvements
in national security, the peaceful electoral process and the inauguration of new
institutions. While voicing his openness to domestic dialogue among Burundians, he
stated that the East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue process had
been concluded. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation,
Albert Shingiro, echoed that stance and asserted that peace and stability prevailed in
the country, despite pending issues pertaining to reconciliation and social cohesion.
10. The President and his Minister for Foreign Affairs stressed that, as Burundi no
longer posed a threat to international peace and security, it should be removed from
the agenda of the Security Council. They also indicated the Government’s readiness
to engage, as soon as possible, in constructive dialogue on the future of the Office of
the Special Envoy for Burundi and on the continuation of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
11. The new President and his Government are generally perceived by many
stakeholders as being accessible and open to engagement with the international
community. The spirit of openness displayed by the Burundian authorities and their
willingness to improve dynamics in various sectors of society, such as political space,
reconciliation, socioeconomic development, security, human rights and social
cohesion, have been welcomed with cautious optimism by many. The President’s
efforts to reach out to some key stakeholders, notably former Presidents of Burundi,
the Catholic and Protestant Churches, the African Union, the European Union,
members of the Security Council, the African Group of Ambassador and most civil
society and women’s organizations, as well as United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and international financial institutions, were especially appreciated and
highlighted by many interlocutors of the strategic assessment mission as positive
steps towards the normalization of relations, including with foreign partners.
12. Some stakeholders concurred with the Government’s request to have the
situation in Burundi removed from the Security Council agenda, arguing that the
removal of the item would enhance the country’s profile for prospective partners and
investors. However, others stated that granting the Government’s reques t would be
premature, considering that threats to peace and security stemming from the crisis in
2015 and concerns in connection with upholding some key provisions of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi remained unaddressed. Moreover,
some stakeholders noted that national institutions were not yet fully equipped to
address those challenges adequately without support from the United Nations and
other regional and international partners. They insisted on the need for continued
international engagement on the country’s sociopolitical process, in order to ensure
the credibility of the process, assure the safety and security of the various external
stakeholders and facilitate consensus among national stakeholders, who remain
deeply divided along political lines.

20-14139

5/17

S/2020/1078

13. In that regard, while several stakeholders continued to insist that the
inter-Burundian dialogue should resume, questions were raised by some over its
feasibility in the absence of engagement by the Government. Nevertheless, reac hing
consensus and building trust among key stakeholders in order to deliver on people’s
expectations for positive change remain major challenges for the new administration.
In the same vein, most stakeholders – except the Government – emphasized the
criticality of abiding by the letter and the spirit of the Arusha Agreement and of the
preservation of the peace dividends thereby achieved.

B.

Security situation
14. Views expressed by the various stakeholders differed as to the role and status of
the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the ruling CNDD-FDD party. Reports of several
incidents indicate that some government officials and institutions are attempting to
rein in on the Imbonerakure, whose members have been accused of taking on tasks
assigned to the security forces and committing abuses and crimes with impunity.
Contrary to several reports in which they are described as an impediment to lasting
peace and accused of human rights violations, the Government has stated that the
members of the Imbonerakure are not armed, do not constitute a threat to peace and
security and are fully committed to supporting national development efforts. The
Burundian authorities have further stated that some members of the Imbonerakure are
also members of joint security committees, alongside women, local administrators,
the police and the army. Several stakeholders noted that the search for alternate
remunerative activities for members of the Imbonerakure remained a challenge for
the authorities.
15. Following an extended period of relative calm, there are rising concerns over
potential violence and destabilization in view of increasing military activities in some
parts of the country. These activities include alleged infiltrations of armed groups
from the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as subsequent
clashes with security forces and reported attacks on civilians. The Government has
downplayed those incidents as criminal activities conducted by groups of bandits.
However, the armed group, Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi, has claimed
responsibility for some incidents, stating that it had acted in response to the refusal
by the CNDD-FDD to engage in dialogue with members of the opposition. A
Rumonge-area administrator announced that three members of the Congrès national
pour la Liberté (CNL) had been arrested for their collaboration with a rebel group
responsible for an armed incursion in which 13 civilians were killed in Rumonge
Province in August.

C.

Socioeconomic and budgetary situation
16. Recent development indicators for Burundi show that the timid economic
recovery continued in 2019. Real gross domestic product (GDP), which was expected
to reach 4.1 per cent in 2019 according to national projections (1.8 per cent according
to the World Bank), will contract by 4.9 per cent in 2020, owing to the economic
fallout from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The country’s
dependence on imported agricultural products will make it especially vulnerable to
supply chain disruptions stemming from travel restrictions, including in neighbouring
countries. Economic growth in 2021, which is projected to average 3.1 per cent year over-year, will be underpinned by steady recovery in export-focused sectors, namely
agriculture, which accounts for about 40 per cent of GDP, and mining.

6/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

17. The current account deficit is expected to decline owing to the sharp drop in oil
prices and the rise in gold prices. The budget deficit is expected to grow to 6.1 per
cent of GDP in 2020, as the contraction in international trade and economic activity
leads to revenue loss and increased health spending as a result of COVID -19,
combined with elections-related spending in 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic
contingency plan was budgeted at $28.5 million for a six-month response, further
widening the gap. Despite an earlier decline in inflation rates, average inflation is
expected to rise steadily to reach 5.0 per cent in 2020, owing to an increase in food
prices that could add to other pressures on the country’s currency.
18. Public debt has increased significantly, rising from 34 per cent of GDP in 2014
to almost 50 per cent in 2018. The COVID-19 pandemic is likely to lead to a drop in
public revenues and an increase in spending in the wake of the emergency response
measures put in place to address the pandemic. The situation is expected to further
widen the budget deficit, which the Government will have to finance by resorting to
borrowing and, potentially, external support.
19. Under the national development plan for 2018–2027, adopted in August 2018,
the Government envisions Burundi becoming an emerging economy by 2027. The
sociopolitical crisis of 2015 has, however, adversely affected its main economic and
social indicators. While the country’s dependency on foreign aid surpassed 50 per
cent in 2015, Burundi has been losing direct budgetary support from various donors
since 2016. Although the poverty rate remains high (72.9 per cent in 2018), mainly in
rural areas, the Government continues to implement its national development agenda
and has achieved commendable results in access to education (96 per cent) and
drinking water (73 per cent).
20. The Government is placing considerable emphasis on social and economic
development as the key to sustainable peace and security countrywide. During the
mission, relevant government ministries underlined the need to overcome poverty,
noting the importance of additional and substantial support from the international
community to shore up those efforts. With the help of United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, significant progress has been made in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals. The
Government’s current main concern lay in how to address development through the
President’s six priorities, in line with the national development plan and the 2030
Agenda. Several stakeholders noted that, owing to a lack of proper consultations with
partners prior to the adoption of the plan, receiving support and funding from par tners
for some of its components had proved difficult.
21. Job creation and income-generating activities to create wealth and meet
expectations for better living conditions among the growing population, in particular
women, young people, returnees and internally displaced persons, remain a matter of
concern. Youth unemployment remains especially high. If left unaddressed, young
people could fall prey to the influence of negative forces instead of becoming a driver
for economic development. Among pressing economic challenges, difficulty in
gaining access to arable lands is a potential trigger of violence that could be
exacerbated by the return of refugees. Some stakeholders noted that the creation of
cooperatives under the auspices of the Government had been met with scepticism.
22. Most interlocutors concurred that economic and democratic governance, as well
as technical and institutional capacity-building, decentralization and the fight against
corruption, were critical areas where support was needed from in ternational partners,
mainly United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

20-14139

7/17

S/2020/1078

D.

Humanitarian situation
23. Humanitarian needs have increased progressively since early 2020, after a one year decline. The uptick is linked mainly to pre-existing vulnerabilities aggravated by
the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to unusually heavy rainfalls in
late 2019 and early 2020, which led to the displacement of thousands of people and
negatively affected harvests.
24. Despite its socioeconomic fragility, Burundi continues to host nearly 74,000
Congolese refugees, scattered among five camps and various urban locations across
the country. The situation of some 41,000 refugees has been especially difficult,
owing to ageing shelters and fragile camp structures that have been hit hard by heavy
rainfall, compounding pre-existing vulnerabilities resulting from the absence of
income-generating activities and continued reservations by the Government on
refugees’ right to work, as well as funding challenges.
25. In April 2020, severe flooding due to rising water levels in the Gatumba area
affected 45,681 people and displaced 17,792 persons, of whom 56 per cent were
women. That situation contributed to an overall 21 per cent increase in internal
displacement since December 2019, with 131,336 internally displaced persons
recorded in August 2020, of whom 55 per cent were women and 83 per cent had been
displaced by natural disasters and were located mainly in the Province of Bujumbura
Rural. A visit to the Gatumba displaced persons camp revealed the deplorable
conditions in which residents lived, especially the women. With the current
underfunding of the humanitarian response plan (at 31 per cent), humanitarian
partners have been unable to meet all needs, and significant g aps in the response
remain.
26. Adverse weather conditions combined with the COVID -19 pandemic have also
negatively affected the food security situation, leading to an increase of over 30 per
cent in the number of people targeted for food assistance since early 2020. The
prevalence of acute malnutrition has also increased among children under 5 years of
age, rising from 4.5 per cent in 2018 to 5.1 per cent in 2019, surpassing the 5.0 per
cent World Health Organization alert threshold. Moreover, nutrition pa rtners expect
to see an increase of up to 20 per cent in moderate acute malnutrition as a possible
indirect impact of the pandemic.
27. The Government’s capacity to invest in health services has been significantly
reduced over the past five years, owing in part to the suspension of direct budgetary
assistance by a number of donors. Meanwhile, the country continues to face recurrent
outbreaks of cholera and malaria in a context of insufficient medical infrastructure
and response capacity. It is in this context that the Government of Burundi, together
with its partners, started to address the COVID-19 pandemic. Although local capacity
remains weak, Burundian authorities had conducted 39,522 tests as at 4 October and
confirmed 514 positive cases (including 35 health workers), representing an overall
infection rate of 1.3 per cent, with Bujumbura Mairie Province accounting for about
80 per cent of cases. While the level of testing and the number of confirmed cases
remain relatively low, a declining trend in the u se of health services was observed
between January and April 2020, possibly as an indirect impact of the pandemic.
28. In a positive development seen in the past two months, the Government of
Burundi has been implementing the tripartite agreements it had signed with UNHCR
and the United Republic of Tanzania, on the one hand, and with UNHCR and Rwanda,
on the other, for the repatriation of Burundian refugees. As at 30 September, more
than 1,070 Burundian refugees have returned from Rwanda, and more returns a re
expected in the future. However, the presence of more than 74,000 Congolese
refugees and asylum seekers and the arrival of more than 98,000 Burundian returnees

8/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

since September 2017, mostly from the United Republic of Tanzania, continue to put
pressure on already scarce resources and have exacerbated competition for land and
other reintegration challenges. Furthermore, allegations of the arrest and ill -treatment
of some returnees from Rwanda could affect the positive trend recently observed and
revive tensions along ethnic lines.
29. Stakeholders noted that, among the Burundian refugees, distinctions were being
made between exiled politicians and civil society activists who were reportedly
involved in the 2015 demonstrations and others who left the country as a result of the
crisis, with the return of the politicians and activists more difficult to accommodate.
The safe and dignified return of all willing refugees, and their protection and
integration into communities, therefore, remain a matter of concern.
30. UNHCR continues to facilitate the repatriation of Burundian refugees who have
made an informed decision to exercise their right to return home, from both countries
in the region and further afield. However, unless conditions conducive to full
reintegration are established, current challenges pose risks and may lead to secondary
displacement, both within the country and across the border, thus aggravating the
situation rather than bringing about a durable solution to the refugee problem.
31. While there was a clear commitment by humanitarian partners to continue to
support Burundi in addressing humanitarian needs, several challenges, including low
levels of funding for humanitarian response, continue to impede such efforts.
Concerns were also raised during the mission regarding the Government’s inclination
to portray a positive image of the situation in the country, which, at times, has led to
the underestimation of humanitarian needs and hampered efforts to raise funds. It was
also noted that there was a need for the Government and its partners to harmonize
data on the humanitarian situation on the ground.
32. Recent changes to the law on international NGOs remain a source of concern
for some stakeholders. While there is support for the Government’s effor ts to ensure
better representation of various ethnic groups in the workforce, international NGOs
noted that the mechanisms proposed by the Government to ensure compliance posed
risks of encroaching on their independence and of creating bottlenecks for
recruitment. There is also a high level of mistrust surrounding the law and the
requirement for such NGOs to collect data on the ethnicity of their staff in the absence
of comprehensive government data on the ethnic composition of the population. For
some development and humanitarian actors, discordances in statistics, the lack of
proper and centralized coordination and a deficit in policy dialogue are also among
the critical challenges that international partners continue to face in their day -to-day
work.

E.

Human rights, gender equality and women’s empowerment
33. Human rights monitoring in Burundi has declined in recent years, owing to the
absence of dedicated and independent mechanisms, institutions, voices and
organizations. Since 28 February 2019, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi has been closed, at the request
of the Government. In the absence of a memorandum of understanding with the
Government, the African Union human rights presence is reduced in scope, and
several restrictions have been imposed on the human rights activities of the African
Union team. In addition, the work of the Human Rights Council Commission of
Inquiry on Burundi, which has been denied access to government sources, is marred
by controversies.
34. The Government described the human rights situation as positive, while
acknowledging that solving the remaining challenges required continued cooperation

20-14139

9/17

S/2020/1078

with the United Nations, mainly to support capacity-building for national institutions.
According to Burundian authorities, human rights are among the priorities of the
Government. During the mission, government officials and the ruling CNDD -FDD
party systematically dismissed human rights concerns related to the Imbonerakure
and its interference in security-related matters, while other stakeholders saw its
members as contributing to insecurity and as perpetrators of most human rights
violations.
35. In July and August 2020, the Government took notable steps to fight impunity.
It arrested and prosecuted members of the Imbonerakure, senior police officers and
local administrative officers for extortion and other criminal offences, thus increasing
cautious optimism among civil society and political actors that the new administration
will bring about change. However, the prevailing view conveyed by several
stakeholders during the mission was that more steps needed to be taken for Burundi
to meet its international human rights obligations. Several stakeholders were of the
view that no decisive improvement could be expected until youth unemployment was
tackled and both the police and the national intelligence service were reformed.
36. Representatives of the opposition and civil society organizations expressed
regret about what they described as the continued shrinking of democratic space,
through the marginalization and silencing of independent media and the targeting of
opposition groups, in particular CNL militants, many of whom were reportedly in
detention. Some political figures blamed the CNDD-FDD party and its youth wing
for oppressing the opposition and excluding it from the management of public affairs
following the elections, thereby compromising efforts towards reconciliation and
peace consolidation. They condemned the closure of the OHCHR presence in Burundi
in early 2019 and called for its reopening or, at least, the assignment of a human rights
advisory team to the Resident Coordinator Office. They also underscored the
importance of adequately managing internal security while ensuri ng respect for
human rights.
37. Members of the strategic assessment mission noted convergent views among
stakeholders on the need to foster the independence and effectiveness of the judiciary.
Team members also noted unanimity of opinion on the effectiven ess of the work of
the Independent National Human Rights Commission, which will be central to
cooperation between the United Nations and Burundi in advancing human rights.
Some State departments and institutions, including the Ministry of National
Solidarity, Social Affairs, Human Rights and Gender, the Human Rights Commission
and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, also expressed their appreciation for
the fruitful cooperation with the United Nations, while calling for more support in
effectively facing persistent human rights challenges.
38. Significant progress has been made in some aspects of gender equality and the
empowerment of women. That progress is reflected, inter alia, in the ratification of
international and regional instruments that protect women’s rights in general, such as
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the existe nce of constitutional
provisions that guarantee gender equality; the adoption of a national gender policy
for 2012–2025; the establishment of a national action plan to implement Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security; the adoption of a
provision to guarantee a quota of at least 30 per cent representation for women in
Parliament, with the possibility of co-optation should that quota not be met; and the
issuance of a guide for gender mainstreaming in the national programme for public
administration reform. In particular, as a result of the quota provision and other
gender-specific aspects of the electoral law, the May–August 2020 elections led to
almost 40 per cent representation by women in the National Assembly, 45 per cent
10/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

representation in the Senate and 30 per cent representation in the Government.
However, in the absence of binding legal provisions to uphold the 30 per cent quota,
the representation of women in elections at the collines (hills) level, and at all levels
of the administration, has remained minimal.
39. The role of women as peacemakers at both the community and national levels,
especially through the nationwide network of women mediators and various women’s
organizations, was commended during the mission. Economic empowerment of
women is being recognized for its contributions to livelihoods, education and healthy
households. It has also been given attention in the national gender policy, resulting in
the creation of an investment bank for women in 2020.
40. Nevertheless, some intractable obstacles remain to the full implementation of
most of the legal instruments on the protection and empowerment of women, such as
the weight of sociocultural norms and practices, the patriarchy, stereotypes and
insufficient resources. Gender-based violence, including rape, is still a reality, yet the
specific law punishing violence against women faces implementation challenges.
Impunity for violence against women is still generalized and out-of-court settlement
of cases is still commonly accepted.
41. Discrimination against women and girls in inheriting family land and property,
but the process to develop legislation to address the matter has been stalled for several
years, and the issue continues to be highly politicized. Some stakeholders noted that
a lack of emphasis on the importance of gender equality and the empowerment of
women in policy statements and declarations made by the current leadership was
diverting attention from this critical issue. In most discussions with the strategic
assessment mission, issues pertaining to gender equality and the empowerment of
women were referred to in terms of the number of women in key institutions or
positions. Despite some progress made, women remain underrepresented in
nominative decision-making positions, especially management positions, at all levels
in both the public and private sectors.

F.

Regional and international cooperation
42. In his inaugural speech, Mr. Ndayishimiye committed his administration to
improving the relationship between Burundi and the international community on the
basis of mutual respect and shared interests. Since assuming office, the President has
met with several representatives of foreign countries and bilateral and multilateral
organizations, including the African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations, to discuss ways to normalize and strengthen bilateral and multilateral
cooperation.
43. Similarly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has indicated on several occasions
that economic diplomacy remains at the core of his activities, underlining the
principles of mutual respect, complementarity and enhanced relations between
Burundi and its neighbours, international organizations and the internati onal
community at large. Alluding to the suspension of direct budgetary support by the
European Union in 2016, Mr. Shingiro also expressed hope that the “unilateral
sanctions” imposed on Burundi would be lifted. Most of the stakeholders consulted
during the strategic assessment mission appealed to the United Nations to advocate
in favour of the resumption of international cooperation in support of the
Government’s development agenda. They noted that such cooperation would be one
of the best ways to support Burundi in implementing its national development plan,
in line with the President’s six priorities, with a view to fostering economic growth,
alleviating poverty and better positioning the country on the trajectory to meeting the
2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals.

20-14139

11/17

S/2020/1078

44. On collaboration between Burundi and the countries of the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Shingiro indicated that it was important to ensure good relations based on
integration, trade and mutual enforcement of peace and security. Negat ive forces are
still active in the region, with movements of combatants and weapons being reported
in particular at the borders between Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda. Over the past few years, efforts towards greater regional coop eration on
security matters have increased, as demonstrated by the series of meetings of heads
of intelligence and security services held in 2019 and facilitated by the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region. More recently, the Expanded Joi nt
Verification Mechanism of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
facilitated a meeting between the heads of the military intelligence services of
Burundi and Rwanda, in an effort to address recurring violent incidents along their
shared border. Porous borders, scarce resources, and unhealed wounds and resentment
stemming from past conflicts, as well as general mistrust, continue to hamper efforts
aimed at improving relations, mainly between Burundi and Rwanda, but also between
Burundi and other regional and international partners.
45. On 6 August 2020, Burundi set conditions to the appeal by Rwanda for the two
countries to peacefully settle their differences and reinstate diplomatic relationships,
linking any normalization of relations to the extradition of the alleged perpetrators of
the 2015 attempted coup and the removal of obstacles for the return of Burundian
refugees hosted in Rwanda. Those conditions were reiterated by Mr. Shingiro during
his meeting with members of the strategic assessment mission. Following the mission,
on 20 October 2020, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda and Burundi met at
the Nemba-Gasenyi one-stop border post, in what was the first bilateral meeting since
the two countries cut ties in 2015. The two officials held a closed-door meeting and
subsequently issued a joint communiqué in which they stated that the meeting had
been meant to assess relations between their respective countries and explore
modalities to normalize them.
46. The urgent need for reconciliation between Burundi and Rwanda was
emphasized by several interlocutors, given the internal political implications of the
tensions between the two countries and the toll they take on the livelihoods of
communities in the border areas. Regarding relations with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, government officials pointed to the favourable state of cooperation
between the two countries in addressing the threat posed by negative forces based in
the two Kivu Provinces. On 5 October, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Marie Tumba Nzeza, visited Burundi to discuss
issues pertaining to peace, security and trade between the two countries
47. While unanimously acknowledging that dialogue is the only way to achieve
lasting peace in Burundi, there is a clear lack of consensus among States members of
the East African Community on the best way to move the process forward. The East
African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue remains stalled and, in the absence
of any decision by the Summit of Heads of State of the East African Community on
the way forward, it is unclear how the Heads of State of the various countries in the
region, including the dialogue mediator, Mr. Museveni, position themselves on the
continuation of the process in the wake of the presidential election. One avenue
proposed by some African Member States would be the establishment of a follow -up
mechanism on the basis of the recommendations set out in the final report of the
former dialogue facilitator. However, the scope and shape of that mechanism remain
to be determined.

12/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

IV. Observations and recommendations
A.

Political and peacebuilding situation
48. The desire of Burundians for positive change is genuine and strong. Member
States and the United Nations should actively assist the country in achieving the
transformation desired, while also facilitating political reconciliation, the
establishment of an inclusive political system and the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedom for all Burundians. The approach to engagement should
emphasize mutual respect, partnership and collaboration with the Government and
with civil society institutions, as well as with regional and international actors.
49. Most Burundian stakeholders acknowledged that the 2020 elections did not
address the issues that developed around the 2015 crisis. Critical elements that would
ensure lasting peace and stability for Burundi remain outstanding, including the need
for reconciliation, social cohesion and the openin g and maintenance of the political
space. Many national and international stakeholders have welcomed the openness to
discussion expressed by President Ndayishimiye and his new administration. The
United Nations is ready to seize that opportunity to engage with the Government, as
well as with States members of the East African Community, the African Union
Commission and other international partners, to explore the best ways to continue to
foster a genuine and inclusive national reconciliation process, taking into
consideration the President’s preference for a Burundi-led and owned dialogue
process, as well as recommendations made by the former dialogue facilitator and the
former Special Envoy for Burundi. In order to support the country’s renewed efforts
to revamp bilateral and multilateral cooperation, relevant partners should take into
account the relative progress made since 2015 and the Government’s assessment that
the country no longer poses a threat to regional and international peace and security.
50. In that regard, the United Nations will engage in discussions with Burundian
authorities to find common ground for continued accompaniment in achieving the
desired transformation. A successor to the Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi
could take the form of a stand-alone office co-located with the Resident Coordinator
Office, with some oversight by the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, thereby ensuring greater
coherence, engagement and partnership in support of the country’s efforts to develop
a national reconciliation process, as identified by the President in his six priorities. In
view of the above, I recommend the extension of the Office of the Special Envoy for
Burundi until 31 December 2021, while it transitions to the new United Nations
presence, the details of which will be agreed to by the United Nations and the
Government of Burundi.
51. Such a reconfigured United Nations presence for political and peacebuilding
support could provide technical and capacity-building assistance to national
democratic institutions, such as the Ombudsman, the Independent National Human
Rights Commission, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and local civil society
organizations, including women’s groups. It could also foster and support, as
appropriate, genuine dialogue on key issues between the authorities and
representatives of opposition groups, internal opposition and members of the
diaspora, including those in exile, as well as civil society lead ers, with a focus on
reaching a consensus for sustaining peace, through the promotion of reconciliation,
national cohesion, peacebuilding and peace consolidation. It is also suggested that the
new office continue to support any initiative undertaken by the region to assist the
Government of Burundi.

20-14139

13/17

S/2020/1078

52. Regarding the stalled inter-Burundian dialogue, consultations among the East
African Community, the African Union, the United Nations and the Government of
Burundi would be critical to identifying an agreeable framework to address issues not
resolved by the electoral process and other persistent political tensions in Burundi
and the region. One option could be a shift from an East African Community -led
inter-Burundian dialogue to a Burundi-led and owned dialogue, with the support of
the United Nations, the African Union and the East African Community.
53. The United Nations, through the new iteration of its political presence and the
United Nations country team, will support Burundian stakeholders in articulat ing a
clear peacebuilding agenda to guide programming and mobilize resources for
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention initiatives at the local and national levels. The
new financing strategy for Burundi, to be developed by the Peacebuilding Fund on
the basis of an updated conflict analysis and in line with the common country
assessment and a prioritization exercise to be undertaken with key Burundian
stakeholders, could play an important role in bringing Burundian stakeholders
together and in identifying new programming initiatives. Those initiatives could
complement, as necessary, continued mediation support under the aegis of the African
Union and the East African Community, with additional support from the political
presence of the United Nations.
54. The Peacebuilding Commission should continue to act, at the Government’s
request, as a platform for discussion between Burundi and its partners, in support of
a peacebuilding agenda and of the national development plan, including for resource
mobilization.

B.

Socioeconomic situation
55. Considering the recent decline in human development indicators for Burundi,
which will be further affected by the socioeconomic impacts of COVID -19, the
country’s development priorities should continue to retain the focus ed attention of the
international community, in line with the six priorities outlined by the President. To
that end, the United Nations country team and international financial institutions will
engage in dialogue with the Government on contributions they can make in the
implementation of the national development plan, as revised and aligned with the
President’s six priorities and taking into account the economic and social impacts of
the pandemic.
56. In view of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and, in
particular, on the most vulnerable, the United Nations country team will engage with
the Burundian authorities on economic recovery, resilience interventions and
institutional capacity. In that regard, I welcome the partnership between the M inistry
of Finance, Budget and Economic Planning of Burundi and the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. I also welcome the support of the Resident Coordinator Office and
UNDP for the joint development, by the United Nations country team and donors, of
a development partner support plan for a socioeconomic response to the COVID-19
pandemic, recovery and peacebuilding in Burundi.
57. I encourage reforms on key governance issues to pave the way for inclusive
dialogue with the international community. I believe that lifting current financial and
budgetary restrictions against Burundi could contribute to the improvement of overall
interactions between the country and the international community. In that regard, if
required, the United Nations could facilitate the resumption of the interactive
dialogue between Burundi and international development partners.

14/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

C.

Humanitarian situation
58. Addressing humanitarian needs in the country requires a renewed commitment
by humanitarian partners and the Government of Burundi to engage in constructive
dialogue for a common understanding of humanitarian principles and the independent
nature of humanitarian action, with a view to improving joint collaboration on
information sharing, data collection and transparency.
59. The return and reintegration of thousands of refugees with the Government’s
support cannot be sustained by the economy in its current state. To ensure that
refugees reap the benefits of their return and strengthen their host communities,
certain long-term investments are required beyond immediate return packages. In that
regard, I encourage the Government to enhance its engagement with the regional and
international development community for the reintegration of returnees into host
communities. Furthermore, I call on international partners and donor countries to
support United Nations and Government efforts to facilitate the return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons.
60. I urge the Government to lift its reservations regarding refugees’ right to work
and to access the labour market in order to allow them to achieve self -sufficiency,
contribute to the national economy and mitigate the risk of their engageme nt in illegal
activities, including association with armed groups.

D.

Human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of women
61. I welcome the openness of the Burundian authorities to continue to collaborate
with the United Nations on human rights matters and to take concrete steps to ensure
accountability for serious human rights violations. I call upon the Government to
approve the re-establishment of an OHCHR presence in Burundi. This would be an
important demonstration of the Government’s commitment to promoting human
rights and a reaffirmation of its readiness to partner with the United Nations to achieve
that objective. Such a presence could provide increased support for the strengthening
of institutions dedicated to the promotion and protection of rights, including the
Independent National Human Rights Commission and the judiciary, as well as for the
implementation of relevant recommendations of international human rights
mechanisms.
62. The United Nations country team, in particular UN-Women, will continue to
engage and support the Government of Burundi in addressing systemic and structural
issues hindering progress in women’s rights and gender equality. It is important to
support the operationalization of the investment bank for women, in ord er to advance
the realization of economic rights for and the empowerment of women. Support
should also continue to be provided for the role of women peace mediators in
implementing the national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
especially with regard to issues of community dialogue, healing, tolerance and
reconciliation. Support for the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Burundi needs to be part of the peacebuilding agenda and road map for the
country and would, in that respect, receive continued funding and support from the
Peacebuilding Fund.
63. There is significant representation for women in the National Assembly, the
Senate and the Government to advance issues related to gender and women’s rights.
Capacity-building in their various areas of responsibility, transformational leadership
and gender-specific training need to be provided to ensure that those women can
deliver effectively on their responsibilities as decision-makers and can move the issue
of the empowerment of women forward. Initiatives could include the revision of

20-14139

15/17

S/2020/1078

gender-discriminatory laws, as well as working in collaboration with the judiciary
and other relevant institutions and leveraging their oversight role, so as to ensure that
gender equality and the empowerment of women are integrated into government
policies and actions across all key institutions.

E.

Security situation
64. The role of the youth wing of the ruling CNDD-FDD party, the Imbonerakure,
in public safety and security remains a point of controversy among Burundians. With
the Government’s concurrence, the United Nations could help the authorities to
address such concerns, by providing support for activities that facilitat e the
socioeconomic insertion of Imbonerakure members. If necessary, specific weapons collection programmes could be designed to ensure sustainable peace and security in
the country and the region.
65. United Nations entities will continue to engage Burundian authorities and
relevant regional entities, including the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, with a view to consolidating the confidence-building process of the chiefs of
intelligence and security services of States members of the Conference. Those efforts
will be considered within the United Nations regional strategy for peace
consolidation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution in the Great Lakes region.

F.

Regional and international cooperation
66. The recent elections and political transition have offered the country and its
bilateral and multilateral partners an opportunity to reset their partnership, if all
involved display the necessary flexibility and are willing to overcome past hurdles
and engage in constructive dialogue. Finding the common ground needed to balance
the Government’s concerns about moving the country away from international
scrutiny so that it can focus on development issues with the Security Council’s
responsibility to maintain international peace and security will facilitate the
resolution of that equation.
67. Guided by the priorities of the new Government and the country’s commitments
under regional and international frameworks, the United Nations will engage key
stakeholders to help bring about significant improvement in relations between
Burundi and the subregion, the region and the international community, in order to
rebuild trust and cooperation. In that regard, the relevant United Nations entities (the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace
Operations, the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary -General for the Great
Lakes Region, the Development Coordination Office and the Peacebuilding
Commission) will facilitate collaboration among the resp ective United Nations
country teams in the region and the co-guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework to mobilize regional and international partners in
supporting projects that hold economic promise for Burundi and that coul d also yield
regional peace and security dividends through stronger cross-border collaboration.
Those efforts will be considered in the framework of the United Nations regional
strategy for peace consolidation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution f or the
Great Lakes region.

V. Conclusion
68. The generally peaceful environment in which the elections were conducted in
Burundi and the ensuing smooth transition to a new leadership were testament to the
16/17

20-14139

S/2020/1078

commitment of the people of Burundi to turn the page and re-embark on a path
towards lasting peace and development in the country. Now more than ever, the
United Nations and the international community have the opportunity to support the
Government and people of Burundi in seizing the momentum ushered in through the
elections. While I commend Burundi and its leadership for the progress achieved,
including on security issues, I call on the Government to work together with the
United Nations to sustain the gains made thus far and to advance national
reconciliation, peacebuilding, social cohesion, socioeconomic development,
humanitarian priorities and respect for human rights and the rule of law. In that
context, I welcome President Ndayishimiye’s stated good will towards the
international community and take note of his six priorities. I also welcome the
readiness of the Government to discuss the future of the Office of my Special Envoy
for Burundi.
69. I thank the Government of Burundi for the support extended to the strategic
assessment mission, which enabled its deployment to the country in full compliance
with COVID-19 pandemic preventive arrangements, and all stakeholders for their
active participation. I thank my Special Envoy for the Greats Lakes Region, Huang
Xia, and my Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Bintou Keita, for jointly leading
the mission. I also thank the Resident Coordinator ad interim, the members of the
United Nations country team and the staff in the Office of my Special Envoy for
Burundi for their contributions to this strategic assessment, and for their dedication
in support of the Government and the people of Burundi. I count on their continued
commitment as the United Nations and Burundi embark on this new chapter in their
partnership.

20-14139

17/17
