UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/828
29 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 28 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 27 October 1997 which
I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee
established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Attached to the letter is the sixth periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1125 (1997) of 6 August 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the
letter and its enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

(Signed)

97-28681 (E)

291097

291097

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

French]

Letter dated 27 October 1997 from the Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the sixth and final report,
covering the period from 16 to 30 October 1997, requested by the Security
Council in paragraph 6 of resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation in the
Central African Republic.

For the Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

(Signed)

Idriss NGARI
Vice-Chairman
General

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Sixth report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1125 (1997)
concerning the situation in the Central African Republic
(27 October 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
This is the sixth and final report which the Security Council requested the
Member States participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) to provide pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1125 (1997).
2.
This report describes developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic from 16 to 29 October 1997.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
3.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body
which directs the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political
guidance directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the
President of the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International
Mediation Committee.
4.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action which
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Bangui Agreements in the form of
a timetable, which can be outlined as follows:
-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Adoption of an amnesty law covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;

-

Disarmament (surrender of weapons by the former rebels in honour and
dignity, and recovery of weapons by MISAB from militias and civilian
populations);

-

Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;

-

Situation of former heads of State;

-

Suspension of the parliamentary audit;

-

Final phase of national reconciliation through a number of actions
aimed at consolidating peace and security (organization of regional
and sectoral awareness-raising seminars, organization of a national

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 4

reconciliation conference, elaboration of an electoral code, access by
political parties to the State media and other measures).
5.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS
Implementation of the amnesty act covering offences relating to the third
rebellion and the misappropriation of public funds under investigation
6.
As indicated in earlier reports, the amnesty act, which was promulgated on
15 March 1997, was implemented with a great deal of pragmatism and understanding
as regards the sanctions to be taken against citizens who might have been
illegally in possession of weapons following the 15-day deadline established by
the law.
7.
This pragmatism enabled the International Monitoring Committee to negotiate
with the former rebels and to persuade them to hand over their weapons with
honour and dignity. It also facilitated the organization and operation of the
awareness-raising and weapons recovery campaign among the civilian population
between 12 August and 3 October 1997 under the direction of the Technical
Commission on Disarmament, headed by the Minister to the Office of the Minister
for Territorial Administration, who is responsible for public security and
disarmament.
Disarmament
8.
This is, without a doubt, the most delicate phase of the national
reconciliation process. The operation has two major components which have made
it possible to carry out this operation effectively:
(a)

The awareness-raising and voluntary participation phase;

(b)

The investigation, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase.

9.
The voluntary participation phase ended on 3 October 1997. The
investigations, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase began
immediately after the first phase. It involves collaborating with informers
compensated according to the quality of their information. This will make it
possible to locate any weapons caches. During this second period, which
actually began on 3 October 1997 after the head of State granted an extension,
anyone found to be illegally in possession of a weapon is to be handed over to
the authorities. In addition, MISAB will conduct searches, together with the
national defence and security forces other than the presidential security force.

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 5

10. Activities during the second phase of disarmament have halted temporarily
owing to the bereavement suffered by the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB with the sudden and tragic death of General Augustin Mombo-Moukagni, the
Force Commander.
11. A coordination and security meeting will take place in the next few days to
finalize the details of the operations to be conducted with a view to recovering
satisfactorily the remaining weapons.
12. Since the signing of the truce agreement on 28 June 1997 and the ceasefire
agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been turned over to MISAB:

Heavy weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(29 September24 October 1997)

120 mm mortars

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4

81 mm mortars

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 15

-

60 mm mortars

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 19

-

14.5 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

6 out of a total of 6

12.7 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 3

75 mm recoilless guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 2

73 mm anti-tank rocket
launchers

surrendered:

66 out of a total of 67

Rocket-propelled grenades

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 11

surrendered:

111 out of a total of 127

Total

(weapons recovered:

-

87.40 per cent)

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 6

Light weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(29 September24 October 1997)

Hand-guns (misc.)

surrendered:

16 out of a total of 111

1

Submachine-guns

surrendered:

299 out of a total of 459

2

Assault rifles

surrendered:

261 out of a total of 541

5

MAS 36-49/56-M14
rifles + muskets

surrendered:

651 out of a total of 1,181

1

Light machine-guns

surrendered:

52 out of a total of 80

1

.30-calibre machine-guns

surrendered:

15 out of a total of 17

2

surrendered:

1,294 out of a total of 2,389

9

Total

(weapons recovered:

54.16 per cent)

0.377 per cent

13. The relatively low rate of recovery of light weapons can be explained as
follows:
(a) These are light personal weapons that are easily transported and have
been taken out of Bangui;
(b) Some of these weapons were probably buried: efforts to dig them up
are continuing as information is provided, with varying degrees of success;
(c) Others, particularly hand-guns (automatic pistols), are easily
camouflaged and may have been sold to as yet unidentified persons;
(d) Still others may have been taken from the State arsenal during the
second rebellion (May 1996) and were never returned before the outbreak of the
third rebellion;
(e) An indeterminate number of light weapons that have not yet been found
may have been thrown into the Ubangi River or into the forest by former rebels
fleeing in June 1997 after encounters with MISAB;
(f) It should be noted that some former rebels, roughly comprising a
company (132 men) and all armed with light weapons, never returned to their
barracks. According to knowledgeable sources, many of these may have left the
Central African Republic taking their weapons with them.
14. In such conditions, the recovery of all light weapons remains uncertain,
despite intensive efforts by the neighbourhood disarmament units and the active
collaboration of the population.

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 7

15. A considerable quantity of munitions of various types was recovered and
packaged. The status of these munitions as at 24 October 1997 is set out below:

Designation

Quantity

Remarks

5.56 mm rounds

69 084

+468

7.5 mm SLC rounds

14 000

7.5 mm S/B rounds

123 862

7.5 mm X rounds

34 000

+6 621

7.5 mm X S/B rounds

135

7.62 mm rounds, NATO

15 962

7.62 mm Kalashnikov rounds

40 660

+2 571

7.62 mm long rounds

121 261

+1

7.62 mm Tokarev rounds

2 810

+1 910

9 mm Para rounds

5 506

+207

.12-calibre riot control rounds

731

+3

12.7 mm rounds

728

+457

14.5 mm rounds

15 322

+1 130

37 fragmentation hand grenades

1 851

+4

Fragmentation hand grenades, China

3 148

+250

16

+13

RPG 7 rockets

1 140

+9

.37 stun hand grenades

1 043

+59

FL LAC F4 hand grenades

1 304

+4

GR FLG AP34

F4 hand grenades

316

Russian grenades

1

60 mm mortars

1 713

+8

81 mm mortars

852

+18

120 mm mortars

113

+11

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, US

168

+2

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, China

223

No weapons in inventory

M79 40 mm rounds, US

6 060

No weapons in inventory

Time fuses (inactive)

2 325

7.5 mm grenade cartridges
Pyro detonator

755
6 100

+6 100

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 8

Munitions, various
types
Explosives and
detonators

Results of the
fourth report

Results of the
fifth report

Increase

228 758

317 138

+38.63 per cent

9 895

17 321

+75.04 per cent

A significant quantity of miscellaneous munitions, handed over loose, not
suitable for firing, will be destroyed by the competent weapons and munitions
units. An analysis will be made available in due course.
Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
16. It appears that quite a few of the claims made by the former rebels could
be answered by responsible implementation of the 282 recommendations made at the
General Meeting on National Defence which was held in August 1996 at Bangui.
That is why the International Monitoring Committee, true to the spirit of the
Bangui Agreements, proceeded, in April 1997, to set up an ad hoc committee to
examine the said recommendations carefully and to set up a schedule for their
implementation, breaking them down into categories according to what could be
applicable in the short, medium and long terms, based on the sensitivity of the
areas to which the recommendations relate and, above all, the financial
resources that would have to be mobilized. The results of the work of the
ad hoc committee, which was chaired by a leader of the opposition,
General Timothée Malendoma, a former Prime Minister, have already been
transmitted by the International Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Defence
for implementation at the various relevant levels. Since the International
Monitoring Committee is merely a mediating body, it must leave the decisions on
these matters to the relevant Central African authorities, while remaining ready
to serve as arbitrator should the need arise.
Situation of former heads of State
17. A revised bill was submitted by the Government to the National Assembly.
Assurances were given to the International Monitoring Committee delegation by
the expanded bureau of the National Assembly at the meeting on 4 September 1997
that the bill would be considered during the first weeks of the current session
of the Assembly, which began on 1 October 1997. It is anticipated that the bill
will be adopted on 27 October 1997.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
18. The Bangui Agreements call for the suspension, then the abandonment "of the
judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit" opened in respect of persons
presumed to have misappropriated public funds under the previous regime, for it
was understood that the audit had been conducted in a very selective manner and
was creating more problems than it was resolving. The International Monitoring
Committee, respecting the spirit of the Bangui Agreements, proposed that the
/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 9

Central African Republic should, by a legislative act, formally renounce
proceedings against authors of offences identified by the parliamentary audit.
It was generally agreed that such an act would undoubtedly be taken in the
context of the next session of the National Assembly.
National reconciliation
19. Each of the points mentioned above constitutes as many phases on the road
leading towards national reconciliation. The present section therefore concerns
the final phase of this exciting process.
20. The International Monitoring Committee, supported by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), is already engaged in making preparations for
awareness-raising seminars, symposia and meetings; the first phase will take
place at the provincial level and be targeted at specific groups (such as trade
unions, women's organizations and youth movements), and the second phase will
take place nationally, in the form of a national reconciliation conference, as
recommended by the Bangui Agreements.
21. A timetable of activities covering the period 1 October to 1 December 1997
(the national holiday of the Central African Republic) was prepared jointly by
the Minister for National Reconciliation, the UNDP Resident Representative and
the International Monitoring Committee. This will be useful in coordinating the
many activities to be carried out in this last phase of the process that began
with the signing of the Bangui Agreements.
22. In the context of the restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces,
the International Monitoring Committee had requested UNDP to set up a fund to
assist military personnel wishing to leave active service in returning to
civilian life, and UNDP had agreed to do so. UNDP launched a project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African Armed
Forces, which would enable 1,000 soldiers to return to civilian life in decent
conditions and make it possible to reduce the cost of operating the armed forces
and facilitate their restructuring. All Member States and international
organizations may make contributions to the fund in question, which will
initially be for an amount of approximately $2 million. The official signing of
the project took place on Monday, 13 October 1997, and activities will get under
way with the imminent arrival of the international experts.
23. A first estimate indicates that 1,000 or more soldiers will be involved in
this project. UNDP has proposed Mr. Gustave Fernando González Gasques as head
of the project. A national of Argentina, he has solid experience in the area of
demobilization and reintegration of former soldiers into civilian life. He has
managed this type of activity in Nicaragua, Mozambique, Liberia and Angola. His
candidature has been accepted by the Central African Government.

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 10

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
24. The new electoral code recently produced by a national commission that
included representatives of all political viewpoints has given rise to a
disagreement over the presidency of the National Electoral Commission. The
Group of Eleven Opposition Parties has requested the International Monitoring
Committee to arbitrate in the matter. Various contacts are being pursued with
the aim of finding a solution that is acceptable to all the parties concerned.
25. Mr. Qin Huasun, Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations and
President of the Security Council for the month of November 1997, made an
information and working visit to Bangui from 21 to 23 October 1997. During his
visit he met with the most senior officials of the State and Government of the
Central African Republic and the International Monitoring Committee, the MISAB
Command and individuals from diplomatic and political circles. He also visited
MISAB headquarters and should be in a position to report to the Security Council
his impressions of the living and working conditions of the International
Monitoring Committee and MISAB.
26. Major-General Franklin van Kappen, Military Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, and his Chief of Staff, Colonel François Dureau,
made a working visit to Bangui from 26 to 28 October 1997. During their stay,
they had numerous contacts with the civilian and military authorities of the
Central African Republic, and with the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB. They will no doubt make a detailed report to both the Secretary-General
and the Security Council on the outcome of their mission.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE INTERNATIONAL
MONITORING COMMITTEE
27. The International Monitoring Committee welcomes the recent decision by UNDP
to allocate additional resources ($130,000) to it. This will enable the
Committee to initiate and continue its activities in the new stage it has
entered in the implementation of its plan of action:
-

Political monitoring of the pursuit of operations to disarm the former
rebels first in Bangui and later in other parts of the country;

-

Consideration of the situation of the former heads of States;

-

Abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit;

-

Coordination of activities relating to the organization and conduct of
various seminars and conferences provided for in the context of
national reconciliation;

-

Solving of problems arising in the execution of the project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African
armed forces.

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 11

NECESSITY OF RENEWING THE MANDATE OF MISAB
28. Undeniable progress has been made in implementing the Bangui Agreements,
but there is still a long way to go in carrying out all the main provisions of
the Agreements.
29. At this time, most of the weapons taken from the state armouries during the
third rebellion have been returned, but there are still suspicions that other
weapons illegally imported by the political parties are present in the territory
of the Central African Republic.
30. The International Monitoring Committee with its neutral and impartial
status can help to pave the way for the conduct of transparent elections and
peaceful and orderly electoral campaigns.
31. The social situation in the country remains tense. Students at the
University of Bangui have been going on strike from time to time because the
Government is six months behind in the payment of study grants. The academic
year did not begin, as scheduled, on Monday, 6 October, because teachers are
demanding the payment of back wages before they return to work. Some trade
union groups are threatening to go on strike if nothing is done to pay them six
months' back wages, wages which have gone unpaid since January 1996. Some trade
unions, such as the union representing employees of the Ministry of Public
Health, have already gone on strike in spite of the Government's efforts to
engage in a dialogue.
32. While the mediation efforts have achieved encouraging results in the
political, military and security areas, the situation in the social sphere
remains problematical and may set everything back to square one. It is well not
to lose sight of the origin of the crisis which broke out in April 1996 with
purely corporatist demands being made initially. Everybody knows what happened
after that.
33. The analysis of the situation by the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB coincides with the views expressed by the population of Bangui in general
and those of the political community, across the board, in particular. Indeed
there is unanimous support for the maintenance of the International Monitoring
Committee and MISAB for a further three-month period, beyond the final date set
by the Security Council in resolution 1125 (1997). It is to be noted that this
is also the wish of the central authorities of the Central African Republic,
namely, the President of the Republic and the Government of Action in Defence of
Democracy.
34. The International Monitoring Committee stands ready to provide, in an
impartial and neutral manner, any information and clarifications which the
Security Council or the United Nations Secretariat might wish to receive.

/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 12

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
35. MISAB, which is deployed throughout the city of Bangui, is ensuring
security in all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20
surveillance posts, and is carrying out patrols nightly in each of the city's
eight districts.
36. The activities of MISAB have been extended, with the agreement of the
parties concerned, to operations to maintain security in the various
neighbourhoods. Since the signing of the Ceasefire Agreement on 2 July 1997,
MISAB has participated, on the basis of a consensus, in joint security patrols
with approximately 120 men, consisting of MISAB personnel and Central African
security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui.
37. It should be noted that the crime rate in Bangui and the surrounding area
has continued to fall. The deployment of MISAB has brought about a distinct
improvement in the security situation. The image of Bangui as a peaceful city
where one can go about without fearing attacks by bandits and criminals is
gradually being restored. There are increasing signs of a relaxation of
tensions. Economic and cultural life and organized sports are resuming, as are
international contacts.
38. MISAB and the International Monitoring Committee have been in mourning:
General Augustin Mombo-Moukagni, Commander of MISAB, died of a heart attack on
14 October 1997, according to information from a medical source.
39. General Mombo-Moukagni who had served for barely two months at the head of
the Inter-African Force, has left his colleagues and all who knew him with the
memory of a man devoted to duty and a leader of integrity. The contingents
which he commanded will find a way to transform their pain into strength,
reinforcing their resolve to carry on with their noble mission of peace.
40. Colonel Talla Niang, Chief of Staff, has been appointed to serve as acting
Force Commander while retaining his present functions, pursuant to the decision
taken by General Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION
41. As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Government of the Central African Republic.
42. While recognizing the generous efforts which the States participating in
MISAB, France, OAU and the Government of the Central African Republic continue
to make to assist the African contingents based in Bangui, it must be
acknowledged that the material conditions of the troops stand in need of
improvement, as they are far inferior to those enjoyed by other similar forces
operating in other conflict areas. An appropriate solution to this state of
affairs should be urgently found in order to avoid demoralization among the
troops, which have been endeavouring up until now to carry on their work
unselfishly.
/...

S/1997/828
English
Page 13

CONCLUSIONS
43. The current experience with the Central African crisis is unique and is all
the more stimulating in that it is unlike any previous experience. The seminar
on the strengthening of African peacekeeping capacities which was recently held
in Dakar and was attended by General Amadou Toumani Touré and the former
Commander of MISAB, General Edouard N'kili, made a useful contribution to the
study of the various aspects of this problem.
44. It is strongly recommended that the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements be extended for a further
three-month period, beginning on 6 November 1997, the date on which the current
mandate given by the Security Council in its resolution 1125 (1997) expires, so
that it can continue to ensure security and complete its peace-building mission.
45. It must be pointed out that, owing to the insufficiency of the African
countries' own resources, logistical support from the international community,
along the lines of the support which France has provided to MISAB and which
remains open to contributions from all other States, is still needed.
46. The International Monitoring Committee and MISAB welcome the understanding
of this issue expressed by the Security Council after its consideration of the
previous reports. They hope that the appeal made to the international community
by the President of the Council will be met with action.
47. Bangui has entered a new era with determination, an era marked by a gradual
rebuilding of confidence and the resumption of activities in numerous spheres,
which is a sign that peace has been restored. That peace must now be
consolidated, by taking into account all the suggestions put forward in this
report in the form of conclusions. The International Monitoring Committee, for
its part, will continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the
Central African crisis to work for the effective implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, as required by its mandate and as regularly called for by the
Security Council.

-----
