"The resolution which the C'.,ouncil has adopted
reconfirms the full validity of the basic ideal of the universality of the United Nations, which calls upon all States large and small •· to help foster peaceful and orderly
international coexistence.

"On behalf of the members of the Security Council, I
congratulate the Federated States of Micronesia on the
decision which the Council has adopted recommending to
the General Assembly its admission to membership in the
United Nations."

C.

"We can see today that as the United Nations gains in
universality, the specific responsibilities of States are
strengthened, as are their rights to participate in the
decision-making process in areas of concern to the international community as a whole involving the maintenance of
international peace and security and, above all, the
promotion of cooperation among peoples.

Applicalion of tlw Republic of the Marshall Islands

Decisions

At its 3000th meeting, on 6 August 1991, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of the Marshall lslands 206 to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members for examination
and report as provided in rule 59 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

"The admission of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands to membership will serve to reaffirm the validity of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
facilitate the achievement of its purposes.
"On behalf of the members of the Security Council, I
congratulate the Republic of the Marshall Islands on the
Council's decision to recommend to the General Assembly
that it be admitted as a member of the United Nations."

At its 3003rd meeting, on 9 August 1991, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members207 concerning the application of the Marshall
Islands for admission to membership in the United Nations.

D. Applicalions of the &public of Estonia, the &public of
Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania

Resolution 704 (1991)
or 9 Augult 1991

Decisions

The Security Council,

Having examined the application of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands for admission to the United Nations, 206

At its 3006th meeting, on 10 September 1991, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
applications of the Republic of Estonia,209 the Republic of
Latvia210 and the Republic of Lithuania211 lo the Committee on
the Admission ofNew Members for examination and report, as
provided in rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of the Marshall Islands be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
Adofmd without a vole at the 3003rd
m«tin&

At its 3007th meeting, on 12 September 1991, the Council,
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members212 conceming the applications of the Republic of
Estonia, the Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Lithuania
for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 704 (1991), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members: 208

Resolution 709 (1991)
of U September 1991

"'The resolution which we have just adopted recommending the admission of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands to membership in the United Nations is a historic
event. It marks the final steps in the process leading to
the full integration of the Republic of the Marshall Islands
into the international community, a process that was given
an impetus when the Security Council adopted resolution
683 (1990) on 22 December 1990, by which the Council
declared that the trusteeship arrangement for the Marshall
Islands had come to an end.

The Security Council,

Having examined the application of the Republic of Estonia
for admission to the United Nations,:1D!l

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Estonia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
Ad'1pted. willwuJ a vote Ill the 3007th
m«lin&

48
