S/PV.8235

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8235th meeting

Tuesday, 17 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11147 (E)
*1811147*

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I accepted my assignment as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
began on 11 March. I approached it with gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his trust and a sense of privilege
that I might get the chance to do something to bring that
great tragedy to a belated end — a privilege coupled, I
hope, with due humility in the face of the complexity
and urgency of the challenge.
In the days since, those original feelings have, if
anything, become stronger. I have been privileged to
meet and to be guided by a wealth of Yemenis from all
the parties and many civic organizations. I have taken
up the time of leaders and listened just as eagerly to the
views of the less fortunate. As is always the case, from
my own experience, it has been the women whom I have
met who have often spoken with the greatest clarity, as
well as with the generosity that is necessary about those
they fear, as well as those they support.
Public comment on Yemen, like on any other
international tragedy, is copious and, sadly, often
vituperative. The rhetoric on Yemen is, perhaps
understandably, unforgiving and unsparing. I know, as
those present do, that peace becomes possible when we
see the good in our foes, even though we can see the
cruelties of war clearly. My emphasis on listening to and
engaging Yemenis above all other priorities is not an
2/21

17/04/2018

idle decision. We know that resolving Yemen’s conflict
may come only from an agreement among its leaders to
put aside their differences and agree to deal with them
not through battle but through dialogue and debate. To
put Yemenis first, therefore, is not merely proper and
right; it is also the only way we will find peace.
In my experience of trying to resolve conflicts, I
have learned to take people at their word — to trust,
yes, but also to verify. We should take on trust the
assurances we hear, even as we know that the ultimate
test is what they will deliver in practice. So when I hear
positive words from one leader or another — which
are often instantly the cause of derision or scepticism
from the other side — my line is: let us take those good
words and put them to good use.
My report today is a preliminary one. I will
share what I know, and also what I fear. I will also
try to identify signs of hope. My plan is to put to the
Council within the next two months a framework
for negotiations. There is good news and bad news. I
apologize for that cliché, but it is the truth.
The good news — and it is my principal message to
the members of the Council today — is that a political
solution to bring an end to the war is indeed available. Its
outlines are no secret. They include the end of fighting,
the withdrawal of forces and the handover of heavy
weapons in key locations, along with an agreement
on the establishment of an inclusive Government that
brings the parties together in a consensus to build peace.
That can be done. All those with whom I spoke, from
the widest range of the Yemeni political spectrum, have
told me that they want that, that they want it quickly,
that they will work with the United Nations to achieve it
and that they are conscious of the consequence, as in all
agreements between enemies, that mutual concessions
will be required. Let me emphasize, however, that
a successful outcome of negotiations, which is never
to be guaranteed, will require patience, diligence and
good faith between the parties.
I have come to that general conclusion by listening
to the leaders of the parties. I have assured them that
what the Secretary-General wishes and what the Council
requires is also what all Yemenis want — a stable and
secure Yemen with a Government accountable to its
citizens. I am grateful to President Hadi for his time,
patience and willingness to put the concerns of his
people first. His Government has spared no effort to
ensure that I understand their positions, needs and
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

willingness to engage. I count on their support, which
is essential to the success of that endeavour.
I was also encouraged by my meeting with the
leadership of the Ansar Allah movement in Sana’a.
They assured me that their movement wants an end to
the war and will cooperate with the United Nations to
make that happen. That message was repeated to me in
several other encounters that I was privileged to have
with other senior Ansar Allah leaders. I am greatly
encouraged by that constructive attitude. I have heard
similar views from the leaders of an exceptionally wide
variety of Yemeni political parties, and I am grateful to
them, too.
I have not yet visited the south, but I have started to
meet with southern groups. The conflict, as members
of the Council can imagine, has brought about major
changes on the ground in the southern governorates,
and has made the long-standing frustrations and
aspirations of southerners more prominent. There will
be no peace in Yemen if we do not also listen to the
voices of the south and make sure that they are included
in the political arrangements that end the war.
It is no surprise that stopping a war is not at all the
same as building peace, and so it goes in Yemen. We
must first turn our energies to the business of stopping
the war. The parties necessary for that specific task are
those whose decisions can contribute to bringing an end
to the war. I have been consistent in delivering the same
message to them that that is the first task. A negotiated
political settlement through inclusive intra-Yemeni
dialogue is the only way to end the Yemeni conflict
and address the ongoing humanitarian crisis in an
ultimate form. To that end, all parties to the conflict
need to abandon preconditions to talks and grant my
Office unhindered, unconditional access to all relevant
stakeholders, as indeed the Council asserted in its latest
presidential statement on this subject, adopted in March
(S/PRST/2018/5).
Building peace, however, will as always be
a larger task, based on different precedents and
broader participation. The national dialogue, with its
impressive record of inclusion and civic participation,
will be a decisive precedent. That will be the agenda
of transition — to include reconciliation, which is the
first item that requires our attention at the end of a
conflict, constitutional review, reconstruction and the
rebuilding of State institutions. It is therefore about
transforming the State. Making that work will require

S/PV. 8235

the full involvement of civil society to ensure that the
process goes beyond politics and reflects the aspirations
of all Yemenis.
I said there was good news, but also bad news.
There is a saying that the darkest hour is the one that
comes before dawn. Let us hope that this is the case.
It will not be news to the members of the Council that
the war has, if anything, become louder and more
pressing over the last few weeks. I am concerned about
the increased number of ballistic missiles launched
towards Saudi Arabia, and I note that the Council has
already pronounced on that.
In addition, I am concerned about the intensified
military operations in Sa’dah governorate. Military
confrontations and air strikes have continued in
numerous other areas of Yemen, including Sana’a,
Taiz, Al-Jawf, Ma’rib, Al-Hudaydah, Hajjah, Al-Bayda
and Lahij governorates. The clashes continue without
major changes on the front lines, but with disturbing
reports of civilian casualties. We also — and this is of
great importance to us — hear unconfirmed reports
that movements of forces in Yemen are on the increase
and that the prospect of intensive military operations in
Al-Hudaydah, long heralded, may be soon forthcoming.
Our concern is simple — that any of those developments
would, at a single stroke, take peace off the table. I am
convinced that there is a real danger of that. We all
need urgently and creatively to find ways to diminish
the chances of those game-changing events upsetting
and derailing the very real hopes of the great majority
of Yemenis.
The people of Yemen are desperately in need of
signs of hope that the war will soon end. Apart from
the urgent requirement for unlimited humanitarian
access — as I am certain Mark Lowcock will mention
later — there are other measures that may provide some
hope. We have, for example, with the encouragement
of political leaders from all sides, been working to get
Sana’a airport reopened to air traffic and to ensure the
right of Yemenis to travel and rejoin their families. We
are also eager to arrange the release and exchange of
prisoners. Both sides have told me that they would like
to see all prisoners released. I am very encouraged by
that. We will do all we can to make it happen, and we
will report back to the Council on progress.
We are also very concerned about the issue of
detentions carried out by all sides. We know from
experience elsewhere that the arbitrary and widespread

18-111473/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

detention of civilians in armed conflict is both a terrible
abuse and a fundamental impediment to the recovery of
a stable society and reconciliation, which is central to
peace. Those are important confidence-building issues.
Even more important is the heroic work being done
daily by humanitarian agencies in Yemen under the
leadership of Mark Lowcock and my good friend and
colleague Lise Grande.
The members of the Council know better than I do
the strategic importance of stability in Yemen. It is of
primary importance for its people, its neighbours and
the wider international community. It can be achieved
only by ensuring a stable Yemen where terrorist
activity can finally be focused upon and eliminated and
the safety of its sea lanes can be relied upon. Making
that happen requires an effective synergy between
mediation, in which I have a role, and diplomacy, in
which the Council does. Mediation without the backing
of diplomacy will certainly fail. We will do whatever
we can to find agreements that work among Yemenis,
but it is for the members of the Council and other
Member States, from time to time, to put the force of
international opinion behind such agreements, and the
Security Council’s unity and resolve will be decisive.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Yemen remains the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis. Three quarters of the
population — more than 22 million people — urgently
require some form of humanitarian help, including
8.4 million people who are struggling to find their
next meal. The crisis is overwhelming families and
institutions and is now affecting nearly every sector
and aspect of Yemeni life. With swift and joint action,
conditions for the Yemeni people can improve. On the
political front, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths just briefed the Security Council.
Humanitarian agencies have scaled up assistance
and strengthened their capacity in Yemen. The relief
operation is one of the largest and most complex in the
world. One hundred and ninety partners, most of them
Yemeni, get help to millions of people in thousands of
locations every single month. Last year, we increased
the coverage of food assistance from 3 million people
a month in January to more than 7 million a month in
December. For 2018, the World Food Programme has
plans to reach 10 million people a month, and we are
4/21

17/04/2018

doing the same thing in other sectors, including water,
health, sanitation and other core services.
The humanitarian operation in Yemen is
already one of the largest in the world. We have five
humanitarian hubs in place to coordinate assistance
across the country, and we are exploring opening more,
including in Ma’rib and Mukalla. Every week, dozens
of humanitarian movements, including food convoys,
and hundreds of specific humanitarian locations are
deconflicted by the parties to the conflict. We are able
to reach people in all 333 districts, and in each district
we aim to collect data on how many people receive aid
every month.
Earlier this month, Sweden, Switzerland and the
Secretary-General co-chaired a pledging conference
for Yemen. In the words of the Secretary-General, “It
was a remarkable success of international solidarity”.
Forty Member States and regional organizations
pledged more than $2 billion. I thank them for that
generosity. Allow me particularly to recognize the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
for their $930 million contribution to the humanitarian
response plan. That was not just an exceptionally large
contribution; it was also prompt, swift, unearmarked and
unconditional, and it has already been fully disbursed.
All parties to the conflict must take practical steps
to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian access,
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The record on that issue remains
mixed. There have been improvements. United Nations
humanitarian flights and vessels are moving regularly.
That is positive, but we remain very concerned about
commercial imports through all of Yemen’s ports,
most particularly Al-Hudaydah and Saleef. Before the
war, Yemen relied on imports to cover 90 per cent of
staple foods and nearly all its medicine and fuel needs.
Commercial shortages and delays at ports have led
to sharp increases in the price of food and household
necessities. Ports are the lifeline of Yemen. We are
doing our part to ensure that they can function properly.
I am pleased to confirm that steps are being taken to
further strengthen the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism, which screens commercial
shipments to Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports.
We are encouraging all those concerned to
accelerate the normalization of commercial shipments
into Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as to Yemen’s
other ports. We are worried that shipping companies
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

are reluctant to enter Yemeni waters. The reasons are
related to problems with foreign exchange and the
banking sector, as well as the ports, but the result is
that insufficient food is being imported. That needs to
be addressed. Price increases, especially of food, are
forcing hundreds of thousands of destitute families to
turn to humanitarian assistance for their very survival.
We are also concerned that Sana’a airport remains
closed to commercial traffic, thereby preventing
thousands of critically ill patients from travelling
abroad to seek treatment unavailable in Yemen. On
several occasions, over the past month, military
activities conducted in the proximity of the airport have
affected humanitarian flights. Last week, there were
serious incidents close to humanitarian locations that
had been deconflicted. We are working closely with all
parties to ensure that they are not repeated.
Within Yemen, bureaucratic impediments imposed
by decision-makers in Sana’a are affecting relief
operations. Humanitarian staff continue to face delays
with regard to visas and project approvals, restrictions
on imports and customs clearance, and long delays
and searches at checkpoints. In recent weeks, some
of the media in Sana’a have depicted humanitarian
operations inaccurately and unjustly, and humanitarian
staff have been detained. We are also concerned about
insecurity in parts of the country, particularly in the
south. While we have partial access to all of Yemen’s
333 districts, restrictions and insecurity mean that an
estimated 1.2 million people in need of assistance live
in areas inaccessible to humanitarian organizations. All
impediments that prevent humanitarians from reaching
people must stop.
Looking ahead, we continue to face enormous
challenges. Unless steps are taken now in high-risk
districts, we will risk another major cholera outbreak.
Last year’s outbreak of cholera and watery diarrhoea
struck more than a million people. The effects continue
to linger. As we enter the rainy season, the conditions
that created this outbreak are still present. Applying
the lessons from last year, we are doing everything
we can to respond. Agencies are pre-positioning
supplies, chlorinating water sources and launching a
vaccination campaign.
As with other challenges, a successful response
requires safe, unimpeded and unhindered access across
and into Yemen for humanitarian staff and humanitarian
supplies. We need predictable fuel imports to keep

S/PV. 8235

hospitals and water treatment plants running. Yemeni
public servants who are doing so much themselves to
prepare for and respond to the crisis need their salaries
paid. Most health and sanitation workers have still not
been paid for more than a year and a half.
The impact of air strikes, shelling and fighting on the
civilian population, particularly in Al-Hudaydah, Taiz,
Saada, Hadramut and Hajjah governorates is deeply
worrying. Civilian lives are lost. Public infrastructure
is destroyed. Displacement is increasing. Mines and
the remnants of war affect agricultural production and
the wider economy, as well as threatening civilian life.
Some 3 million women and girls are at risk of sexual
and gender-based violence.
Like the Special Envoy, I too remain very concerned
about missiles being launched into Saudi Arabia from
within Yemen. That adds a further dimension to the
civil war and puts many civilians at great risk. I want
to remind all parties that they have obligations under
international humanitarian law. Restraint is needed to
avoid any escalation that would worsen still further the
suffering of ordinary people.
While the humanitarian response can do, and is
doing, a lot, it cannot resolve this crisis. I therefore
echo the Special Envoy’s call for all parties to engage
meaningfully with the United Nations without
preconditions to achieve a lasting negotiated settlement
towards sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome the new
Special Envoy and thank him for his briefing. I also
thank Mr. Lowcock for his assessment and welcome
our Yemeni colleagues.
It is a desperate situation and it is clear, as the
Special Envoy set out, that it can be resolved, ultimately,
only through a political solution. I think we all agree
on that. I think what the Under-Secretary-General said
about the humanitarian consequences — particularly
8 million people being close to starvation and 1 million
people at risk of cholera and similar illnesses — is
absolutely shocking and ought to be a spur to action
for the Council. I think the international community
must do whatever it can to enable the Special Envoy to
develop his plan at the pace that he has just outlined to

18-111475/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

us. I welcome the clarity and the elements of the plan he
set out. I hope we can, as an international community,
pool all our influence and urge the parties to engage in
good faith with the United Nations process. Although
the conflict has some quite desperate humanitarian
consequences, it is a solvable conflict.
The Under-Secretary-General said that if we took
swift and joint action, then we could make some very
good progress. That is absolutely where we should
put our efforts. As a Council, I hope that we can
encourage people to grant full and unhindered access
to Yemen for the Special Envoy, for his team and for the
humanitarian actors. In that respect, the meetings that
the Envoy laid out in the region, including in Sana’a
with senior Houthi leaders, are extremely welcome. I
would like to highlight a couple of areas for specific
immediate action.
The Under-Secretary-General mentioned financial
pledges, and I agree that the scale of the generosity from
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait
are all quite remarkable. We ourselves, as the United
Kingdom, have provided $250 million for this year
and next. I think we all know that money alone will
not be enough. We need to do more to get commercial
supplies in. I was concerned about the foreign exchange
problem, because in Yemen a lot of the food and
supplies that go in need to come from commercial
sources. Humanitarian assistance cannot manage the
scale required. Commercial shipping needs to be able
to go in as it is vital to water and sanitation systems. I
do hope we can all find ways to urge collaboration in
that regard.
My second point is about access to Houthicontrolled areas where we see many severely
malnourished children. The presidential statement
adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5) highlighted the
importance of vaccination campaigns, as the UnderSecretary General said.
Thirdly, I want to echo the call about paying
non-military public workers. Families do not have the
means to buy food. They do not have the means to buy
medicine and half of the health facilities have closed.
That is all contributing to a more desperate situation in
Yemen than needs to be, objectively, the case.
I would now like to turn to regional stability. The
conflict’s impact on regional stability is growing and it
is dangerous. It puts Saudi Arabia at risk and puts Saudi
citizens at risk. The continued Houthi missile attacks,
6/21

17/04/2018

including the use of ballistic missiles, at civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia attract our outright condemnation. The
deliberate targeting of civilian areas is abhorrent. It
is against international law and against international
humanitarian law. We call on all parties involved in the
conflict to abide by their international humanitarian
law obligations. And as the Under-Secretary General
set out, that is still not being done to a sufficient degree.
I also want to stress that it really is a national
security threat to Saudi Arabia and that, in turn, is
driving renewed conflict on the ground. So it is vital
and I hope the Council can help ensure that all Member
States fully implement the arms embargo that the
Council has imposed.
In particular, the Panel of Experts on Yemen
mandated by resolution 2342 (2017) has concluded
that missiles and related to material of Iranian origin
was introduced into Yemen after the imposition of the
targeted arms embargo. That, in turn, means that Iran
is in non-compliance with resolution 2216 (2015). We
strongly urge Iran to desist from destabilizing activity
and we encourage all Member States to use whatever
influence they have to ensure that the supply of missiles
fuelling the conflict inside Yemen stops.
I want to stress the Special Envoy’s remarks
about it being possible to make progress. We have
within our grasp the ability to do something to help
bring this conflict to an end. That is a very important
contribution that the Council can make for regional and
international peace and security at a time when we see
so many problems on so many other issues. I would like
to conclude by urging all members of the Council to
put our shoulders to the wheel to support the United
Nations and to try to bring peace to Yemen.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
The delegation of the United States welcomes
Special Envoy Griffiths to the Council. He has taken on
one of the world’s most difficult diplomatic assignments
and we thank him for it. The United States fully supports
his efforts to find a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We especially appreciate that he has quickly
reached out to all of the Yemeni parties involved.
We hope that all parties will engage with the United
Nations without preconditions going forward.
The situation in Yemen is an issue on which it
should be easy for all members of the Security Council
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

to agree. Yemen is not Syria. We agree that there
needs to be peace in Yemen and that the war has taken
a horrifying toll on the Yemeni people. Government
services, such as schools, hospitals and clean water,
barely exist anymore.
Such chaos is the perfect environment for terrorist
groups, such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, to find a safe haven and to plan
attacks that could threaten us all. Finding peace is
urgent. However, pushing for peace also requires that
we do not reward bad behaviour. Iran, and the Houthis
in particular, need a much better understanding of
our seriousness when it comes to their destabilizing
activity. Just because we seek peace does not mean that
we look the other way when they take steps to make the
war even worse.
In order to achieve enduring peace in Yemen, Iran
must end its interference and its violations of the arms
embargo that the Security Council imposed. Last week,
the Houthis launched yet another round of ballistic
missiles at Saudi Arabia. At the end of March, debris
from a Houthi missile attack against the capital of Saudi
Arabia killed a civilian. We warned earlier that it was
only a matter of time before the Houthi attacks caused
civilian casualties in Saudi Arabia. That prediction has
now come true.
With each day that passes, the risk of greater
regional conflict increases. Yet the Security Council has
not acted to hold the Houthis and Iran accountable for
weapons that violate the arms embargo and resolution
2216 (2015). We all went to Washington, D.C., to see the
missiles first hand and that the missiles found in Saudi
Arabia had originated in Iran. The independent and
impartial Panel of Experts on Yemen then corroborated
what we showed the Council and affirmed Iran’s
non-compliance with resolution 2216 (2015).
The evidence exists and it is strong. The Houthis
did not work out on their own how to build and to fire
ballistic missiles more than 1,000 kilometres to hit the
Saudi capital. Iran is supporting them. Action by the
Security Council to stop the flow of arms to the Houthis
would be a step forward in helping to resolve the war.
The Houthis must realize that if they continue to use
banned weapons of war, the international community
will be united in condemning them. The United States
supports the ability of our Saudi partners to defend
their borders against those threats. In the Council, we
will continue to push for real accountability.

S/PV. 8235

The Houthis show no sign of stopping their missile
launches towards Saudi Arabia. It is imperative that the
Security Council come together to make clear that such
provocations are unacceptable. We hope that all parties,
especially the Houthis, see the arrival of Mr. Griffiths
as an opportunity to start down a new path. The time is
long past for all parties to show flexibility and restraint
in the service of a real negotiated settlement. I suspect
that if we could hear from ordinary Yemenis, they
would send the same message.
The United Nations has emphasized the dire
humanitarian stakes. The bottom line is that 18 million
Yemenis do not know where their next meal will come
from. Something has to change. That is why the United
States emphasizes once again that all parties must
do more to expand access for commercial goods and
humanitarian aid to reach the Yemeni people. We are
doing our part. We funded four mobile cranes for the
port of Al-Hudaydah, which we expect to increase the
flow of goods through the port. The United States also
supports the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen as a tool that helps address the
threat of weapons smuggling, while also helping ships
with legitimate cargo to reach Yemen. It is vital that
the port of Hudaydah remain open to commercial and
humanitarian traffic, and we appreciate the steps that
the parties have taken to keep the port functioning.
Beyond reaching the port, aid workers should be able to
move freely throughout the country in order to deliver
the humanitarian assistance to those in need.
The United States has also joined donors in taking
steps to respond to the humanitarian crisis. We have
announced nearly $87 million in humanitarian aid to
Yemen this fiscal year. We applaud Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates in particular for putting
forward almost $1 billion towards the United Nations
humanitarian response.
As long as the war continues, the parties must be
careful how they plan and carry out attacks so as to
reduce human suffering on the ground. We have called
on all parties to take appropriate measures to mitigate
the risk of civilian casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure. The United States is working to provide
support to the Saudi-led coalition, while minimizing
the number of civilian casualties. The Houthis must
halt their indiscriminate shelling and ensure that
humanitarian aid is delivered without any diversion or
delays. The war in Yemen is at a critical turning point.
We have a new Envoy, who is ready to promote peace.

18-111477/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

The Security Council can take steps to address the
provocations by the Houthis from ballistic missiles, to
promote humanitarian access and to support a return to
talks. Those are the goals that we all ought to share. As
the Security Council, we should therefore not hesitate to
take action to achieve them. That means not being afraid
to identify the Houthis and their Iranian patrons by
name in future resolutions. That means actually leaning
on the parties to negotiate in good faith in the United
Nations process. That means responding generously to
the United Nations humanitarian appeals and standing
by our demands for unfettered humanitarian access. If
we do those things, we can lay the groundwork for an
enduring political settlement.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by welcoming Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
to the Security Council in his new role for the first
time and to thank him for his very clear briefing this
morning. We share his deep concern about the risks of
escalation. However, we also see the opportunities that
he outlined. As he pointed out, in Yemen the stakes are
high whether with regard to the humanitarian situation,
regional stability or the spread of terrorism. I would
like to encourage him to continue to reach out to those
strong and women peers to whom he referred. It is clear
to us that the active participation of women in the peace
process will be decisive. I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his briefing today,
as well as for his efforts to address the humanitarian
situation in Yemen and to ensure that it remains high
on our agenda and that of the international community.
I will focus on two points in my intervention: first,
the political situation and the need to strongly support
the resumption of a United Nations-led political
process; and, secondly, the humanitarian situation and
the need to implement the March presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/5).
First, on the political situation, the appointment of
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths provides an opportunity
to relaunch the political process in Yemen. It is essential
that the Council now unite in giving the Special Envoy
its strong support and that we stay focused on making
use of this opportunity. The members of the Council
and regional actors must now use all their influence
to ensure that all the parties engage with the Special
Envoy and the United Nations-led process in good faith
and without preconditions.
8/21

17/04/2018

We encourage the parties to now move forward
quickly on confidence-building measures, such as those
related to Sana’a airport and the release of prisoners. It
also seems clear that the southern question will need to
be addressed in those discussions.
Mr. Griffiths has made a very good start to his
challenging task. We are encouraged by his early visit
to Yemen and the region, and we fully support the
efforts to pursue broad consultations with an inclusive
approach. Full and unhindered access to all the relevant
parties in Yemen is critical.
Moving on to the humanitarian situation, on
15 March the Security Council unanimously adopted
a statement by the President (S/PRST/2018/5) that
recognizes the vast humanitarian needs and the
immediate steps that must be taken in order to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Those steps
were based on the obligation of the parties to respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
However, regrettably, the implementation of that
strong and clear statement by the Council is clearly
lacking. Restrictions, delays and uncertainty at ports,
such as Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, hinder humanitarian
and commercial imports. Delays and obstacles to the
clearance process of the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen for vessels continue
and act as a deterrent to private shipping companies.
Even when supplies reach the country, access
within it remains a serious challenge owing to the
many bureaucratic impediments and checkpoints. To
date, no humanitarian evacuations, even for emergency
treatment, have been allowed through Sana’a airport.
Strikes on civilians and civilian infrastructure continue
from all sides.
We have also seen renewed missile attacks from
Houthi-held territory targeting Saudi Arabia, which our
Foreign Minister has strongly condemned. Clearly, the
violations of international humanitarian law continue,
and accountability for such violations remains to be
attributed. It is time to move from words to action with
respect to the situation in Yemen. It is time for the
Council to demand that its decisions be implemented in
full. It is time to actively and urgently engage the parties
and to ensure that the will of the Council is heeded.
Sweden’s Special Envoy for Yemen, Ambassador
Peter Semneby, visited Sana’a and Aden in late March.
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

While there, he met with representatives of the Yemeni
Government, the Houthis, the General People’s
Congress and the Southern Transitional Council. He
also met with the international, regional and local civil
society actors, as well as internally displaced persons
and other victims of the conflict. During his visit,
the Ambassador urged the parties to engage with the
United Nations-led political process and to respect
international humanitarian law, including protecting
civilians and eliminating all obstacles to humanitarian
assistance. The presidential statement provided by the
Council provides a good basis for such discussions
and should be used by all Council members. Despite
the many and well-known challenges, in his meetings,
the parties showed the same signs of an increased
willingness to engage in a United Nations-led process
that Mr. Griffiths referred to earlier today. We must use
that momentum.
As one of the co-hosts of the high-level pledging
event for Yemen in Geneva on 3 April, we wish to
join Mr. Lowcock in thanking all those donors that
participated, resulting in pledges of over $2 billion to
the Yemen humanitarian response plan. The pledges
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates will contribute significantly to the
implementation of the United Nations emergency
response plan. We now call on all donors to make
their disbursements as soon as possible. The panel
discussion on humanitarian access that formed part of
that conference demonstrated with clarity how difficult
it is for United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
actors to operate in Yemen. It is clear that without
addressing that fundamental issue, the funds raised
will not be able to reach those in need as effectively as
they should.
In conclusion, the 15 March presidential statement
was our strongest yet on the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. It reflected the urgency on the ground; however,
over one month later this urgency remains. We must
make every effort to ensure implementation, while,
at the same time supporting the Special Envoy. The
desperate situation in Yemen demands greater attention
by the international community, and the Council should
further step up its efforts in the coming weeks and
months to provide united support.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Martin Griffiths for
his very detailed and illuminating briefing and for
his initial assessment of the steps needed to revive

S/PV. 8235

political negotiations in the difficult situation we are
seeing. I would like to assure the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen of the full support and
faith of France. I also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
efforts and for his briefing, which shows how worrying
the situation is in Yemen.
Today I will focus on three points: the growing
intensity of the Yemeni conflict and the regional
impact of the crisis; the ongoing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation; and the need to relaunch the
political process.
We are all aware of the gravity of the situation in
Yemen. France has consistently called on the parties
to resume the path of negotiations under the auspices
of the United Nations without preconditions, because,
as we all know, there is no military solution to the
conflict. We also emphasize the urgent need to lay
down weapons.
In that context, the latest firing of missiles into
Saudi Arabia is unacceptable and must stop. In addition
to the gravity of those indiscriminate missile launches
and their impact on regional security and stability, they
reduce the potential of a political outcome in Yemen.
We have repeatedly expressed our concern about the
launching of Houthi ballistic missiles into Saudi Arabia
and the Red Sea and have condemned those launches.
In this extremely tense regional context, we call for
calm from the parties. Let us also bear in mind that
the continuation of the conflict benefits only terrorist
groups, who use the chaos to strengthen and expand
their presence. That is an important factor that must
bring us together.
The first victims of this conflict are civilians, in a
context where the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. This humanitarian crisis is among the most
serious in the world. We have repeatedly welcomed the
announcement of the Coalition’s humanitarian plan,
which is a positive and encouraging step. We also
welcome the adoption of the recent presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/5, which defines the humanitarian road
map. Finally, the donor conference held earlier this
month in Geneva enabled the mobilization of about
$2 billion for the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan. That is a very good result, even though the gap
has not yet been completely filled.
In that context, access to humanitarian aid remains
our main concern. It is crucial that all parties ensure
rapid, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian

18-111479/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

assistance and commercial supplies to those in need.
Access to all ports and airports, including the ports of
Al-Hudayda, Saleef and Sana’a airport, must be fully
assured and kept open. In that regard, we welcome
the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, which is intended to shorten the waiting
time for commercial vessels. It is essential that supplies
cover all needs, be they food, medicine or gasoline. The
current coverage rate is still insufficient, especially
for fuel.
Another top priority is to ensure full respect for
international humanitarian law in order to protect
civilian populations and humanitarian and medical
personnel. The parties must respect the zones and
periods reserved for the arrival of supplies and
humanitarian and medical personnel. I am referring in
particular to Sana’a airport.
We remain concerned about the situation
of displaced persons, and specifically about the
vulnerability of over 3 million women at risk of sexual
violence, as well as the threat of a new cholera and
diphtheria epidemic in the coming months. The parties
must help the United Nations respond to that danger in
at-risk regions.
France will remain fully mobilized to concretely
improve the situation of the Yemeni population. The
President of France, Emmanuel Macron, has announced
that a humanitarian conference on Yemen will be held by
this summer in Paris in order to launch new initiatives
for the civilian population and better protect them from
violations of international humanitarian law. Naturally,
we wish to be in close contact with the Special Envoy,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, but also with Mr. Mark Lowcock,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as relevant United Nations agencies in
order to prepare this conference properly.
In that critical context, we must, alongside our
humanitarian commitment, remain more mobilized
than ever to support a new political dynamic — the
only sustainable outcome to this conflict. The arrival
of Martin Griffiths gives the opportunity to all parties
to re-engage seriously without preconditions in the
negotiations. To carry out its mission, the Special
Envoy must have access to all regions and countries
where he wishes to go, without any party preventing or
jeopardizing his movements.
In the same spirit, we must continue to convey
to regional actors a clear message on the need to play
10/21

17/04/2018

a responsible and constructive role in Yemen. We
believe that everyone can contribute to a solution. Our
common goal must be to achieve a lasting cessation
of hostilities and to encourage the parties, in support
of United Nations mediation, to resume dialogue for a
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement, while
respecting the territorial integrity of the country.
Finally, the unity of the Security Council is
of vital importance, and we — individually and
collectively — have a role to play in that regard.
The robust and united support of the international
community is indeed essential if we are to prompt the
parties to resume the path of dialogue. Despite the scale
of the difficulties we are experiencing, there is now an
encouraging alignment of the planets that could create
a historic opportunity to end the Yemeni conflict. Let
us work together to bring about the conditions for such
an outcome by supporting the Special Envoy. Council
members can rest assured of France’s firm commitment
to that end.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to start by
expressing its sincere thanks to both our briefers, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock, for their very clear and comprehensive
briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome Mr. Griffiths to the Security Council and to
reiterate our full support for his efforts.
Today I would like to focus on three aspects: the
peace process, the enduring humanitarian crisis and the
need to address Yemen’s economic challenges.
First, with regard to the political process, 2018
could be a crucial year. The appointment of a new
envoy brings with it opportunities for renewed
dialogue — dialogue that is so desperately needed as
we move into the conflict’s fourth year. It is up to all
parties to the conflict to seize these opportunities and
do so without preconditions.
We condemn the continued launching of ballistic
missiles by the Houthis and call on all parties to the
conflict to refrain from taking steps that would lead
to further escalation. We welcome the Special Envoy’s
extensive and inclusive outreach in his first weeks in
office, during which he spoke to Yemenis from all
sides of the conflict, as well as countries in the region.
I would particularly like to welcome what the Special
Envoy said about including women in that outreach. We
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

strongly support that inclusive approach and call on all
parties to allow full access to the Special Envoy.
In absence of a ceasefire, the impact of hostilities
on civilians remains of great concern. Human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law are being reported too often. We once again
urgently call for full compliance with international
humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. As the
war drags on, the need for accountability becomes
ever more prominent. Without it, a negotiated political
settlement has little chance of sustaining itself.
Secondly, in the absence of a political settlement,
we call the Council’s attention to the humanitarian
crisis. The pledging of $2 billion at the humanitarian
conference in Geneva is a positive step. We welcome
the quick disbursement of the generous pledge of almost
$1 billion by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates. We call on all Member States to
follow this example and disburse their pledges as soon
as possible.
At the same time, pledges mean little if access is
not ensured. We call for the full implementation of the
presidential statement of 15 March (S/PRST/2018/5),
particularly the Council’s clear call for the full and
sustained opening of all Yemen’s ports for both
humanitarian and commercial goods. It is deeply
worrying that commercial food imports are still not at the
level that they were before the blockade was imposed in
November 2017. At the start of 2018, 8.4 million people
were severely food insecure and at risk of starvation,
which represents a 24 per cent increase since 2017.
The United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen (UNVIM) has a crucial role to
play in restoring the confidence of commercial shippers
that have stayed away since the start of the blockade.
UNVIM has our full support, and we welcome the recent
steps taken to address this issue. It is equally important
that goods that have entered Yemen reach the people
who need them the most. Unimpeded access throughout
Yemen is essential, and unnecessary bureaucratic
impediments should be removed by all parties.
My third point is about the economy. Yemen cannot
survive on humanitarian aid alone. Due to inflation
and loss of income for many Yemenis, access to
commercially available supplies is rapidly decreasing.
It is essential that public sector salaries be paid across
Yemen — not only to provide income to millions of
Yemenis in need but also to enable the resumption of

S/PV. 8235

essential public services, especially in the health and
sanitation sectors. With summer approaching, the
threat of a renewed cholera outbreak makes this issue
even more pressing.
In conclusion, the following steps need to be
taken by all parties to the conflict. Further escalation
must be prevented. Parties must engage with the
new Special Envoy without preconditions. Full and
sustained humanitarian and commercial access into
and throughout Yemen must be allowed. Urgent steps
must be taken to resume the payment of salaries and
restore public services. After more than three years of
conflict, the Yemeni people deserve nothing less than
our maximum efforts.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by once again congratulating once again
Mr. Martin Griffiths on his appointment as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. I wish him
and his team every success. We express our appreciation
to Mr. Griffiths and to Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock, and thank them for their valuable and
important briefings on developments pertaining to the
humanitarian and political situation in Yemen.
I would like to emphasize three major points
today: the political and security developments, the
humanitarian situation and the message that the
Security Council must send out.
With regard to the political and security
developments, we have heard just now on the political
level from Mr. Griffiths about the outcome of a number
of meetings he held with Yemeni parties since he took
up his role as Special Envoy. I would like to express
our full support for his efforts as well as the efforts of
the United Nations to resolve the conflict in Yemen in
a peaceful manner.
The State of Kuwait is convinced that there can be
no military or humanitarian solution for Yemen. The
solution will have to be political and it must be based on
the three political references — the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, the outcome of the National Dialogue
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Furthermore, we welcome the
19 March statement issued by Mr. Griffiths’s Office
where he says that he plans to revive the political
process between the Yemeni parties in accordance
with those three references, and to complete previous
consultations, including consultations that took place
in Kuwait in 2016 during which both parties were

18-1114711/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

almost ready to sign an agreement putting an end to the
fighting and the suffering of the Yemeni people.
On the security front, the deliberate attacks by the
Houthis against populated areas in Saudi Arabia show
that Houthis are defying the will of the international
community and working against a political solution to
put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people. We
reiterate our condemnation in the strongest terms of the
attacks using ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia,
the threats made against neighbouring countries, as
well as the threats made to maritime shipping at BabAlmandab in the Red Sea. All of those aspects are a
danger for regional and international peace. We support
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in all measures that it
is planning to take in order to safeguard its security
and stability.
The Security Council also adopted a very clear,
explicit and unified position to condemn the ballisticmissile attacks against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The presidential statement of 15 March (S/PRST/2018/5)
condemned in the strongest terms the ballistic-missile
attacks. Later, on 28 March, the Council issued a
statement to the press (SC/13270) in which it robustly
condemned the ballistic-missile attacks, which had
targeted cities in Saudi Arabia, including the capital
Riyadh, and demanded an end to such attacks. In
response, the Houthis have done nothing but continue
to launch missiles, which shows once again that they
are in clear defiance and not being earnest. They stick
to military escalation and violence, and not to peace
and dialogue. We underscore that all Member States
must respect the arms embargo pursuant to resolution
2216 (2015).
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the outcome of the donor conference on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, which was held
in Geneva and organized by the United Nations,
Switzerland and Sweden. The conference was able to
garner contributions amounting to $2 billion dollars. At
that conference, the State of Kuwait pledged to provide
$250 million in humanitarian assistance to Yemen. We
call on members to uphold those commitments given
the urgent humanitarian needs in Yemen. We also
welcome the $1 billion joint contribution announced by
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well as
the generous contributions of the United Kingdom and
other countries. We hope that those contributions will
improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen this year.
12/21

17/04/2018

Pertaining to the Security Council message, the
Council must remain unified and firm in the light of the
crisis in Yemen. The Council must send a clear message
to all parties in Yemen, in particular the Houthis,
that they cannot continue to defy Security Council
resolutions and international law and refrain from
engaging in the political process. It is unacceptable to
put personal interests and political ambitions over the
interests of an entire people. It is also unacceptable at
all that ballistic missile attacks continue to be carried
out against neighbouring countries, threatening vessels
crossing Bab-Almandab and the Red Sea. That is
a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security.
The ideal solution to the crisis must be centred on
the three reference points I mentioned and must ensure
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yemen and respect for its constitutional
order. Any interference in Yemen’s internal affairs must
be rejected. That was affirmed at the Arab summit held
in Saudi Arabia a few days ago. We urge the Yemeni
stakeholders to work together with the Special Envoy
in that regard.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
congratulating Special Envoy Martin Griffiths on
his first briefing in the Chamber. I thank him for his
initial report and convey our readiness to extend our
full support to him and his mission. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
We commend the sterling contribution of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the World Health Organization (WHO),
especially in providing increased medical supplies
and rendering life-saving services and surgical
procedures. Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the
selfless commitment of OCHA and other humanitarian
organizations to easing the suffering of the Yemeni
people in their present difficult circumstances.
Since the start of this month, humanitarian partners
have provided about 60,000 people with emergency
assistance. Over 2 million people, 90 per cent of whom
fled their homes more than a year ago, still remain
displaced across the country owing to the conflict. It
is necessary to increase humanitarian emergency aid
and provide unhindered access to all areas of Yemen.
We emphasize that all obligations under international
humanitarian law must be respected and all parties
must take responsibility to mitigate the humanitarian
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

situation by cooperating fully with the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian organizations.
The large-scale vaccination campaign to control the
spread of diphtheria in Yemen, undertaken by WHO,
UNICEF and health authorities, is noteworthy. That
campaign targeted nearly 2.7 million children between
the ages of 6 weeks and 15 years old in 11 governorates.
As of 1 March, the World Food Programme had provided
over 6 million people with emergency food assistance
and nearly 2 million people with safe drinking water
by rehabilitating urban water systems and rural water
programmes and water was delivered to nearly 375,000
of the most vulnerable internally displaced persons.
My delegation welcomes the coalition’s decision
to keep open all of Yemen’s main ports, including
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, in order to allow access
to humanitarian and commercial cargo without
restrictions, similar to the previous situation when
Yemen was importing 90 per cent of its food staples.
Maintaining the flow of those imports is absolutely
essential for humanitarian assistance.
On the political track, we are alarmed by the
resurgence of hostilities in Yemen, particularly in
Yemen’s southern Al-Hudaydah governorate, which is
about 100 kilometres south of Al-Hudaydah port, and in
the Sana’a governorate in northern Yemen. Air strikes
and clashes have also intensified in neighbouring
Al-Jawf governorate. Kazakhstan therefore calls on
all parties to commit themselves to establishing a new
regime for the cessation of hostilities. Such a temporary
respite would create conditions for the resumption
of negotiations.
It is obvious that solving all outstanding issues
and stabilizing the country will require many years
of additional effort and the involvement of the
international community. However, the cessation of
hostilities will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
basic public services to the population, which has been
severely affected over the past three years. Achieving
that goal should be a priority for the Council.
In general, the Security Council should work more
resolutely to resolve the Yemeni conflict and focus on
stabilizing the situation in the entire region, combating
terrorism, implementing the humanitarian mission in
order to preserve civilian lives, and bringing about
an end to the war in the country. The Special Envoy
plays a key role in that regard. We have repeatedly

S/PV. 8235

said that balanced external support for a settlement in
Yemen could effectively complement the work of the
Special Envoy. The search for a peaceful resolution to
the conflict through dialogue and confidence-building
measures should be intensified, and an urgent, universal
ceasefire without preconditions must be reached.
Victory cannot be achieved exclusively by military
means. It is necessary to prevent the splitting of the
country. All parties in Yemen must seek compromises
and reject unilateral decisions that could harm the peace
process. At the same time, the parties to the conflict
are obliged to refrain from committing acts that could
lead to an escalation of the regional situation and
insecurity. It is not acceptable to conduct rocket attacks
against civilian targets on the territory of Saudi Arabia,
and Kazakhstan strongly condemns those attacks.
All parties should exercise restraint amid mounting
tensions. A military escalation is not a solution.
Yemen is the world’s worst humanitarian crisis,
with more than 22 million people — three quarters
of the population — in need of humanitarian aid
and protection. Under such critical conditions, it is
important that the United Nations initiate a plan for
further action. We were pleased that, in Geneva on
3 April, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait and more than 30 other countries generously
pledged over $2 billion to support the humanitarian
response in Yemen. Kazakhstan was also part of that
effort. We endorse the Secretary-General’s view that
humanitarian resources are very important, but they
are not enough. It is essential that they reach people
in need.
Lastly, we also call upon the parties to the conflict
to demonstrate sincerity and flexibility, to avoid
disagreements in the course of consultations and to
properly resolve complex issues, in particular the
withdrawal of forces, disarmament and the formation of
a Government of national consent, in order to achieve
a comprehensive settlement, taking into account the
national conditions in Yemen and the concerns of all
parties. We fully agree with the words of the SecretaryGeneral that a negotiated political settlement, through
inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue, is the only solution.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me begin by welcoming
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and by expressing
Poland’s full support to him and his Office in their
endeavour to relaunch the political process in Yemen. I

18-1114713/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

also thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing
on the humanitarian situation in the country.
First, I would like to underline the urgent need to
resume the political process in Yemen. Poland is deeply
convinced that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council is to pave the way for a peaceful solution to
the conflict. Let me echo what has been said by many
speakers. Only a genuine, inclusive, intra-Yemeni
political process can bring about long-standing peace
and put an end to the tremendous suffering of civilians,
who continue to bear the brunt of ongoing hostilities.
We perceive Mr. Griffiths’s assumption of the post of
Special Envoy as a unique opportunity to resume peace
negotiations, which should be carried out with the full
participation of all relevant parties and stakeholders,
as well as all groups of Yemeni society, including
women and youth. We encourage actors in the region
with influence on the parties to the conflict to convince
them to engage constructively with Mr. Griffiths and
his Office and to participate in the United Nations-led
process in good faith and without preconditions.
Let me turn to the humanitarian situation. I would
like to express Poland’s highest appreciation to the
Governments of Sweden and Switzerland, which,
together with the United Nations, hosted the high-level
pledging event for Yemen earlier this month. Like other
members of the Council, we welcome the outcome of
that event, which confirmed the commitment of the
international community to alleviating the suffering of
the Yemeni people.
As we have heard from Mr. Mark Lowcock, despite
some positive developments, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen remains desperate. The widespread fighting,
severe economic decline and food insecurity continue
to take an enormous toll on the population. We believe
that, in order to improve the situation of civilians, it
is essential to ensure that public sector salaries are
paid across Yemen in order to enable the resumption
of essential public services, including health care and
education. Sustained deliveries of humanitarian and
commercial goods, including food, fuel and medical
imports, must be guaranteed. Therefore, we urge all
parties to the conflict to fully comply with the provisions
of the presidential statement adopted by the Council on
15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and ensure that all Yemeni
ports remain open and fully functional. We also urge the
14/21

17/04/2018

parties to facilitate access for humanitarian operations
across the whole territory.
With regard to the ongoing hostilities in Yemen,
we again call upon the parties to refrain from taking
action that might lead to the escalation of fighting.
Poland strongly condemns all indiscriminate attacks,
including air strikes, which have a disastrous impact
on civilians. We also strongly condemn ballisticmissile attacks carried out by the Houthis against Saudi
Arabia. All parties are obliged under international
humanitarian law to ensure the protection of civilians
and humanitarian infrastructure. We also call upon all
sides to fully cooperate with the group of international
and regional eminent experts on Yemen to allow for a
comprehensive examination of all alleged human rights
violations and abuses. Finally, we reiterate the call for a
cessation of hostilities in Yemen.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. We welcome Mr. Griffiths’s
assumption of the important post of Special Envoy.
Yemen’s political process is currently at a stalemate,
military conflicts continue and the humanitarian crisis
remains serious. The international community should
step up its mediation efforts, encourage all parties in
Yemen to broker a ceasefire and return to the path to
a political solution in order to achieve peace, security
and stability in Yemen as soon as possible. A political
solution is the only way to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen. The international community should continue
to support Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. It is imperative to support the
meditation efforts of the United Nations, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, its Implementation
Mechanism and the National Dialogue Conference
outcome documents, and engage in dialogue and
negotiations in order to reach an inclusive settlement to
the issue as soon as possible.
The Security Council and relevant parties should
remain united, support the mediation efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, strengthen efforts for peace talks and
negotiations and encourage all parties to the conflict
to break the stalemate as soon as possible in order
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. It is important to support the Special
Envoy in his efforts to develop a road map or plan of
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8235

action as soon as possible towards a political solution
to the situation in Yemen. The international community
and countries of the region should provide constructive
assistance in that regard.

of more than 85,000 people who have been forced to
leave their homes since December last year, thereby
increasing the total number of internally displaced
persons to more than 2 million people.

The current humanitarian situation in Yemen
is dire. Cholera persists and millions of people face
severe famine. The international community should
provide greater humanitarian assistance to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. China welcomes
the successful holding of the Geneva high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen in
Geneva. Through bilateral means and its cooperation
with the World Health Organization and the World
Food Programme, China has provided humanitarian
assistance to Yemen totalling RMB150 million, in
order to ease the famine and eradicate cholera. We will
continue to provide assistance to the people of Yemen
to the best of our ability.

Similarly, there are growing reports about the
recruitment of children as combatants. According to
a report issued by UNICEF on 27 March, since 2015
at least 2,400 children have been recruited as fighters
amid threats and promises of financial compensation to
their families.

Ensuring smooth humanitarian access to Yemen is
key to mitigating the humanitarian crisis. The relevant
parties should work together to provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to create the conditions
to ease the humanitarian situation in Yemen. China is
ready to work with all parties to support the work of the
Special Envoy and continue to play a constructive role
in the situation in Yemen.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his briefing. We take this opportunity to
assure him of our full support in the work ahead. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock for his informative briefing.
Regrettably, we face a disheartening situation
in Yemen. Once again, we deplore the fact that, in
spite of the Security Council’s repeated calls for the
parties to resume political dialogue and end the severe
humanitarian crisis plaguing the country — described
by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock as the worst
humanitarian crisis — we continue to witness an
increase in the number of armed clashes. Violence
has escalated in the governorates of Al-Hudaydah,
Ta’iz, Saad and Al-Jawf, among others. There have
been reports of air strikes and armed clashes, which,
according to a report issued on 9 April by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, have caused
the deaths of at least 41 people in March and April. In
addition, ongoing clashes have led to the displacement

More over, the dire humanitarian crisis must
contend not only the problem of food insecurity, which
has put 8.4 million people at risk of famine and 60 per
cent of the population at risk of food insecurity, but also
the cholera outbreak that has affected nearly 1.1 million
people in 22 of the 23 governorates of Yemen and
caused more than 2,200 deaths since its outbreak in
April 2017. Unfortunately, that situation is exacerbated
by the dangerous diphtheria outbreak, which, according
to a 17 March report published by the World Health
Organization, has recorded more than 1,300 infected
people and 76 confirmed deaths so far this year.
Against that backdrop, my delegation reiterates once
again its call for the Council to maintain a unanimous
and firm position on condemning the belligerent acts
and campaigns that aggravate the crisis in Yemen and
recklessly threaten the lives of 27 million innocent
people. We must also be consistent in categorically
condemning and rejecting any indiscriminate attacks
against the civilian population, including, of course,
missile launches and air strikes, as such acts constitute
flagrant violations of international law,
Likewise, our voice must be clear and determined
in calling on all parties to guarantee the full and
continuous operation of all ports, airports and access
routes, especially the Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports
and the Sana’a airport, since they are lifelines for
the population’s survival. We also call on the parties
to comply with the presidential statements adopted
on 15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and 15 June 2017
(S/PRST/2017/7) and to definitively implement the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).
To that end, the parties must abandon any
preconditions to engaging in dialogue, cease hostilities
immediately and commit to taking up negotiations,
which would enable an inclusive and orderly political
transition in line with the demands and aspirations of
the Yemeni people within the framework of respect for

18-1114715/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

17/04/2018

the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Yemen.

pursuit of a peaceful solution to the crisis, which has
gone on too long.

In that vein, we recall the words of the SecretaryGeneral on 13 April, when he stated in this Chamber
that

My country believes that the international community’s
political efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
Yemeni crisis will be completely futile if they are not
accompanied by significant progress on the ground.
The implementation of a comprehensive ceasefire and
the resumption of political negotiations for lasting
peace, under the auspices of the United Nations, are
today the only way out of the crisis to which the entire
international community must commit. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
to give new impetus to the peace talks and political
dialogue. It especially welcomes the recent visits of
the new Special Envoy to Riyadh and Sana’a, as part
of the consultations with the Yemeni parties, which are
encouraging signs of a renewed political process.

“There is only one pathway to ending the Yemeni
conflict and to addressing the humanitarian crisis:
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue.” (S/PV.8231, p. 2)
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
My delegation would also like to take the opportunity
of the first briefing delivered by Mr. Martin Griffiths,
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, to congratulate him on his appointment and
wish him every success in the discharge of his duties.
Three years after the outbreak of the conflict in
Yemen, my delegation remains particularly concerned
about the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, which has been described by the United
Nations as the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
Indeed, the statistics are particularly alarming, with
nearly 10,000 human lives lost, 3 million displaced
and more than 24 million people suffering from
malnutrition, including 2.4 million children, not to
mention the threat of famine and the devastation caused
by the cholera epidemic affecting the population.
In view of the gravity of the situation, Côte d’Ivoire
appeals for international solidarity. In that regard,
it welcomes the donors’ conference held in Geneva
on 3 April, which resulted in more than $2 billion in
pledges under Yemen’s humanitarian response plan.
My country thanks all donors for that outpouring of
solidarity, and especially welcomes the commitment by
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to raise an
additional $500 million from donors in the region.
Despite our joint efforts, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen will continue to deteriorate in the absence
of a viable political prospect. My delegation deplores
the current political impasse and calls for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict through an inclusive political
process involving all Yemeni stakeholders. It urges the
international community, faced with the confirmed risk
of destabilizing the entire region, to invest more in the
16/21

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen. It calls on the parties
to the conflict to return to the negotiating table with a
view to achieving a peaceful settlement to the crisis.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his maiden briefing. We congratulate him
on his appointment and express our support to him as
he embarks on his heavy responsibilities of facilitating
a diplomatic solution for the Yemeni crisis. We find it
encouraging that he has already started engaging with
the parties and building the necessary cooperative
relationships that will be imperative in the revitalization
of the political process. Listening to the views of the
Yemenis themselves is indeed absolutely important.
We recognize that the crisis in Yemen requires a high
sense of urgency, but we also believe that support,
understanding and patience from all parties, including
the Council, are needed so that the new Special Envoy
can formulate a comprehensive way forward that will
be effective in ending the conflict. The Special Envoy
also emphasized that point in his briefing, and we look
forward to the new framework for negotiation, which he
plans to present in the coming two months.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his briefing, and we reiterate our
appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners for their continued selfless service to provide
aid under difficult conditions.
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

As the war enters its fourth year, we remain deeply
concerned by the multifaceted and complex crisis in
Yemen, which continues to have a devastating impact
on civilians. In that regard, we thank the United Nations
and the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
for hosting a high-level pledging event in Geneva
on 3 April. We also thank all donors for pledging to
provide more than $2 billion. We hope that the funds
pledged will be disbursed rapidly to finance the Yemen
2018 humanitarian response plan. As mentioned by
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock during the event, in addition to the financial
aspect, the success of the plan to reach all Yemenis in
need of aid requires safe, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access.
We are still of the belief that the only solution to
the Yemeni crisis is a peaceful and inclusive Yemeniled political process that meets the legitimate demands
and aspirations of the Yemeni people, in full respect of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
We also believe that the concerns of countries in the
region need to be addressed. In that regard, we reiterate
our support for the presidential statement adopted on
15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and the 28 March press
statement (SC/13270), which enabled the Council to
speak with one voice, underscoring, inter alia, the
need for all parties to return to dialogue as the only
means of delivering a negotiated political settlement.
We call on all parties to fully implement them and
engage constructively with Special Envoy Griffiths
in the resumption of political dialogue and agreement
on the cessation of hostilities. They should seize the
appointment of the new Special Envoy as an opportunity
and demonstrate the necessary political will to work
with him towards reaching a deal, which today he said
is possible, and bring an end to the war.
Finally, we believe that the international solidarity
demonstrated during the pledging event should also
be repeated to find a durable political solution to end
the worst humanitarian tragedy of our time. We cannot
agree more with what the Special Envoy said with
respect to the strategic importance of ending the crisis
in Yemen, not only for the sake of Yemenis themselves,
who have endured so much over the past four years,
but also for the sake of peace and stability in the region
and, indeed, the world.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would first like to congratulate Mr. Martin
Griffiths on his recent appointment as Special Envoy of

S/PV. 8235

the Secretary-General for Yemen and to thank him for
his excellent, clear and informative briefing. Although
his briefing was only preliminary, as he indicated, we
found it very detailed and comprehensive. We wish him
every success in the work that the Secretary-General
entrusted to him in Yemen, and we fully support him
and his entire team in carrying out their work. We
would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his detailed and
vivid briefing, which, as always, has given us a clear
idea of the situation on the ground. Our thanks also
go to Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Mr. Griffiths’s
predecessor as Special Envoy, who during nearly three
years in that role did his utmost to find a viable solution
to the conflict in Yemen. We wish him every success
with his new responsibilities.
I will touch on three aspects of this issue that
will somewhat echo the views of our friends from the
Dutch delegation.
First, concerning the attacks on Saudi Arabia,
Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns the ballisticmissile attacks allegedly launched on 25 March by
Houthis at the Saudi Arabian cities of Riyadh, Khamis
Mushait, Najran and Jizan. They endangered civilian
areas and caused a number of fatalities. The growing
number of such incidents, which was the bad news that
Mr. Griffiths gave us this morning, shows that those
weapons have fallen into the hands of non-State actors
in violation of the arms embargo imposed on Yemen
in accordance with resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2402
(2018). We therefore call on Council members to take
a united position condemning those attacks and, where
appropriate, to identify and sanction anyone who
has helped to violate the relevant Security Council
resolutions on the arms embargo, so as to prevent
any further escalation of this unending and troubling
conflict, which has resulted in the worst humanitarian
crisis that Yemen has ever known, and especially now
that actors are trying to harm populations well beyond
their national borders.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the impasse
in the political situation in Yemen. The military
conflict persists, the political process has failed to
yield satisfactory results and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. It is therefore important that the
parties involved in the Yemeni crisis understand that a
political process involving direct, sincere and inclusive
dialogue is the only way to arrive at a lasting solution to

18-1114717/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

this grave situation. The warring parties in Yemen must
support the efforts of the United Nations based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council. In that regard, Special
Envoy Griffiths told us this morning that the good news
is that a political solution is within reach, and that it can
be achieved through the establishment of a transitional,
inclusive Government and dialogue. But for that to
happen, as he pointed out, above all, the terrible war in
Yemen must end.
Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian aspect of
the situation, Equatorial Guinea joins other Council
members in echoing Emergency Relief Coordinator
Lowcock’s message with regard to the need to honour
funding pledges as soon as possible in order to provide
the 22 million people in need of assistance — according
to information from Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs — with aid to end the food insecurity from
which they are suffering and thereby also tackle the
disastrous situation that these conflicts have produced.
The humanitarian problems of cholera and the risk of
famine are still worrying, and it is important to ensure
that the international community continues to be ready
to help those most in need. For that, it is essential
that humanitarian actors be given free access to the
affected areas.
In conclusion, we hope that the Geneva conference
will lead to the disbursement of the $2 billion pledged
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings. We would like to express our support
for Mr. Griffiths, who has just begun his work and
is conducting it appropriately. We hope that with the
support of the Security Council and all stakeholders
he can succeed in overcoming the impasse in this
protracted crisis. We will support him in his efforts.
We have been closely following the military,
political and humanitarian developments in Yemen.
We are seriously concerned about the fact that as a
result of the ongoing hostilities, the numbers of dead
and wounded are increasing, as is the extent of the
damage to civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities. So far, unfortunately, the escalating trend in
the conflict is only increasing, and the humanitarian
disaster is getting worse. More than 80 per cent of
18/21

17/04/2018

the population of Yemen is in need of assistance.
Millions of Yemenis are starving. The country has been
swamped by an epidemic of cholera and diphtheria.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of all who are taking
steps to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people
and welcome the outcome of the pledging conference
held in Geneva on 3 April and the pledges that were
announced there, especially by Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
Russia is also providing assistance to the Yemeni
people both through Aden and Sana’a. Since the acute
stage of the conflict began in 2015, the Russian Ministry
of Emergency Situations has delivered planeloads
bringing a total of more than 70 tons of various
humanitarian goods to Yemen. We are working both
bilaterally and through the World Food Programme.
Nevertheless, we believe that humanitarian assistance
alone cannot result in viable, long-term solutions.
We continue to believe that the only way to end this
protracted civil conflict is through dialogue that takes
into consideration the interests of all the participants.
We emphatically condemn indiscriminate strikes,
of which civilians are usually the victims. Targeting
civilian areas of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles is
also absolutely unacceptable. We urge the perpetrators
to halt such efforts, which do not help the political
process or an eventual political settlement in any
way. We reaffirm our principled position in favour of
an immediate halt to the armed confrontation in the
Republic of Yemen and to the use of force and attempts
to settle their differences militarily by the parties to
the conflict. That can be achieved only by focusing
on Yemen itself, not by introducing geopolitical
calculations into the conflict. Through desire and
political will, Yemen can become an example of a
successful settlement to other conflicts in the region
and a factor contributing to regional stability, which the
area so desperately needs.
We hope that Mr. Griffiths can succeed in
reversing those trends. We believe that the international
community, and first and foremost the United Nations,
to which we traditionally assign a central role, should
continue their efforts to induce Yemeni stakeholders
to reject violence and sit down at the negotiating table
to create a consolidated vision for the country’s next
incarnation, on the basis of a broad national dialogue
and mutual consideration of the interests of its main
political forces, as well as the relevant decisions of
the international community. Rather than ostracizing
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

anyone, it is important to involve all the countries and
forces that can bring genuine influence to bear on the
parties to the conflict.
For our part, we intend to continue to contribute to
those efforts. We have been doing so since the start of
the civil conflict in Yemen, and have been in regular
communication with everyone who is crucial to putting
the situation in Yemen back on a path to peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would particularly like to thank Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Lowcock for their important and detailed briefings.
Peru fully supports the dialogue initiated by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General with
all the parties to the Yemeni conflict, and would
like to emphasize his assessment that there is a real
possibility for a political solution if we act inclusively,
pragmatically, swiftly, even-handedly and with
restraint. We believe that because they are so closely
linked, the political and humanitarian aspects of the
Yemeni conflict must be addressed simultaneously
and with the utmost urgency. We therefore express our
deep concern about the escalation of hostilities, which
is exacerbating the greatest humanitarian crisis in the
world today.
We note with alarm that various actors involved
in the conflict continue to violate international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights.
These crimes must be duly investigated and those
responsible prosecuted and punished. In that regard, we
condemn the firing of missiles at Saudi Arabia, since
targeting urban centres is a war crime. We also stress
that any military response must respect the principles
of proportionality, legality and precaution.
We regret the fact that trade in essential goods and
humanitarian access continue to be restricted. That is
notwithstanding the important presidential statement
that the Council adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5),
with concrete commitments aimed at alleviating the
suffering of the Yemeni people, and the generous
contributions announced for the humanitarian response
plan. As Mr. Lowcock pointed out, all ports, including
Hudaydah and Saleef ports and Sana’a’s airport, must
be kept open. The airport is particularly important
for bringing in medical supplies and for emergency
humanitarian evacuations. Safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers must also be ensured.

S/PV. 8235

In conclusion, I would like to stress that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen, and to
point out that my delegation will continue to work in its
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) to end
the suffering of the civilian population and to build
sustainable peace in that country.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Peru’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month,
and to wish you every success. I thank you for giving
me the opportunity to address the Council, and I would
also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-General for
his direct engagement in the quest for a settlement
of the situation in Yemen. I commend the direct role
that he has played in guaranteeing the success of the
conference held in Geneva at the beginning of this
month in order to finance the United Nations plan to
meet the humanitarian needs in Yemen.
I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, for his first briefing to the
Council, as he begins his efforts to resolve the now
nearly four-year-long crisis in Yemen. The crisis
resulted from a coup led by Houthi militias against the
legitimate Government in Yemen, which at the time was
leading a transition in line with the noble and legitimate
aspirations of the entire Yemeni people of all political
stripes, under the auspices of the United Nations and
the Council. My Government supports the efforts
of Mr. Griffiths. He can count on our collaborative,
constructive and flexible cooperation in the efforts to
achieve a lasting peace in Yemen and to put an end to
the current chaos and the war that the Houthis launched
against our people in September 2014.
There are specific terms of reference for a settlement
in Yemen, unlike some other crises in the world, and,
as the Special Envoy said, they are clear. Through their
allies and friends, the Houthi Iranian militias have tried
to undermine those terms of reference. They thought
they had seized power that they would never let go.
They thought they could attack the Yemeni people
and our neighbours and use the chaos and violence to
impose Iran’s expansionist agenda. Any acceptance of
those Houthi militias as the guarantors of security in
Yemen and stability in the region is a clear example of

18-1114719/21

S/PV.8235

The situation in the Middle East

the politics of despair. Neither Yemen nor any country
represented here can accept the possibility that our
political life might be managed by an armed militia
that, like the terrorist militia Hizbullah, is supported
financially and logistically by another country.
That is why the Yemeni Government has always
expressed its readiness to cooperate with the Special
Envoy, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed
on by the Yemeni people and with the legal backing of
the international community. That includes the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and implementation
mechanism; the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference sponsored by the United Nations in 2013,
resulting in a reconciliatory document that reflected the
aspirations of Yemeni society; and, lastly, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015), which constitutes the main basis
for a resolution of the crisis in Yemen and shows that
the Security Council understands the essence of the
problem in Yemen. This solution remains the only way
to establish lasting peace in the country.
We met in Kuwait in the first half of 2016. At the
time, the Yemeni Government was genuinely ready to
implement resolution 2216 (2015). We demonstrated
a spirit of conciliation and signed accords aimed
at reaching an eventual comprehensive political
agreement. However the Houthis were not willing to
sign the accords, as Mr. Ould Sheikh Ahmed said during
his most recent briefing of the Council in February
(see S/PV.8191). Previously, we had met in Biel,
Switzerland. Back then, the Yemeni Government called
for the adoption of confidence-building measures, but
the Houthis rejected them. Those measures are again in
the spotlight.
Today, as has been said, the ports, the airports,
salaries and the release of prisoners are all priority
issues. If the perpetrators of the coup were aware of the
gravity of the humanitarian situation which they caused
for Yemen and its people, then we could work together
under the auspices of the Special Envoy to discuss many
issues, some of which were already discussed in Biel,
such as the release of all prisoners and taking immediate
action to improve the humanitarian situation by lifting
restrictions on humanitarian access and ending attacks
on humanitarian workers so as to allow them safe
and unimpeded access to all areas. Other issues that
we discussed in Biel could also be discussed. Those
include steps towards economic recovery to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people, help the central
20/21

17/04/2018

bank to stabilize the Yemeni riyal, pay salaries, improve
the financial, economic and investment situation and
facilitate food imports. That is our focus today.
The Yemeni Government welcomes the proposal
made by Martin Griffiths during his meeting with
the President last week to open Sana’a airport for
humanitarian cases. He called for the opening of the
airport under the supervision of the United Nations and
for the withdrawal of the militias from it. That issue
has been brought up previously by the Government.
However, we still believe that the situation cannot
be normalized without an end to the coup and the
restoration of State institutions.
The Security Council has shown unity since the
beginning of the Yemeni crisis in 2011. We call on the
Council and on Mr. Martin Griffiths to focus above all
on the Houthis’ compliance with the Security Council
resolutions. The Houthis must not benefit from their
crimes against humanity. That would only embolden
other militias around the world and lead to the spread
of terrorism and chaos. In order to achieve peace in
Yemen, the Houthi militias must first withdraw from the
cities and the State institutions that they have occupied
and pillaged. They must return the weaponry that they
stole from the military and State security institutions,
as well as and especially the ballistic missiles that
were provided to them by Iran. They must end their
aggression against the territories of Saudi Arabia and
stop carrying out the functions of the State. They
must stop committing one of the gravest violations of
international law, namely, the recruitment of children.
That is the only way to ensure lasting peace.
The Iranian regime continues its flagrant
interference in the internal affairs of Yemen and other
countries of the region. The Yemeni Government and the
Saudi Arabia-led coalition have sent a number of letters
to the Security Council and the Secretary-General with
regard to the attacks by Iranian-made ballistic missiles.
Some 119 missiles have been launched by the Houthi
militias against Saudi Arabia to date. That is clear proof
that Iran is a State that sponsors terrorism and seeks to
destabilize all the countries of the region.
On 11 April, the Yemeni Government also issued
a statement concerning the Iranian Embassy in Sana’a,
which continues to operate. Today it functions as a
command centre for the Iranian regime to hold meetings
between Iranian military experts and the coup forces.
That is happening despite the fact that the Yemeni
18-11147

17/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Government and Iran ceased diplomatic relations on
2 October 2015, and despite the letter sent by the Yemeni
Government on 6 January 2016, after having verified
that Iran had not closed its Embassy in Yemen. In that
letter, the Yemeni Government informed the Iranian
regime that it had not complied with the decision to
end relations between the two Governments. We gave
the Iranian regime 72 hours to leave Yemen. However,
despite all those communications, the terrorist Iranian
elements of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps
continue to use the Embassy to cover up their military
and training activities in order to support the Houthis in
clear violation of international law.
The Security Council has failed to put pressure on
Iran to end its interference in Yemeni affairs and its
threat to regional security and stability. It has failed to
compel Iran to stop smuggling missiles and threatening
international navigation south of the Red Sea and Bab
Al-Mandab.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen continues to
deteriorate into a humanitarian crisis unprecedented in
the twenty-first century. The areas of Yemen controlled
by the Houthis have been systematically destroyed,
which has led to horrific levels of humanitarian suffering.
Today, as we discuss international efforts to address
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, we commend the
outcome of the Geneva conference convened on 3 April
by the Secretary-General, together with Switzerland
and Sweden. At the conference, $2.1 billion was pledged
for the humanitarian response plan for Yemen for 2018,
which will require $3 billion. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Governments of Switzerland
and Sweden for organizing the conference. I would also
like to thank Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait, as well as all the other countries that made
generous contributions to assist the Yemeni people.
I cannot but commend the efforts of Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, to transform the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to improve
the performance of the humanitarian agencies in
Yemen and all the relevant parties in order to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout
Yemen. The Yemeni Government has sent letters to
the Secretary-General regarding the obstacles facing

S/PV. 8235

humanitarian workers created by the Houthi militias.
The letters describe the looting of humanitarian
assistance. The latest such letter was sent from the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
to the Secretary-General regarding the complaint by the
Federation of International Civil Servants’ Associations
to the assistant of the Under-Secretary-General about
the blackmailing and attacks by the Houthis against
United Nations staff.
The Houthi militias are taking advantage of the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen as an excuse to portray
themselves as victims. Yesterday, I met the Special
Envoy. We talked about the garbage accumulating
in the streets of Sana’a, which could lead to another
cholera outbreak. It seems that this practice is being
undertaken systematically in order to unleash an
outbreak of cholera. We hold the Houthis accountable
for that. As the Under-Secretary-General said, another
outbreak of cholera in Yemen would pose yet another
challenge for the international community.
I have warned more than once against focusing
on the humanitarian aspect of the situation in Yemen
in the absence of a political solution and the failure of
the international community to pressure the Houthis
to come to the negotiating table and to implement the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015). Following the
success of the Geneva conference, we cannot expect
the international community to continue to provide
such generous contributions in the coming years in the
absence of a political resolution. I call on the Council
to put pressure on the coup party, which continues to
reject the peace initiatives. It must be criminalized
before the world.
In conclusion, the Yemeni people beseech the
members of the Council to stand by them at this critical
historic moment, as has been their hope since the
beginning of the political crisis in Yemen in 2011. The
Yemeni people will never forget the noble positions that
Council members have taken on ending the war and the
coup, with a view to enabling Yemen to become a new
democratic and federal State that can embrace all its
people, provide assistance on the humanitarian front
and work towards regional and international stability
and security.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-1114721/21
