S/2020/913

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 17 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ambassador Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of Estonia, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, in connection with the video-teleconference on
“Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, convened on
Tuesday, 15 September 2020. A statement was also delivered by the representative
of the Sudan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, this briefing
and statement will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-12067 (E) 180920 121020

*2012067*

S/2020/913

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning Sudan, Sven Jürgenson
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Sudan, on behalf of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan,
on reaching the historic peace agreement. We commend the commitment of the
transitional authorities to prioritize peace, and urge the parties that have not yet
joined the peace agreement to do so urgently. We hope that this peace deal will pave
the way to sustainable peace for all people in the Sudan.
In accordance with paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the
honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the Sudan Sanctions Committee,
covering the period from 9 June to 14 September 2020.
On 13 July 2020, the Committee held its first informal informal consultations
remotely. The purpose of this informal meeting was to discuss the final report
of the Panel of Experts (see S/2020/36) with the regional Member States and to
continue strengthening the dialogue between the Committee and the regional
Member States, in accordance with the mandate of the Committee. I convened a
meeting in accordance with paragraph 28 of resolution 2340 (2017), by which the
Security Council
“[e]mphasize[d] the importance of holding regular consultations with
concerned Member States, as may be necessary, in order to ensure full
implementation of the measures set forth in this resolution”.
After a brief presentation by the Panel’s Coordinator, the representatives of
the Sudan, Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Uganda made their statements. All
representatives expressed their appreciation for the opportunity to share with the
Committee and the Panel their views on the final report. We discussed with our
interlocutors the issue of peace in the Sudan, borders, security and armed groups in
the region.
In accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2508 (2020), the Panel submitted
to the Committee its interim report, which the Committee discussed during the
informal informal consultations held on 18 August. Due to the restrictions warranted
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Panel continued to collect and verify the
information remotely.
For the benefit of the Council, so that it can provide the best support to
the Sudan regarding the most recent developments on the ground, I would like to
highlight the following elements from the Panel’s reporting.
The Panel reported that the security environment in Darfur has been volatile
and has deteriorated in several areas. Bolstered by new gold-mining revenues, the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid has been able to increase its capability in Jebel
Marra by recruiting new fighters and purchasing weapons, though the movement
is divided by internal infighting. Intercommunal clashes and related attacks on
civilians have increased since May, especially in West and South Darfur. Attacks on
civilians have increased, in particular on internally displaced persons and farmers
trying to return to their land.
The Sanctions Committee recognizes the willingness of the Government of the
Sudan to respond to the security incidents and the need for the necessary capacitybuilding to be provided in order to address this issue. The Panel also reported that
most Darfuri rebel groups remain in Libya, where they have participated in large
2/5

20-12067

S/2020/913

numbers in military clashes in 2020, including in Tripoli and Sirte. These rebel
groups have grown significantly over the last six months, engaging in large-scale
recruitment and obtaining new equipment.
We would like to recognize the Government of the Sudan for increasingly
acknowledging the issue of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations
in Darfur, and would encourage them to address this issue.
Regarding the implementation of sanctions, the Panel reported that parties in
the Sudan have continued to transfer arms and other military material into Darfur,
in violation of the arms embargo. Porous borders and the easy availability of small
arms in Darfur and the region mean that illicit flows of weapons in and out of Darfur
continue and pose a threat to security and stability both in Darfur and neighbouring
countries. The Panel reported that the implementation of the travel ban and assets
freeze also remains a challenge.
In connection with the sanctions list, I would like to note that, as of 31 August
2020, the Committee has been considering a proposal, submitted by a Member State,
for the delisting of four individuals.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate that the sanctions
regime was established for the sole purpose of helping to bring peace to Darfur.
It is not to punish the Sudan, but to support to achieve sustainable peace. The
1591 Committee is committed to working together with the Sudan and all relevant
stakeholders to make this a reality.

20-120673/5

S/2020/913

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the
United Nations, Omer Mohamed Ahmed Siddig
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and expressing our confidence in your able leadership in steering
the Council’s agenda during September. I also thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, Ambassador
Sven Jürgenson, for his quarterly briefing on the Committee’s work.
There have been major positive developments in Darfur since my last
statement before the Committee in June (see S/2020/528). On Monday, 31 August,
the Government of the Sudan and the armed groups in Darfur, Blue Nile and eastern
Sudan agreed on a peace deal to end 17 years of conflict. The agreement covers key
issues around security arrangements, land ownership, transitional justice, powersharing, civilian protection and the voluntary return of internally displaced persons.
It also provides for the disarming of armed combatants and the integration of their
fighters into the national army or civilian life.
From 3 to 5 September, the Sudan’s Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok,
met in Addis Ababa with Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, the leader of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North in South Kordofan. Together, they signed a declaration
of principles, in which an agreement has been reached to establish negotiation
workshops to resolve outstanding issues.
These two agreements are considered to be a significant step in the transitional
Government’s goal of resolving the root causes of the civil conflicts in the Sudan.
My Government is committed to and will continue its quest to achieve sustainable,
inclusive and lasting peace in the country. It is noteworthy that the SecretaryGeneral has “congratulated the people of the Sudan for this historic achievement”
and commended the parties to the negotiations for their “political will and
determination in working towards the common objective of peace”. In this regard,
the Security Council is called upon to positively react to these developments by
lifting the measures it imposed pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) in 2005, because
these measures have become completely irrelevant, counterproductive, outdated and
surpassed by developments.
A positive gesture in that direction would be the delisting of the four individuals
who are currently sanctioned by the Committee. Earlier this month, we submitted a
delisting request, supported by the relevant information from our own investigations
and from the reports of the Committee’s Panel of Experts; however, the request was
put on hold. We call on those countries that requested the technical hold measure to
quickly reach the same conclusion, which motivated us to make the request in the
first place. Since circumstances have fundamentally changed, not only in Darfur but
in the whole country, the Sudan expects nothing less than to be treated with fairness
by the Security Council.
My Government reaffirms its full commitment to improving the overall
protection of its citizens in Darfur, in particular, and other parts of the country
in general. When some unfortunate intercommunal incidents occurred a couple
of months back in Darfur, the Government took robust measures to prevent their
recurrence. These measures included, but were not limited to, the deployment of
15,000 law enforcement personnel, the collection of unregulated small arms and
light weapons, and encouragement of the traditional conflict-prevention mechanisms
to resolve intercommunal clashes. Even though these measures have proven to
be successful, a comprehensive peace would be the only solution to address any
lingering challenges in Darfur.
4/5

20-12067

S/2020/913

My Government submitted to the Security Council yesterday its first quarterly
report on the implementation of the national plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians
and requested the quarterly report to be circulated as an official document of the
Security Council.
Since the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid remains the only armed group
that is still not a party to the agreements I mentioned earlier, we reiterate our appeal
to the Council member in which he resides to encourage him to join the peace and
mitigate the suffering of the people around the Jebel Marra area.
The Sudan looks forward to engaging constructively with the Committee in
the spirit of partnership that is essential to achieving the goal of preserving the peace
in Darfur, which ultimately leads to the lifting of the sanction measures. I commend
the Chair of the Committee for reiterating that the sanctions are not intended to
punish the Sudan.

20-120675/5
