116

-- -- ----------·.

_______ ________
General AssemblyJ<'ortieth Session
_;_

tity cards on the Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan Heights and calls upon it to desist from its
repressive measures against the population of the Syrian
Arab Golan Heights;
5. Calls once again upon Member States not to recognize any of the legislative or administrative measures and
actions referred to above:.
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
118th plenary meeting
16 December /985

G
The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,7
Deeply concerned at the continued harassment by Israel,
the occupying Power, against educational institutions in
the occupied Palestinian territories,
Recalling its resoiutions 38/79 G of I 5 December 1983
and 39/95 G of 14 December 1984,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 14
August 1985, 15
Taking note of the relevant decisions adopted by the
Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization concerning the educational and cultural situation in the occupied territories,
1. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949, to the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem;
2. Condemns Israeli policies and practices against
Palestinian students and faculties in schools, universities
and other educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially the policy of opening fire on
defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of
repression against and closing of universities and other
educational and vocational institutions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding the academic activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting
the selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes, the admission of students and the appointment
of faculty members to the control and supervision of the
military occupation authorities. in clear contravention of
the Geneva Convention;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply
with the provisions of that Convention, rescind all actions
and measures against all educational institutions, ensure
the freedom of those institutions and refrain forthwith
from hindering the effective operation of the universities
and other educational institutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly as soon as possible and not later than the
15 N40/542.
16 N40/62 I and Corr. I.
17 See Report of the Second , 'mted Nat,m1s ( ·,•n/erence on the f:_,p/oratton
and Peaaful Uses of Outer Spa, e, Vwonu. 'J 21 fol(Ust /'182 (NCONF. ,01 •
IO and Corr. I and 2).
l8 Official Records of the C,eneral A;sernhfr. hm1eth Sesswn, Supp/ernenl
No. 20-(A.140120 and Corr ll

beginning of its forty-first session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
118th plenary meeting
16 December 1985

40/162.

International co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/96 of 14 December 1984,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all
States the benefits derived therefrom, and of the importance of international co-operation in this field, for which
the United Nations should continue to provide a focal
point,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation in developing the rule of law, including the relevant
norms of space law, for the advancement and preservation
of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Gravely concerned at the extension of an arms race into
outer space,
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with
major space capabilities, should contribute actively to the
goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international co-operation in the exploration and uses of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Aware of the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to an orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socio-economic advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of
developing countries,
Taking note of the progress achieved in the further
development of peaceful space exploration and application
as well as in various national and co-operative space projects, which contribute to international rn-operation in this
field,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General 16
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Use .. of Outer Space, 17
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its twentyeighth session, 18
I. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States that have not yet become parties to the
international treaties governing the uses of outer space 19 to
give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties;
3. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentyfourth session, in its working groups, continued:
(a) Its detailed consideration of the legal implications
of remote sensing of the Earth from space, with the aim of
formulating draft principles relating to remote sensing;
19 Treaty on Principles Governini the Activities of States in the Explorat10n and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
(resolution 2222 (XXI). annex); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the
Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched in10 Outer Space
(resolu110n 2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liab,hty fo,
Damage Caused by Space Objects (resolution 277 7 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution 3235
I XXIX). annex): Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon
and Other Celesual Roches I.resolution 34/68, annex).

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _I_V_._R_eso_lu_ti_·o_n_s_a_.io_p_tcd on the reports of the Special Political Committee

(b) Its consideration of the possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of
nuclear power sources in outer space;
(c) Its consideration of matters relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space and to the character
and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and
equitable use of the geostationary orbit, without prejudice
to the role of the International Telecommunication Union;
4. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Legal SubCommittee at its twenty-fifth session should, taking into
account the concerns of all countries, particularly those of
developing countries, in its working groups:
(a) Continue its detailed consideration of the legal
implications of remote sensing of the Earth from space,
with the aim of finalizing the draft set of principles;
(b) Undertake the elaboration of draft principles relevant to the use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(c) Continue its consideration of matters relating to the
definition and delimitation of outer space and to the
character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including consideration of ways and means to ensure the
rational and equitable use of the geostationary orbit, without prejudice to the role of the International Telecommunication Union;
5. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentysecond session continued:
(a) Its consideration of the following items on a priority basis:
(i) United Nations Programme on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities
within the United Nations system;
(ii) Implementation of the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
In this context, it was noted that it was particularly
urgent to implement the following recommendations:
a. All countries should have the opportunity to
use the techniques resulting from medical
studies in space;
b. Data banks at the national and regional levels
should be strengthened and expanded and an
international space information service should
be established to function as a centre of coordination;
c. The United Nations should support the creation of adequate training centres at the
regional level, linked, whenever possible, to
institutions implementing space programmes;
necessary funding for the development of such
centres should be made available through
financial institutions;
(iii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the Earth
by satellites;
(iv) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(b) Its consideration of the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in space:
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
6. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and

____________

117

Technical Sub-Committee at its twenty-third session,
taking into account the concerns of all countries, particularly those of developing LOuntries, should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) United Nations Programme on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities
within the United Natiom, system;
(ii) Implementation of the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
In this context, it is particularly urgent to implement the following recommendations:
a. All countries should have the opportunity to
use the techniques resulting from medical
studies in space;
h. Data banks at the national and regional levels
should be strengthened and expanded and an
international space information service should
be established to function as a centre of coordination:
c. The United Nations should support the creation of adequate training centres at the
regional level. linked., whenever possible, to
institutions implementing space programmes;
necessary funding for the development of such
centres should be made available through
financial inswutions;
d. The United Nations should organize a fellowship programme through which selected graduates or post-graduates from developing
countries should get in-depth, long-term exposure to space technology or applications; it is
also desirable to encourage the availability of
opportunitie~ for such exposures on other
bilateral and 1nultilateral bases outside the
United Nations system;
(iii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the Earth
by satellites;
(iv) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space:
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in space;
(i1 i Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
7 Endorses also the recommendations of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
(a) That there should be a continued consideration in
the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the item
relating to life sciences, mcluding space medicine;
(b) That, for the twenty-third session of the Scientific
and Technical Sub-Committee, the Committee on Space
Research and the International Astronautical Federation
should be invited to submit reports and arrange a special
presentation on progres5. in the geosphere-biosphere programme;
(c) That the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee
should, at its twenty-third session, give special attention to
the theme "Remote sensing for developing countries"
selected in accordance with the procedure recommended
by the Sub-Committee at its twenty-second session and
that the Committee on Space Research and the International Astronautical Federation should be invited to make
presentations in accordance with this theme;
8 Fndorses the Uni1ed Nations Programme on Space
Apphcatwns for 1986, , ~ proposed lo the Committee on

118

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by the Expert on Space
Applications; 20
9. Emphasizes the urgency and importance of implementing fully the recommendations of the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space as early as possible;
lO. Reaffirms its approval of the recommendation of
the Conference regarding the establishment and strengthening of regional mechanisms of co-operation and their
promotion and creation through the United Nations system;
11. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments that
made or expressed their intention to make contributions
towards carrying out the recommendations of the Conference;
12. Invites all Governments to take effective action for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
13. Urges all States, in particular those with major
space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international co-operation in the
exploration and uses of outer space for peaceful purposes;
14. Takes note of the views expressed and documents
circulated during the twenty-eighth session of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and during the fortieth session of the General Assembly concerning ways and
means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to consider, as a matter of priority, ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
16. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the following
three studies proposed by the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space should, together with the comments made thereon
during the twenty-second session of the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee, be called to the attention of
Governments of all Member States, specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system:
(a) Assistance to countries in studying their remotesensing needs and assessing appropriate systems for meeting such needs;
(b) The feasibility ofusing direct broadcasting satellites
for educational purposes and of internationally or regionally owned space segments;
(c) The feasibility of obtaining closer spacing of satellites in the geostationary orbit and their satisfactory coexistence, including a closer examination of techno-economic implications, particularly for developing countries, in
order to ensure the most effective utilization of this orbit
in the interest of all countries;
17. Also endorses the recommendation of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with regard to possible further studies as set out in paragraph 48 of the report
of the Committee, 18 bearing in mind in particular the
needs of the developing countries;
18. Endorses the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to grant, at their request,
permanent observer status to the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) and to
20See A/AC.105/348, para. 39.

the International System and Organization of Space Communications (INTERSPUTNIK);
19. Affirms that the interference that satellite systems
to be newly established may cause to systems already registered with the International Telecommunication Union
shall not exceed the limits specified in the relevant provision of the International Telecommunication Union Radio
Regulations applicable to space services;
20. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations working in the field of outer space or on
space-related matters to co-operate in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
22. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue and, where appropriate,
enhance their co-operation with the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to provide it with progress reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of
outer space;
23. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the
present resolution, to consider, as appropriate, new projects in outer space activities and to submit a report to thr
General Assembly at its forty-first session, including its
views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
118th plenary meeting
16 December 1985

40/163. Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of
23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, 2451
(XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2670 (XXV) of8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 296~
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3091 (XXVIII) of 7
December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974.
3457 (XXX) of lO December 1975, 31/105 of 15 December 1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977, 33/114 of 18
December 1978, 34/53 of 23 November 1979, 35/121 of
11 December 1980, 36/37 of 18 November 1981, 37/93 of
10 December 1982, 38/81 of 15 December 1983 and 39/
97 of 14 December 1984,
Awaiting the issuance of the report of the Special Com mittee on Peace-keeping Operations to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session,

1. Reaffirms and renews the mandate given to the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Comprehensivr
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations
in all their aspects".
118th plenary meeting
16 December 1985
