Reeolution11 adopted on report11 of the Sixth Committee
1. Expresses to the Committee on Int~rnational
Criminal Jurisdiction its appreciation for its valuable
work on the draft statute ;
2. Urges the Member States which have not yet
done so to make their comments and suggestions on the
draft statute, in particular if they are of the opinion
that further action should be taken by the General
Assembly with a view to the establishing of an international criminal court;
3. Decides to appoint a Committee composed of
one representative each of seventeen Member States,
which States shall be designated by the President of
the General Assembly in consultation with the Chairman of the Sixth Committee; and directs that this
Committee shall meet at the Headquarters of the United
Nations in 1953, the exact 4te to be determined by the
Secretary-General, with the following terms of reference:
'
(a) In the light of the comments • and suggestions
on the draft statute submitted by governments, as well
as of those made during the debates in the Sixth
Committee,
( i)
To expMre tht: implications and consequences
of establishing an international criminal
court a,:iq_of the various methods by which
this m1ght be done ;
(ii) To study the relationship between such a
court and the United Nations and its organs;
(iii) To re-examine the draft statute;
( b) To submit a report to be considered by the
General Assembly at its ninth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the necessary services and facilities for the meetings
of the Committee.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
In accordance d-ith the terms of resolution 681 (VII) above,
the President of the General Assembly announced, at the 401th
plenary ',Meting o,s 19 December 1952, that, in consultation
-with the Chairman of the SixJh Committee, he had designated
the following Member States as members of the Committe,:
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, BF.LGIUM, CHINA, DENMARK, EGYPT,
FRANCE, ISRAEL, THE NETHERLANDS, PAKIST.\N, PANAMA, PERU,
THE PHILIPPINES,. THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA AND YUGOSLAVIA.

The various forms of aggression,
The connexion between a definition of aggrC'Ssion and the maintenance of international peace and
security,
(a)

( b)

( c) The problems raised by the inclusion of a definition of aggression in the Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind and by its application within the framework of international criminal
jurisdiction,
( d) The effect of a definition of aggression on the
exercise of the jurisdiction of the various organs of
the United Nations,
( e) Any other problem which might be raised by a
definition of aggression,
Considering that continued and joint efforts shall be
made to formulate a generally acceptable definition of
aggression, with a view to promoting international
peace and security and to developing international law,
1. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
fifteen members, each representing one of the following Member States: Bolivia, Brazil, China, Dominican
Republic, France, Iran, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, to meet at the
Headquarters of the United Nations in 1953;
2. Requests the said Special Committee:
(a) To submit to the General Assembly at its ninth
session draft definitions of aggression or draft statements of the notion of aggression;
( b) To study all the problems referred to above on
the assumption of a definition being adopted by a resolution of'] the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
the Special Committee's report to Member States for
their comments and to place the question on the provisional agenda of the ninth session of the General
Assembly.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

689 (VII). Measure11 to limit the duration of
regular sessions of the General Assembly
A

688 (VII). Question of defining aggres11ion
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 599 (VI) of 31 January 1952,
Considering that the discussion of the question of
d~fining aggression at the sixth and seventh sessions
of the General Assembly and in the International Law
Commission 7 has revealed the complexity of this question and the need for a detailed study of :
See document A/2186 and Add. I.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Supplemeut No. 9, para. 35 et seq.
6

63

The General Assembly,
Having considered the memorandum 8 submitted by
the Secretary-General on measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of adopting appropriate
measures to this end, consistent with the fulfilment of
the Assembly's functions,
Noting the observations and suggestions presented
by the Secretary-General with respect to the rulei1
of procedure,

7

s See document A/12.fXJ.

64

General Assembly-Seventh Session

1. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
fifteen members, each representing one of the following Member States: Afghanistan, Australia, Chile,
China, Czechoslovakia, El Salvador, France, Iran,
N·etherlands, Norway, Philippines, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Uruguay;
2. Requests this Special Committee to cons1aer the
Secretary-General's mrmorandum and any other relevant information communicated to it by Member States
and to submit its recommendations to the General
Assembly at its eighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
Special Committee's report to Member States for comment and to include the item in the provisional agenda
of the eighth session of the General Assembly.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
B
The General Assembly,
Having examined the memorandum O submitted by
the SecretaryrGeneral on measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General Assembly,
Recognizing the need for adopting measures calculated to accomplish this purpose, without restricting
the rights of States Members, including the right to
speak fully and freely in the debates of the plenary
meetings and in the various Committees,
Amends rule 2 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly to read as follows :
"On the recommendation of the General Committee, the General Assembly shall, at the beginning
of each session, fix a closing date for the session".
410th plenMy meeting,
21 December 1952.
690 (VII). Status of claims for injuries incurred
in the service of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 10 of the Secretary9

/bit!.

General on the status of claims for injuries incurred in
the service of the United Nations,
Noting that the Secretary-General, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 365 (IV) of 1 December
1949 has presented international claims for reparation
to governments in connexion with the death of agents
of the United Nations,
Recommends that such claims be settled by the procedures envisaged in resolution 365 (IV).
41fltJ plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

691 (VII) . Correction of the Chineae text of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Government of China has made
a request for correction of the authentic Chinese text
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, with a view to bringing the
Chinese text into greater harmony with the other authentic texts of the Convention, and had for this purpose submitted a corrected text, 11
Considering the memorandum 12 submitted to the
General Assembly by the Secretary-General,
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit a certified copy of the corrected Chinese text of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, as well as a copy of the present
resolution, to all Members of the United Nations and
to the non-member States contemplated in article XI
of the Convention, and to request States signatories
of or parties to the Convention to notify him of their
acceptance or objection.
411th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
See document A/2180.
See document A/2221, annex III.
12 See document A/2221.
10
11
