United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/55/120
Distr.: General
14 December 2000

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 47

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1)]

55/120. Assistance in mine action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/7 of 19 October 1993, 49/215 of 23 December
1994, 50/82 of 14 December 1995, 51/149 of 13 December 1996 and 52/173 of
18 December 1997, on assistance in mine clearance, and its resolutions 53/26 of
17 November 1998 and 54/191 of 17 December 1999, on assistance in mine action,
all adopted without a vote,
Considering mine action to be an important component of United Nations
humanitarian and development activities,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian and development
problems caused by the presence of mines and other unexploded devices that
constitute an obstacle to the return of refugees and other displaced persons, to
humanitarian aid operations and to reconstruction and economic development, as
well as to the restoration of normal social conditions, and that have serious and
lasting social and economic consequences for the populations of mine-affected
countries,
Bearing in mind the serious threat that mines and other unexploded devices
pose to the safety, health and lives of local civilian populations, as well as of
personnel participating in humanitarian, peacekeeping and rehabilitation
programmes and operations,
Reiterating its dismay at the high number of victims of mines, especially
among civilian populations, including women and children, and recalling in this
context Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1995/79 of 8 March 1995, 1
1996/85 of 24 April 1996, 2 1997/78 of 18 April 1997, 3 1998/76 of 22 April 1998, 4
1999/80 of 28 April 1999 5 and 2000/85 of 27 April 2000, 6 on the rights of the child,
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
2
Ibid., 1996, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/1996/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II.
4
Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 (E/2000/23), chap. II, sect. A.

00 56659

A/RES/55/120

and resolutions 1996/27 of 19 April 1996,2 1998/31 of 17 April 1998,4 2000/51 of
25 April 2000 6 and decision 1997/107 of 11 April 1997,3 on the human rights of
persons with disabilities,
Deeply alarmed by the number of mines that continue to be laid each year, as
well as the presence of a large number of mines and other unexploded devices as a
result of armed conflicts, and thus convinced of the necessity and urgency of a
significant increase in mine-clearance efforts by the international community with a
view to eliminating the threat of landmines to civilians as soon as possible,
Noting the decisions taken at the First Annual Conference of the States Parties
to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, held at Geneva from 15 to 17 December
1999, 7 particularly with respect to Protocol II to the Convention, and the inclusion in
Amended Protocol II 8 of a number of provisions of importance for mine-clearance
operations, notably the requirement of detectability,
Noting also the entry into force of Amended Protocol II to the Convention on
3 December 1998,
Recalling that the States parties at the Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Convention declared their commitment to keep the provisions of the Protocol
under review in order to ensure that the concerns regarding the weapons it covers
are addressed, and that they would encourage the efforts of the United Nations and
other organizations to address all problems related to landmines,
Noting that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction 9 entered
into force on 1 March 1999 and that the Convention has been signed or acceded to
by one hundred and thirty-nine States and ratified by one hundred and nine States,
noting also the conclusions of the Second Meeting of the States Parties to the
Convention, held at Geneva from 11 to 15 September 2000, 10 taking note of the
reaffirmed commitments that were made, among other things, to provide assistance
for mine clearance and rehabilitation, the social and economic reintegration of mine
victims and mine-awareness programmes, and taking note also of the work of the
inter-sessional programme established by States parties to the Convention,
Stressing the need to convince mine-affected States to halt new deployments of
anti-personnel mines in order to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of mineclearance operations,
Recognizing the important role that the international community, in particular
States involved in the deployment of mines, can play in assisting mine clearance in
mine-affected countries by providing necessary maps and information and
appropriate technical and material assistance to remove or otherwise render
ineffective existing minefields, mines and booby traps,
Concerned about the limited availability of safe and cost-effective minedetection and mine-clearance equipment, as well as the need for effective global
coordination in research and development to improve the relevant technology, and
7

See CCW/AP.II/CONF.I/2.
CCW/CONF.I/16 (Part I), annex B.
9
See CD/1478.
10
See APLC/MSP.2/2000/1.
8

2

A/RES/55/120

conscious of the need to promote further and more rapid progress in this field and to
foster international technical cooperation to this end,
Concerned also about the limited availability of the technical, material and
financial resources needed to meet the cost associated with mine-clearance activities
in mine-affected countries,
Recognizing that, in addition to the primary role of States, the United Nations
has an important role to play in the field of assistance in mine action,
Reaffirming the need to reinforce international cooperation in the area of mine
action and to devote the necessary resources to that end,
Concerned about the critical financial situation of the Mine Action Service of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the mine-action coordination centres already established under the
auspices of the United Nations, as well as the creation of international trust funds
for mine clearance and mine assistance,
Noting with satisfaction the inclusion in the mandates of several peacekeeping
operations of provisions relating to mine-action work carried out under the direction
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in the context of such operations,
Commending the action already taken by the United Nations system, donor and
recipient Governments, the International Committee of the Red Cross and nongovernmental organizations to coordinate their efforts and seek solutions to the
problems related to the presence of mines and other unexploded devices, as well as
their assistance to victims of mines,
Commending also the role of the Secretary-General in increasing public
awareness of the problem of landmines,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations in assistance in mine action; 11
2.
Calls, in particular, for the continuation of the efforts of the United
Nations, with the assistance of States and institutions as appropriate, to foster the
establishment of mine-action capacities in countries where mines constitute a
serious threat to the safety, health and lives of the local population or an impediment
to social and economic development efforts at the national and local levels,
emphasizes the importance of developing national mine-action capacities, and urges
all Member States, in particular those that have the capacity to do so, to assist mineaffected countries in the establishment and development of national capacities in
mine clearance, mine awareness and victim assistance;
3.
Invites Member States to develop national programmes, in cooperation
with the relevant bodies of the United Nations system where appropriate, to promote
awareness of landmines, especially among women and children;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to Governments, regional organizations and
other donors for their financial and in-kind contributions to mine action, including
contributions for emergency operations and for national capacity-building
programmes;

11

A/55/542.

3

A/RES/55/120

5.
Appeals to Governments, regional organizations and other donors to
continue their support to mine action through further contributions, including
contributions through the Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action, to
allow for the timely delivery of mine-action assistance in emergency situations;
6.
Encourages all relevant multilateral and national programmes and bodies
to include, in coordination with the United Nations, activities related to mine action
in their humanitarian, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development assistance
activities, where appropriate, bearing in mind the need to ensure national ownership,
sustainability and capacity-building;
7.
Stresses the importance of international support for emergency assistance
to victims of mines and for the care and rehabilitation, and social and economic
reintegration, of the victims, and also stresses that such assistance should be
integrated into broader public health and socio-economic strategies;
8.
Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies and other
donors to take further action to promote gender- and age-appropriate mineawareness programmes, victim assistance and child-centred rehabilitation, thereby
reducing the number of child victims and relieving their plight;
9.
Emphasizes again the important role of the United Nations in the
effective coordination of mine-action activities, including those by regional
organizations, and especially the role of the Mine Action Service of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat on the basis of the policy on mine
action and effective coordination developed by the Secretary-General, 12 and stresses
the need for the continuous assessment by the General Assembly of the United
Nations in this regard;
10. Emphasizes in this regard the role of the Mine Action Service as the focal
point for mine action within the United Nations system and its ongoing
collaboration with and coordination of all the mine-related activities of the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General to develop further a comprehensive
mine-action strategy, taking into consideration the impact of the landmine problem
on rehabilitation, reconstruction and development, with a view to ensuring the
effectiveness of assistance in mine action by the United Nations, emphasizes in this
respect the importance of further multisectoral assessments and surveys, notes in
this regard the ongoing development by the United Nations of standards and
certification guidelines for such surveys, and emphasizes the need for an inclusive
process to be followed in the development of such standards and guidelines;
12. Emphasizes in this respect the importance of developing a comprehensive
information management system for mine action, under the overall coordination of
the Mine Action Service and with the support of the Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining, in order to facilitate the setting of priorities and the
coordination of field activities;
13. Welcomes recent approaches with regard to the establishment of mineaction coordination centres, encourages the further establishment of such centres,
especially in emergency situations, and also encourages States to support the

12

4

See A/53/496, annex II, and A/55/542.

A/RES/55/120

activities of mine-action coordination centres and trust funds established to
coordinate assistance in mine action under the auspices of the Mine Action Service;
14. Encourages, whenever appropriate, the use of the United Nations Office
for Project Services by the United Nations, including in peacekeeping operations, in
order to ensure the unity and continuity of implementation required for integrated
mine-action programmes;
15. Urges Member States and regional, governmental and non-governmental
organizations and foundations to continue to extend full assistance and cooperation
to the Secretary-General and, in particular, to provide him with information and
data, as well as other appropriate resources that could be useful in strengthening the
coordination role of the United Nations in mine action, in particular in the fields of
mine awareness, training, surveying, detection and clearance, scientific research on
mine-detection and mine-clearance technology and information on and distribution
of medical equipment and supplies;
16. Emphasizes in this regard the importance of recording the location of
mines, of retaining all such records and making them available to concerned parties
upon cessation of hostilities, and welcomes the strengthening of the relevant
provisions in international law;
17. Calls upon Member States, especially those that have the capacity to do
so, to provide the necessary information and technical, financial and material
assistance, as appropriate, and to locate, remove, destroy or otherwise render
ineffective minefields, mines, booby traps and other devices in accordance with
international law, as soon as possible;
18. Urges Member States and regional, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and foundations that have the ability to do so to provide,
as appropriate, technological assistance to mine-affected countries and to promote
scientific research and development on humanitarian mine-action techniques and
technology so that mine-action activities may be carried out more effectively at
lower costs and through safer means and to promote international collaboration in
this regard;
19. Encourages Member States and regional, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and foundations to continue to support ongoing
activities to promote appropriate technology, as well as international operational and
safety standards for humanitarian mine-action activities, and in this context
welcomes the initiation of the revision of international mine-clearance standards and
the development of guidelines for the use of mine-detection dogs and mechanical
mine-clearance equipment, as well as the development of an international test and
evaluation programme;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session a comprehensive report on the United Nations mine-action policy,
including the progress achieved on relevant issues outlined both in his previous
reports to the Assembly on assistance in mine clearance and mine action and in the
present resolution, as well as the progress made by the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other international and regional organizations as well as national
programmes, and on the operation of the Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Action and other mine-action programmes;

5

A/RES/55/120

21. Invites the Secretary-General to study how to secure a more sound
financial basis for the Mine Action Service and to present options to this effect to
the General Assembly;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Assistance in mine action”.
82nd plenary meeting
6 December 2000

6
