&,)(.,,&;'c'.',,';.
7"1.(,,
I '7.:

'UNITEDNAT/ONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

MEETING:

4

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l967) . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , , , , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . , , . . , . , . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12218) . . . . . . , . . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . I.. . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . , . . . . . , . , .

1

S/PV. 1967

1967th MEETING
Held ‘in New York on Thursday,
Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

President:

4 November

Council’s practice, the relevant provisions of the
Charter and the provisional rules of procedure, if
I hear no objection I propose to invite those representatives to participate in the debate without the
right to vote.

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

3. I invite the representatives of *Bangladesh and
Mauritania to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take.a place at the
Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l967)

1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12218)
The meeting

WNS called

to order

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

4. The PRESIDENT
(irrtr/p/‘Ptllti(~/l
,fi*o/lr Sptrnish):
The Council will now continue its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

crt 4.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): In opening, may I express
to you, Mr. President, my congratulations on yom
election to the important post to which you have
been elevated. I have no doubt that you will acquit
yourself well in it not only as the representative of
your country but also because of your important
personal attributes which make you so very qualified
to hold this post. On this occasion, may I also pay
tribute to your country, with which Israel has enjoyed
such cordial relations over the years.

The Situation in the occupied Arab territories:

Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
jS/l2218)

1. The PRESIDENT
(intPlprctcrtion
,fkor~~ Spanish):
In accordance with the decision adopted at the 1966th
meeting, I invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), to participate in the debate without the right
to vote.

6. This is the second time in six months that Egypt
has seen fit to call the Security Council into session
in order to discuss the situation in the administered
territories. I put it to the Council that in fact Egypt
could not care less about religious freedoms or the
well-being
of the population
of the territories
administered by Israel. As each and every representative here knows, this meeting, like many other meetings
of the Council, has not been prompted by any particular Egyptian interest in the subject under review.
It is merely a function of the internecine inter-Arab
struggle for position which characterizes the daily
Middle East scene with which we in the region are
only too familiar and with which by now, I believe,
representatives here are both familiar
and probably
.
somewhat bored.

2. The PRESIDENT
(irltP;.p’P,.etotic?ll .fkm SpruliLsh):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Bangladesh and
Mauritania in which they ask that, under rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, they be invited
to participate in the debate. In accordance with the
1

7. It is, 1 submit, an insult to each and every one of
us and to the Council that every time Egypt has
I

problems in the Middle East with its Arab colleagues
the Council is called upon to provide a machinery for
their inter-Arab political purposes. Every time that
President Sadat feels it necessary to assert himself in
the Arab world or to demonstrate what you, Mr. President, would perhaps characterize as his /nnc/zis\no
to the other Arab States, you, Mr. President, and the
other representatives are the convenient vehicle
chosen by him.

refugees created-to
quote my Lebanese colleague.
And what did the Council do all the time that this was
happening? They know as well as I do: nothing.

8. Gone are the lofty principles on which the Organization was established. Gone are the purposes for
which the Security Council was created. One might as
well admit it whether or not he likes it: this body
has been turned into nothing more than a vehicle for
a game of one-upmanship by one Arab State over
another in pursuance of their puerile and immature
political approach. It is a disgrace, it is an insult to all
those here, it is unbelievable that this body allows
itself, without protest, to be used in this manner.

13. Is this the explosive situation in the Middle East
or is the situation in Lebanon the explosive situation
in the Middle East, the resolutions adopted at Riyadh
on 18 October notwithstanding?
Even after those
resolutions the death toll in Lebanon continues at a
rate of almost 50 a day.

12. This sombre and disgraceful behaviour will
remain for ever a reproach against the Council and the
Organization. Instead members have allowed themselves to be used in barren deliberations to satisfy.
the whims of this or that ruler in the Arab world.

14. Is the situation in Israel the explosive situation
or are the results of the terrible slaughter in Lebanon
the explosive situation? If members want to find
explosive situations in the Middle East and in the
Arab world, they should just take a look at that world,
at Arab armies poised against Arab armies on the
Iraqi-Syrian border, on the Libyan-Egyptian
border,
on the Moroccan-Algerian
border; at the internecine
Arab slaughter going on to such a degree that it has
become commonplace and is not even reported.

9. We were called into session on the basis of, a
letter dated 20 October 1976 addressed to the President
of the Council by my Egyptian colleague, Mr. Abdel
Meguid. The letter asked this body to discuss “the
dangerous and explosive situation” in the territories.
He referred in his letter to the events in Hebron-a
subject which was taken up by the other Arab speakers.
I shall revert to this matter later on in my remarks.
But let me make one point quite clear, in the light of
the “dangerous and explosive situation” for which
we have been called here. Not one person was killed
in those events, and the distinguished representative
of Jordan lied to this body when he said that an
Israeli civilian with a machine-gun in a moving car
killed in cold blood seven innocent Palestinian Arab
bystanders in nearby Halhoul. Nobody was killed,
because, had anybody been killed, representatives
surely do not suspect that their Egyptian colleague
would have omitted such a pi& L/P wzistnnw
from
his note or his remarks. One person was injured as a
result of that incident, which is a matter of a police
investigation at the moment. But to say that seven
people were killed is untrue and it serves to underline the kind of credulity with which, I regret to say,
we have to regard the statements of our new Jordanian
colleague.

15. My Egyptian colleague was driven to call for a
meeting of the Council to discuss the explosive situation and to draw attention to the acts of desecration
of the Holy Places in Hebron. I shall refer later to
Hebron. But the events that he and his Arab colleagues
here refer to took place over a month ago. Since then
the damage has been repaired and today Jews .and
Moslems pray peacefully side by side in the Tomb of
the Patriarchs. Not one life was lost.
16. Why were my Egyptian colleague and indeed the
Council not moved for over one and a half years by
the shameful desecration of Holy Places which took
place in Lebanon? Either the places are holy or they
are not holy. Either their holiness has to be respected
or it has not. Are you, my Egyptian colleague, being
selective in this matter tooTin the matter of Holy
Places?
17. Am I to understand that if a mosque is allegedly
desecrated in Hebron the Security Council is convened, but if hundreds of churches and mosques are
burned and razed to the ground and desecrated in
Lebanon the Council remains silent?

10, Can anyone imagine our Arab colleagues and the
media ignoring such an event if perpetrated by
Israel? No, there was no bloodshed in Israel or in the
territories administered by Israel, because the Government of Israel has been and is determined not to
allow a second Lebanon to develop in the areas under
Israeli control-and
it will not develop,

18. Why was not the Council convened when the
Maronite Patriarch in Lebanon pleaded with the world
about the desecration of churches and the defiling of
Holy Places, the shelling of and firing at monasteries,
hospitals and ambulances,
attacks on religious
leaders including the Mutran Yussuf Khoury, the
Archbishop of Tyre, and Bishop Yochana, not to
mention countless monks and nuns? Why was the
looting and burning and defiling of holy places in

Il.
Was that indeed the explosive situation in the
Middle East which warranted convening the Council?
Let us recall the fact that that meeting was requested
at a time when the most horrible bloodshed was taking
place in Lebanon, where almost 50,000 people had
been killed, 100,000 wounded and over 1 million
2

hl

Hebron, no bloodshed developed and that today
*Jews and Moslems are again worshipping peacefully
side by side in the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron.

Tripoli, about which the Maronite Patriarch issued
an appeal, ignored’? When the world press reported the
slaughter of three old monks in the Monastery .of
Deir Ashasha, with anti-Christian slogans painted on
the doors of the monastery, an event the publication
of which was forbidden by the then Prime Minister
Karame, where were all the member of the Council?

23. The question that faces us here today is not any
matter of substance raised by the Egyptian ‘representative. The question is not the fact that my
sympathies go out to the members of the Council who
have to listen to the interminable tirades of the Arab
representatives which reflect more than anything else
the problems facing Israel in the Middle East and
which illustrate in a most revealing manner the
difficulties
that face us in trying to achieve an
accommodation
in the area. The issue, in my view, is
for how long is the Council going to allow itself to be
turned into an instrument to solve the internal
problems of any given Arab regime at any given time.
If it has to be, because nobody can bring this mockery
to an end, then why not institute a procedure whereby
that standard Arab speech which we all know here by
heart is issued in record form to all representatives so
that we are relieved of the obligation to sit and
waste our time listening to it here.

19. Why was nobody moved to call a meeting of the
Security Council when the Christian town Damur was
ransacked and 6,000 refugees fled; when, according to
The Wmhington Po.vt, boats carrying refugee women
and children from Damur to Junieh were fired at and
sunk; w,hen according LP Mo~~rle more than 200 bodies
were mutilated and burned?
20. As Mr. Abdel Meguid’s letter was being distributed here at the United Nations in righteous
indignation on 20 October, less than two weeks ago,
on that very day a terrifying massacre was carried
out in the village of ‘Achiyeh by the PLO. First word
of the horrible massacre at Achiyeh appeared in the
international press on 21 October. The Wcr.rhingtcm
Post carried the following dispatch: “The Maronite
Catholic Bishop of Tyre charged that Lebanese leftists
and Palestinians broke into Achiyeh today [20 October] and about 300 Christians were massacred.” A
Lebanese reporter
for the Associated
Press,
Mohammed Salam, is reported by The New York
Timm on 21 October to have said that virtually all
the houses of the village had been destroyed. The
full dimensions of this outrage became known only
when several wounded refugees crossed the Israel: Lebanon border and recounted the full story. One of
,the refugees told the following story:

24. The Council dares not allow itself to become a
tool of Arab expediency and it must resist this
dangerous process of becoming an accomplice in this
shameful and fruitless exercise.
25. Since the subject has been raised by the three
Arab representatives
who addressed the Council
before me, namely, those of Egypt, Jordan and Syria,
I am left with no option but to deal with the events.
My delegation
distributed this week [S//2223] a
complete history of the Tomb of the Patriarchs in
the city of Hebron, known to the Jewish people as
the Cave of Machpela and to the Moslem people as
the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque or Abraham’s Mosque.

“They massacred us mercilessly and with amazing
cruelty as if we were sheep. They crushed the
skulls of children and raped girls and women...
Even the village priest was butchered in cold blood
after having been bound to the altar of the local
church.”

26. I shall not go into any great detail, referring
representatives instead to the documents issued by
my delegation to which I previously referred. I would
direct the attention of members to the map of the
Cave of Machpela which we attached to the letter and
additional copies of which we are now making available here.

Another eyewitness reported how, when the attackers
reached the village they were met by women and
children pleading for their lives. The attackers
answered by slaughtering them using knives, bayonets
and axes’ in an unbelievable show of cruelty. Even
those who surrendered were not spared.

27. The Cave of Machpela is a Jewish Holy Place,
housing as it does the tombs of the Jewish Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their respective wives,
Sahara, Rebecca and Leah-a
fact conveniently
ignored by my Arab colleagues. For the benefit of
representatives who may not be particularly familiar
with the Bible, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were
Jewish, and were the early Jewish Patriarchs. The
story of the acquisition of the land and the tomb of
Abraham is toid in Chapter 23 of the Book of
Genesis.

21. That happened less than two weeks ago in a
church in Lebanon. The survivors who managed to
escape are in Israeli hospitals. Where was the world
conscience then? Were was the Security Council?
22. Was taht not a case of religious desecration? That
was hardly a matter apparently to exercise the
conscience of the Egyptian representative and his
colleagues here. Instead we have to be regaled with
stories about a situation which, in contradistinction
to events in Lebanon, was handled by Israeli
authorities in such a way that after the incidents in

28. I have here a copy of the Bible, in which the
principles of human brotherhood which inspired the
creation of this Organization were first enunciated and
3

_I,,r,‘
1 ,

1 ‘-

given to the world by the Jewish people. This is the
Bible in which the immortal words of Isaiah which
grace the wall facing this building were first recorded.
This is the Bible which includes the Five Books of
Moses enunciating the greatest principles of humanity,
of social justice, of moral law and of brotherly love.
It was the Holy Scrolls of the Law, or the Torah,
in which these Five Books of Moses are recorded
and which are sacred to the Jewish people, that were
torn, defiled and desecrated by a mob of Arab youths
in the Tomb of the Patriarchs on 3 October last-an
act of desecration that was condemned by the Moslem
religious leaders in Hebron, Jerusalem and everywhere
else.
29. In chapter 23 of the Book of Genesis we read
that, when Sarah died in Kiryat Arba, or Hebron,
Abraham negotiated for a burial place and purchased
a piece of land paying 400 shekels of silver. And so,
as the Bible recounts, “the field, and the cave that is
therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of burying-place by the Children of Heth”.
30. This contract was entered into by thk Father of
the Jewish people during the period of the Sumerian
culture in Babylon, during the era of the Pharaohs
in the Middle Kingdom of Thebes in Egypt. Indeed,
it might interest my Chinese colleagues to know that
it was a contract entered into a couple of hundred
years before the advent of the Shang Dynasty. This
was a contract entered into during what my Chinese
colleagues must consider to have been a happier period
than today when the two super-Powers which exercise
them so much did not exist in the world. What a
boring world it must have been without those two
super-Powers. While my forebears were signing
contracts in Hebron and the ancestors of my Chinese
colleagues were producing the most beautiful works
of art and of the skills of writing, out of which came
the present Chinese system, the inhabitants of what
are today the territories of the super-Powers were
engaged in a daily primitive struggle for life, with
no greater ambition than that their hunt for a bear or
a bison would bring them the sustenance they required.
31. While we can but look back, with or without
nostalgia, to such a period, the fact remains that for
well-nigh 4,000 years that Tomb in Hebron housing
the remains of the Jewish Patriarchs and their wives
has remained a Jewish Holy Place, and Jews have
prayed there for most of the period.
32. How ironical it is that Israel should be condemned on this issue. For a long time, when the tombs
were under exclusive Moslem jurisdiction,
Jews were
not allowed access to them. During the period of the
British Mandate Jews were allowed to walk up only
seven steps leading to the tombs; they were not
allowed inside to pray by the Arab custodians. I can
recall as a child being threatened by a sword when
I tried to put my foot on the eighth step. In August
1929, most of the Jewish population of Hebron was

brutally massacred by an Arab mob. My greatgrandmother, an old lady of 80, was one of those
who were cut down by an Arab dagger on that
occasion.
33. Once again?he Jordanian representative has the
brazen effrontery to raise the issue of the Holy Places.
The Jordanian Government’s
record in respect of
Holy Places under its control surely denies it any moral
standing in such issues.
34. For 19 years, from 1948 to 1967, Jews were
denied access for prayer to the holiest of Jewish
shiines, the Wailing Wall, by the Jordanian occupation authorities in Jerusalem, in contravention of
their international obligations. Their troops set fire to
and destroyed Jewish synagogues and centres of
worship in Jerusalem. The ancient Jewish cemetery
on the Mount of Olives, hallowed by thousands of
years of history and dating back to Biblical times,
was desecrated by the Jordanian authorities, who
defiled the graves and tombs, uprooted the tombstones
for use in constructing army camps and bulldozed
roads across the historic Mount sanctified in Jewish
and Christian traditions. As I mentioned before,
Jewish access to the Cave of Machpela, or the Tomb
of the Patriarchs, in Hebron was forbidden by the
Jordanian authorities from 1948 to 1967 during their
occupation of that area.
35. Since the administration of Hebron devolved on
Israel after the 1967 war, brought on by the unprovoked
Arab attack on Israel at that time, Israel has given
complete freedom of access to all religions concerned
to the holy sites in the Holy Land. I refer the Council
in this respect to the official statements in this regard
issued by the representatives of the various Christian
sects and by the heads of the Moslem religion.
36. The overriding principles guiding Israel’s policy
regarding all the Holy Places have been and are to
guarantee free access to members of all faiths and to
ensure orderly conditions of worship to members of
every religion. This principle also applies to the Cave
of Machpela, and the sanctity of this Holy Shrine
is strictly observed.
37. Israel is proud of its record in respect of the
Holy Places of all faiths. Israel’s policy will continue
to adhere strictly to the fundamental principle of free
access for prayer and worship by all believers of all
faiths to all Holy Places.
38. This allegation about a shrine which is visited
daily by hundreds and sometimes thousands of people
from all over the world is patently untrue; it is SO
obviously a repetition of the “big lie” and yet is SO
sinister in its horrible implications, designed as it is to
incite millions of people who are ignorant of the facts.
It is but another example of the level to which we
have been dragged down in this Organization bY
those who are rapidly taking control of it and turning

it into a centre of uncontrollable
cilable division.

hate and irrecon-

incitement.
Obviously his appeal did not reach this
far. These appeals came against the background of
repeated efforts by Arab Governments to inflame
Moslem
religious feeling. Radio _ Damascus, for
example, warned of Moslem wrath, threatening, in a
broadcast on 3 October, to repeat the massacres of
1929 and 1948 in Hebron and the vicinity.

39. The recent events’in the Cave of Machpela, or
the Tomb of the Patriarchs, have been completely
distorted and misrepresented by the Arab representatives here, and I therefore wish to set the record
straight. As usual, it falls to my lot to set out the
events as they occurred following the hysterical
diatribe to which we are regularly subjected by our
Arab colleagues.

46. Faced with such gross incitement, the Israel
Defence Forces adopted measures to maintain law and
order in Hebron. Israel’s Defence Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, announced in the Knesset on 6 October:

40. The facts are as follows. On the evening of
I October, Jewish worshippers arriving at their place
of prayer in the Cave found that one of the ceremonial
mantles in the chamber had been torn and cut and that
another was missing. Early the following morning it
was alleged by the Moslem employees in the Tomb
that several Jewish youths, allegedly four in number,
slipped into the prayer room used by the Moslems
and overturned a bookstand containing copies of the
Koran, scattering them on the floor.

“The Government will ensure that its policy,
whether in relation to the coexistence of the two
settlements, or to Jewish and Moslem worship under
a single roof, shall be honoured and carried out,
preferably
through the goodwill of the people
involved but, if not, by virtue of the law and those
entrusted with its preservation.”
47. On 10 October the Government of Israel adopted
the following resolutions, at a special Cabinet session,
concerning the Cave of Machpela:

41. The Israeli Military Commander of the area met
the local Arab religious and political leaders, expressed
his regret for what had happened and promised that the
police would institute an immediate investigation. At
his request the Moslem leaders undertook to use their
influence to calm the populace so as to prevent any
further outbreaks of violence. The two Chief Rabbis
of Israel issued a similar appeal to the Jewish public.

“The Government once again calls upon the
Jewish and Arab citizens of Kiryat Arba and
Hebron and their spiritual leaders to ensure the
preservation of law and order, to take measures to
permit the return of calm and to denounce any act
of damage to the ritual objects of all faiths. The
Government
calls upon all public figures and
religious leaders to foster relations of tolerance and
mutual respect among all the inhabitants of the
area.

42. On Sunday, 3 October-the
eve of Yom Kippur,
the holiest day in the Jewish calendar-several hundred
Al’ab youths, led by a few adults, broke into the Cave
of Machpela during the Moslem prayer hours and the
mob began to tear up Torah scrolls and prayer-books,
and vandalized the Holy Ark and other sacred objects.

“An all-out effort will be made to identify those
responsible for defiling both Jewish and Moslem
holy books and to bring them impartially and
speedily to trial.”

43. A nearby Israeli unit entered the building and
evicted the rioters from the premises. In the course of
this action some 61 rioters were arrested. Nine of
these, being under 14 years of age, were released on
their parents’ bond. Seven adults were arrested later
on suspicion of incitement to riot. A police investigation team was promptly appointed to identify those
responsible for the violations of law and order, both
Arabs and Jews, and to bring them to justice speedily
and impartially. In the meantime, legal proceedings
have been instituted against those suspected of
breaking the law in Hebron, both Arabs and Jews,
including, incidentally, Rabbi Levinger, concerning
whom my Arab colleagues seem to have a peculiar
obsession.

Since then the curfew in Hebron has been lifted and,
the damage in the Cave having been repaired, the Cave
has been reopened for worship by Moslems and by
Jews.
48. There have been too many tragic events caused
by religious fanaticism both in the past and in the
present. Those who try to fan religious fires and
animosity should beware of what they are doing. The
danger is too great, the risks too high to make this a
subject for irresponsible political manoeuvres.
49. One should ponder and appreciate how the use
of religious hatred and incitement by Arab Governments has claimed the lives of some 50,000 men,
women and children in Lebanon.

44. Israel’s two Chief Rabbis called for restraint
and moderation. The Mayor of Hebron and Moslem
religious leaders expressed their shock at the incidents,
and apologized publicly for the desecration of the
Torah scrolls.

SO. Perhaps nothing can bettCr illustrate the unbelievable distance between what goes on in the territories administered
by Israel and the portrayal
regularly presented to the Security Council by the

45. The former Mayor of Hebron, Sheikh Ali AlJa’abari, appealed to Arab Government to desist from
5

to be made to calm down passions and curb provocateurs in Hebron.”

Arab representatives at this table and in the halls of
the Organization. Compare the unbridled incitement
to religious and racial strife which we regularly hear in
this chamber to the following statements made by
Moslem leaders in Israel in respect of the incident
about which the Egyptian and Jordanian representatives have complained.

Here you had the voice of reason of the Moslem
leadership which lives with us and which knows the
truth. Compare these statements with the spurious,
specious and time-consuming discussion which we are
forced to engage in at this Council table for reasons
not connected to the situation in Hebron at all.

51. Thus, in the Jerusalem Arabic daily Al-Quh
dated I5 October, the Qadi of Hebron, Sheikh Rajab
Bayudh Al-Tamini, reported that he had visited the
Tomb of the Partiarchs together with other Moslem
dignitaries and that they were all satisfied that no
changes had taken place within the mosque. No
damage had been caused and the renovations had
not incorporated any partitioning
or alterations.
Accompanying the Sheikh were the head of the
Moslem Council of Jerusalem, Sheikh Hilmi AlMuhtasib; the Qadi of Jerusalem, Sheikh Saad Aldin
Al-Alami; the Administrator of the Hebron lVnclf
Midhat Tahbub; and the Mayor of Hebron, Fahd
Qawasma.

55. Let me sound a word of warning. The history of
religious incitement is long and dates back in our
country to the beginning of the century. For over
55 years, violence, terrorism and endless indoctrination
of hate have been cardinal principles of Arab policy
by some of the Arab leaders against Jews and Israel,
The price paid has been a very high one in both lives
and property.
56. Let us not allow Arab extremists another
opportunity to exploit the Security Council for the
purpose of fomenting hatred between Arab and Jew.
Let there be no illusions: Israel will not permit another
Lebanon to develop in the territories administered by
the Government of Israel.

52. Earlier, following the outrage committed against
Jewish Torah scrolls in the tomb building, Sheikh AlMuhtasib issued a statement, quoted in A/-Q//t/s on
3 October, denouncing the act. It read:

57. As President Franjieh of Lebanon said in his
farewell speech as President: “Assad has woken up;
Kuwait has awakened; and Jordan awoke before them.
We woke up too late, and others are still asleep”.
We are not asleep and do not intend to fall asleep.

“I have read the news about the desecration of
the Torah yesterday. I cannot accept the desecration
of anything holy, certainly not the Holy Scriptures.
I share the views of the Mayor of Hebron, who
has expressed his regrets. It does not befit Moslems
or Arabs to destroy holy books, whatever the reason.
I had the same feelings about the Torah desecration
as 1 had when the Koran was harmed.”

58. How can the representative of Egypt dare even
to utter the word “Gaza”? Does he really believe that
everyone has forgotten the 19 years of Egyptian rule
over Gaza? Does he believe the inhabitants of Gaza
have forgotten the 19 years they were kept as
prisoners within that narrow strip of land? Does he
believe the Gazans have forgotten that the first decree
announced by the Egyptian Military Governor of
Gaza was the imposition of a 9 p.m.-to-dawn curfew’?
That curfew lasted for 19 years and violators were
put to death. Highways were closed to all but military
traffic after dusk. Does he believe that the world
has forgotten how fellow Arabs described Egyptian
oppression in Gaza? The Syrians complained that
“Egypt was exercising tyranny in the Strip”. The
Saudi Arabians attacked Egypt in the following words:
“Let us now examine the Cairo rulers’ attitude IO
the Palestinians., . These are the very methods which
the dictator Hitler used in the countries he occupied
during the world war”.

53. In an interview on Israeli television the same
day, Sheikh Al-Ja’abari, former Mayor of Hebron,
denounced the sacrilege and called upon the leaders
of the Arab States to desist from provocation.
54. And finally, let me quote two editorial comments
in the Arabic press in Jerusalem. Both newspapers
from which I quote are Arab-owned,
Arabadministered and Arab-edited and espouse a very
strong anti-Israel policy.
I quote from the 5 October issue of Al-Q&s:
“Two wrongs do not make a right. We are against
retaliation for what was done. The Torah is the
Holy Book of the Jews. To attack a Torah is to
attack our own heritage and belief and this must
be condemned. Sheikh AI-Muhtasib has spoken for
us all.”

59. The list of quotations is long. I have cited some
of them before, and I will not tire you by recalling
them. But my Egyptian colleague should know full
well that the last person with any moral right even to
mention the word Gaza here or anywhere else is an
Egyptian. The inhabitants of Gaza, like the inhabitants
of the West Bank, have varying views as to their
fate in a future settlement. They are free to express
their opinions and to conduct open debates on the

And I quote from the 6 October issue of Al-Shrrtrh:
“We support Sheikh Al-Muhtasib and the Mayors
of Nablus and Hebron, who have expressed Moslem
respect for all holy books. We call for every effort
6

subject, but it is significant that not once has an
Egyptian solution for Gaza ever been proposed .in
Gllza.

by 12 per cent, and private consumption has risen by
9 per cent in both territories. The total exports Ofgoods
and services in 1974 prices has risen annually for the
West Bank by 24 per cent and for the Gaza Strip by
30 per cent. The net daily wage in the West Bank has
risen annually by 35 per cent and in the Gaza Strip
by 39 per cent.

60. If ever a regime was hated it was the Egyptian
regime in Gaza.
61. One of the more entertaining points raised by my
Egyptian colleague concerned alleged Israeli economic
pressure and blackmail in the administered territories.
What utter nonsense. One has only to look at the
figures on economic trends in the territories administered by Israel to note the radical economic revolution
which has occurred and is occurring in them.

65. The education budget which we discovered in
the Gaza Strip and northern Sinai area in 1967-1968
was a total of approximately
$2 million, believe it or
not, for a population of some 400,000. In the West
Bank, for a population of some 650,000, it was a total
of some $7 million. The education budget this year in
the Gaza Strip and northern Sinai is 10 times as big
as it was nine years ago, and in the West Bank nine
times what it was nine years ago.

62. A few months ago Israel followed the example
of many other countries and introduced the system of
value added tax called VAT. Since Israel and the
territories administered by Israel today comprise one
customs union, obviously the same tax which applies
to goods in Israel applies in all territories within that
customs union. Mr. Abdel Meguid [/966th lneetin~l
mentioned the Arab opposition to the application of
that tax. He omitted to mention an equally considerable opposition by the Jewish population
to the
imposition of the tax. Strangely enough, believe it or
not, the two populations, the Jewish and the Arab,
do have at least one thing in common. They are not
especially enthusiastic’. about new taxes. I have a
suspicion that this characteristic is not exclusive to
our two peoples and that many here will appreciate
the feelings of those who do not enjoy paying taxes.

66. The health budget in Gaza and northern Sinai,
which in 1967-1968 we found to be $800,000 for a
population of 400,000, believe it or not, or $2 per head,
has increased 30-fold, and the health budget we found
in the West Bank has increased some 20-fold. The
international
financial statistics which have been
published reveal that the West Bank and Gaza were
the leaders in economic growth measured in gross
national product per head when compared with
Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Iraq and Lebanon.
67. So much for economic
guised Egyptian colleague.

oppression,

my distin-

68. The Egyptian representative mentioned the fact
that there are 3,200 Arab prisoners in Israeli gaols.
As the representatives may be aware, over 500,000
Arab citizens live in Israel, and over a million in the
territories administered by Israel. Now, I believe you
will find it extremely interesting if you will compare
the number of Arabs held in gaol in Israel, where the
prisons are open for al1 to investigate, and where
prisoners are sentenced by due process of law, with the
number of Arabs in gaol in the surrounding Arab countries. What are of more relevance are the conditions
in which they are held in those gaols. Indeed, they
defy description.

63. If Mr. Abdel Meguid feels very strongly about
it, #and President Sadat’s internal or external problems
require a further meeting of the Council, this might
be as good a subject as any on which to convene
the Council. We could, for instance, jointly vent our
displeasure with the British tax authorities,
who,
I regret to say, are the mentors of Israel’s tax
authorities-tradition
and previous association die
hard-because they seem to have a knack of devising
the most diabolical tax laws imaginable, as my British
colleague will doubtless confirm. For the British tax
ideas are invariably adopted by Israeli tax people
and dutifully applied. Or perhaps we ought to complain
to our French and Swedish colleagues. I am open to
correction, but I believe that this particular tax was
the product of the imagination of the French and
Swedish tax authorities and a device ultimately adopted
by many other countries including, I regret to say, my
own.

69. I am not revealing anything new to the Council
when I say that acts of terrorism have been carried
out against innocent people in. Israel and that terrorists
have been apprehended after perpetrating the most
brutal murders and acts of violence. Does the representative of Egypt really want us to emulate the Arab
Governments in the treatment even of the PLO terrorists? In 1970 well over 100 members of the PLO
came over voluntarily to Israel rather than experience
Jordanian gaols I

64. But, seriously, if the Egyptian representative
wishes to complain about taxation, then let him present
the Council with. the entire economic picture of the
territories administered by Israel, because the facts
are that in the period from 1968 to 1975 the gross
national product in the West Bank and in the Gaza
Strip has risen by an annual average of 14 per cent.
In that period the national product per crrpitn
has risen in the West Bank by 11 per cent and in Gaza

70. In the last year two tourist hotels have been
attacked by PLO terrorists. In both, innocent tourists
were killed. One was the Savoy Hotel, in Tel-Aviv,
and the other the Semiramis Hotel, in Damascus, What
would the distinguished
Egyptian
representative
7

Israel” [ihitl., pr/rrr. 691, but also by characterizing
the Koenig report as an “official plan”. Since the
representative of Egypt is so fond of quoting the
Israeli press-l know that the functioning of a lively
democracy is something beyond his comprehensionwhy does he ‘not quote the statement I have just
cited, made by Prime Minister Rabin on 16 September,
which is the one most relevant to the issue?

suggest as our mode of behaviour? To give them a fair
trial and sentence them to prison terms, even though
they murdered people, as occurred in Israel, or to
arrest them, conduct a token trial of 12 minutes’
duration in which the presiding judge announces there
will not be time for coffee, and hang them immediately
thereafter publicly in a square in Damascus for the
enlightenment of the population which gathers to see
the spectacle, as occurred in Syria? Which norm of
behaviour would my distinguished Egyptian colleague
suggest?

77. Suffice it to say that the so-called proposal by
Mr. Koenig did not even warrant discussion at any of
the superior levels of the Government of Israel, and
had in fact been shelved for oversix months before
anybody heard about it.

71. The terrorists who were accused of sabotage
in Al-Tahrir Square in Cairo were sentenced a few
weeks ago-one to death by hanging and another to
life imprisonment. Less than two weeks ago the two
terrorists accused of sabotaging a train in Alexandria
were sentenced to death. The three PLO terrorists
who hijacked an Egyptian plane in August were
sentenced to life with hard labour. Should we emulate
the standards of our Arab neighbours?

78. Finally, I really do not wish to involve myself
in any further useless polemics and to engage in the
time-consuming
exercise of refuting my Arab
colleagues. It will not bring us any closer to peace.
That is what should interest us, and not this useless
monthly exercise in name-calling.

72. Despite the intense provocation under which we
live, despite the massacres, the shootings, the acts of
terrorism that have been directed against our population, in many cases against innocent women and
children, I am proud to sit here and state that not in
one single case has Israel carried out a death sentence.
Yet you, the distinguished Arab representatives,
pontificate to us about civilized behaviour?

79. But I do wish to make a number of comments,
addressed primarily to the representative of Jordan.
In discussing the Palestine Arab people, he conveniently ignored the Palestinian inhabitants ofJordan.
80. The fact is that, of 2.8 million Palestinian Arabs,
over 1.7 million, including some 650,000 in the West
Bank, are citizens of the Kingdom of Jordan and
hold Jordanian passports, while half a million are
citizens of Israel and hold Israeli passports. Therefore, approximately
80 per cent of all Palestinian
Arabs are citizens of both countries, Jordan and
Israel.

73. We have been regaled with the newly discovered
bonanza, the so-called Koenig report. All my Arab
colleagues are having a field day-including
my
Jordanian colleague, whose racist Constitution and
laws forbid a Jew to be a citizen of Jordan because
he is a member of the Jewish religion and forbid
Christians to own land in Jerusalem, and my Syrian
colleague, whose regime keeps 4,500 Syrian Jews
virtually in prison in Syria, denying them the elementary rights of freedom, of expression and of
movement.

81. Furthermore,
80 per cent of the territory of
Palestine under the Mandate is the present Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan. These facts only bring us to
reiterate the belief of the Government of Israel that
the ultimate solution of the Palestine Arab problem
must lie within the context of a peace agreement
-and I emphasize: peace agreement-between
Israel
and Jordan. But we are not going to achieve that
agreement if Mr. Nuseibeh already sets out preconditions to such negotiations as might take place:
namely, prompt Israeli withdrawal, and thereafter the
restoration of what he calls

74. Despite the fact that this is a purely internal
matter, and as such is outside the competence of the
Organization, Israel has nothing to hide, and I therefore wish to refer to it briefly.
75. The position of my Government on this question
was expressed by Prime Minister Rabin in a speech
on 16 September. In his statement the Prime Minister
stated that the Koenig letter is nothing but an internal
memorandum from an employee of the Ministry of the
Interior to his superiors in which he expressed his own
personal opinion. This memorandum does not reflect
the policy of the Government of Israel and, moreover,
it does not determine the Government’s policy towards
the Arab citizens of Israel.

“the legitimate national rights and... aspirations of
the Palestinians, it being understood that Jordan
recognizes the PLO.. . as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people” [&id., paru. 144Js”
82. Now, he should please make up his mind. The
Government of Jordan and the Government of Israel
have agreed on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
as a basis for negotiation between free and equal
parties to the negotiations. All the elements in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) are part of a
package deal, and it must be obvious to Jordan, as
it is to the international community by now, that we

76. The representative of Egypt, as usual, distorts
the facts-not only by naming Mr. Koenig as the
official “responsible for the treatment of Arabs in
8

.

!‘I., ;,,,.,,
1”

will not be browbeaten into solutions which prejudice
the negotiations in advance and which set out preconditions.

together in Jerusalem but have met in dialogue-are
aware of the fact that in Israel they have a free and
open society which can be talked to, where they can
meet, and which is open to influence in the normal
democratic process. Incidentally,
I must ask him and
his Arab colleagues: what would they all do for
speeches if they did not have the free, unfettered
Israeli press as a source?

83. I was very interested to note the Jordanian
statement about that country’s recognition of the position of the PLO. Frankly, I had not noticed it.
84. Fifty per cent of the Jordanian Parliament
is
still, to this day, composed of representatives of the
West Bank. The Mayors of the West Bank pay
homage to King Hussein and receive loans for development from his Government, in addition, of course,
to receiving loans from the Government of Israel.
The Jordanian civil service still, in effect, administers
the West Bank on a day-to-day basis.

90. I personally presided in Tel Aviv over a meeting
addressed by his distinguished brother, in which he
openly castigated Israeli policy,
91. What I am trying to say is that Council resolution 338 (1973) calls for the States parties to the
conflict to sit down and to negotiate. Only a few days
ago, our Prime Minister reiterated our willingness to
go to Geneva for the resumption of the Conference
as originalEy constituted.

85. It is more than the life of a member of the PLO
is worth for him to show his face in Jordan. Whom do
they think they are fooling? Why all this make-believe?
Does Mr. Nuseibeh really mean to say that he, a
Palestinian Arab, the distinguished son of a distinguished Palestinian Arab family, representing the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, or that the West Bank
representatives to the Jordanian Parliament,
or the
freely elected Mayors in the West Bank, in the only
free elections in the Arab world, or a good percentage
of the Jordanian Cabinet-does
he really wish to tell
us that they all represent the Palestinian Arabs less
well than do the Cairo-born Yasser Arafat or the
emigre leadership in Beirut?
86.

92. How are we going to arrive at any solution?
Why should they complain when life refuses to stand
still because they can do nothing but convene meetings
of the Security Council in order to call us names’?
93. Why can we not start the negotiating process’?
Why can we not sit down even here and talk like
civilized human beings? How are we ever going to
make any advance if we do not sit down and talk’?
How has any other conflict ever been solved without
the parties talking? Why can they not overcome this
inherent fear of talking to us, here and elsewhere’?
How do they ever expect us to make progress, here
or anywhere else?

He asked us the other day:

“Should we miss a precious opportunity,
which
seems to exist and which may not exist in the
future,... or should we continue a blind and
inexorable drift towards an inevitable cataclysm’?
pm., /It//Y/. 1311.

94. In addressing myself to the Jordanian representative, I happened to be referring to a paragraph of his
speech, but I was not particularly addressing myself
only to him: this appeal applies equally to all representatives of countries with which we have common
borders.

87. Then, to my utter amazement, his answer was
that it depended largely on what we do or fail to do in
the Council today. He surely cannot,be serious. Does
he really believe that this type of barren, useless,
time-consuming debate is the right way to solve the
problem in the Middle East’?

95. Let me spell it out and make it quite clear:
as long as they refuse to talk to us, it means that they
do not recognize our right to exist. If they do not
recognize our right to exist, then we are not disposed
to accommodate them in this or any other respect.
That being the case, why blame us when we do not
sit still in the territories and await their pleasure’?

88. The Jordanian delegation surely cannot believe
this in the case of a discussion sprung on them and on
the other Arab delegations by their Egyptian colleague
without any advance notice, and about which they
learnt only four hours after the Egyptians presented
their request to the President of the Security Council.
They surely cannot believe that this meeting, which
is a function of inter-Arab one-upmanship, is the forum
in which we can solve such problems.

96. They said here that the PLO represents the
Palestine Arabs. They know the PLO Covenant as
well as I do, and that in article I9 it declares that the
existence of the State of Israel is null and void, and that
in article 20 it denies any historical links between the
Jewish people and the Holy Land, and in article 21
rejects any form of solution to the problem, apart,
in effect, from the destruction of Israel.

89. The Jordanian representative knows Israel: he
has been there; he has talked to Israelis. I do not for
a moment suggest that he likes them or that he approves
of their policies. But at least he and the members of
his family-with
some of whom I have not only studied

97. Do they really think that they are going to find
anybody in his right mind in Israel or elsewhere to
accept this nonsense’? I join Mr. Nuseibeh in his
9

/

.-

the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization [s/11663/A&/.32].
These facts
were compiIed by impartial United Nations observers,
What do they have to report, since the representative
of Israel raised the question of Lebanon? They make
the following points: first, in October 1976 six cases
occurred of Israeli occupation of positions on Lebanese
territory; secondly, in October there were 14 cases of
firing across the truce demarcation line involving not
only small-arms fire but mortar and artillery fire by
the Israelis; thirdy, in the month of October there
were six cases of violation of the territorial waters of
Lebanon by Israeli warships; fourthly, in the same
month there were 26 cases of violation by Israeli
aircraft of Lebanese airspace.

prayer that we should not miss a precious opportunity.
We must not miss such an opportunity. For that reason
let us sit down like civilized human beings and begin
to talk and understand each other and together seize
this precious opportunity. Let us abandon this horrible,
useless and interminable rhetoric, which we shall hear
again as soon as I have concluded, and let us join
together, representing as we do two great faiths, two
great cultures, which have given so much to humanity,
to seize that opportunity.
98. The PRESIDENT (inlnpwtrrtion
fro/77
Spa/~ish):
I wish to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia
requesting that he be invited, in accordance with the
‘relevant provisions of the Charter, to participate in
our debate without the right to vote. In accordance,
therefore, with the usual practice and with the provisions of rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council and if there are no objections,
I propose that the representative of Saudi Arabia be
invited to participate in the debate without the right to
vote.

103. These are the facts of the real situation and the
true role of Israel in Lebanon. These are facts gathered
by United Nations observers. Accordingly, we can
draw the conclusion that Israel does not confine
itself to its continuing occupation of Arab lands which
it seized in 1967 but is also attempting, by means of
creeping aggression and occupation, to violate the
sovereignty of another Arab country, Lebanon. This
is what every memberof the Council should think about
since the representative of Israel has referred to this
problem.

99. I invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is his turn to address the Council.

104. The PRESIDENT
(interprertntim
jTo/77
Spanish): I call on the representative of Israel on a point
of clarification.
105. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): I would appreciate it if
the Soviet representative would clarify whether there
was any loss of life in the various incidents referred1 :
to by him and whether at that time the Israeli forces
which he alleges were in southern Lebanon were the
only foreign forces in Lebanon.

100. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intPrprPflrtion
,fhm Rmsitrn):
The Soviet
delegation reserves its right to speak on the item under
discussion at a subsequent meeting of the Security
Council. If we are forced to speak today, it is because
of the statement of the representative of Israel,
Mr. Herzog. Not for the first time when we are
discussing the question of the Arab territories occupied
by Israel in 1967, he is using the same device, He
prefers to talk about all kinds of things, but above
all-as I have no doubt members of the Council have
noticed-about
the situation in Lebanon.

106. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i/zterp,.etolion
f,‘o/lz Russian): I note that
the representative of Israel does not deny the fact of
the violation of the airspace of Lebanon by Israeli aircraft, of the territorial waters of Lebanon by Israeli
naval warships or of the occupation of positions on
Lebanese territory by Israeli troops.

101. If we are to believe the words of the representative of Israel, there is no country that is more concerned about the sovereignty of Lebanon, about its
future and the integrity of its frontiers than Israel.
Mr. Herzog is nodding his agreement. But is it really
so? It is well known that in reality one of the major
reasons for the tragic events in Lebanon is Israel’s
policy of flagrant interference in the affairs of that
Arab country. The representative of Israel hastened
to yxplain all this as being communist propaganda.

107. The PRESIDENT
(i,lfc~p,‘et~lfio/t
.f?onl Spur!is/i): The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania whom I request to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
108. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritinia)
(interpretrrriorr
fiwu F/YII~/?): The task before the Security Council
‘is once again a difficult and important one; difficult
and important by reason of its essentially political
character; difficult and important, also, by reason of
the explosive nature of the situation prevailing in
the Middle East. Mr. President, cognizant as we are
of your outstanding qualities as a diplomat and the
commitment of your country, Panama, to the struggle
of peoples fighting for the recognition of theil

102. However, I would venture to draw the attention
of members of the Council to a document of the
Council, a routine report on the status of the ceasefire in the Israel-Lebanon sector. This is the report by
10

:;

113. Today the situation has not changed fundamentally as compared with that prevailing in 1973 and,
the same causes engendering,the
same effects, it is
probable, if not certain, that Israel’s practices in the
occupied Arab territories and its refusal to bow,to the
will of the international
community
will lead once
again to a war, the consequences of which, both
for the region and for international peace, no one can
foresee. Israel now and in the past, thanks to perfected
propaganda, has made others believe the idea that its
neighbours wish to cast it into the sea. Today no
country can in any way believe so grotesque and
simplistic
an idea. What we fear is the opposite
situation. The Arab territories have been occupied
and annexed by force. Their populations have been
uprooted and looted, and the policy of genocide
against the Palestinian people undertaken over a
quarter of a century ago continues ‘today, blindly and
mercilessly.

inalienable rights, we are convinced that under your
presidency the Council will be able to face up to the
important and difficult tasks to which I have referred.
Permit me to extend our congratulations to you.
109. For the third or fourth time in the course of this
year, the Council is concerned with the situation
prevailing in the occupied Arab territories.
If the
Council has been seized of this question on repeated
occasions, it is not because rhetoric in the Council
is an end in itself for the Arab countries as was
implied by the representative of Tel Aviv; nor is it
because, the Arab countries are not in a position to
respond to violence with violence. If the Council
has been seized of this question, it is because the
Council has been vested by the Charter of the United
Nations with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. Israel’s
practices in the occupied Arab territories, the ‘blind
repression which characterizes its policy in those
territories, its policy of looting the Arab territories,
all constitute, to say the least, a threat to peace in the
region and beyond that a direct threat to international
peace.

114. This is the policy of the Zionist authorities in
Tel Aviv, which has consisted so far of disregarding
the resolutions of the Council calling on Israel to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. As I said
earlier, there is a second element which so far has
caused the Council’s action to remain without practical
effect, because there is a fundamental omission in its
resolutions and this has greatly contributed to their
ineffectiveness. It is essentially the fact that we put
in parenthesis the principle cause, if not the primary
cause, of the situation prevailing in the Middle East,
namely, the question of the Palestinian people. It is
obvious that no just and durable peace can be established in the region without the recognition of the
national inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
This is the reality that has become clear to the international community in these past years.

110. It is obvious that the duty of the Council is to
deal with this situation itself and take the measures
laid down in the Charter for such circumstances, in
order to remove this’ threat to peace and avoid a
situation that could explode at any time. It seems to
me that the Council should be grateful to the representative of Egypt for drawing its attention once again
to the gravity of the situation.
111. We know that the Council has already considered the situation in the Middle East and that it
has studied its various aspects. We know too that it
has adopted a number of resolutions dealing with that
situation, but neither this consideration by the Council nor the resolutions it has adopted have so far
prevented a recurrence of violence in the form of
repression or in the form of a large-scale war. This is
something that no country questions, and if this is the
case it is because the decisions of the Security Council
have not been implemented, because of two fundamental elements, the first of which is the arrogance
and intransigence of Israel, and the second is the fact
that these resolutions of the Council suffer from a
fundamental omission.

11.5. The General Assembly itself has adopted a large
number of resolutions that are unequivocal on the
subject. The participation
of representatives of the
PLO in the debates in the Security Council since the
beginning of this year constitutes another illustration
of this general trend. The Council, if it is to live up to
its responsibilties and to fill the gap that so far has
appeared in its resolutions on the Middle East, must
take this trend into account. We believe in fact that
the Council cannot continue to avoid recognizing
an increasingly evident reality, namely, the Palestinian
reality. It cannot remain impassive with regard to the
Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories. Nor
can it remain indifferent to the threat to international
peace and security constituted by the Israeli policy of
occupation and annexation by force. The Council, the
guardian of world peace, must express to Israel its
most vigorous reprobation by saying that its policy
may well lead to a new confrontation,
with unforeseeable consequences. For our part, we place OUI
hopes in the Council and we trust that it will live up
to our expectations.

112. The intransigence and arrogance of Israel
prevented any of the peace efforts preceding the 1973
war from succeeding. Israel has refused to withdraw
from the Arab territories it occupied in 1967 following
its aggression against the Arab countries bordering
Palestine. Not only has it flouted all efforts at mediation but it has embarked on a systematic policy of
settlement and establishment of colonies in those territories, while at the same time proceeding with the
displacement of the Arab populations
and their
despoliation. Undoubtedly this attitude on the part of
Israel was at the very root of the 1973 war.

116. The representative of Israel has resorted to the
worn-out record that he customarily makes us listen
11

of the Security Council. We are confident that under
your able and skilful guidance the Council’s deliberations will be fruitful.

to in the Council when he has to face up to his
immediate and very serious responsibilities. He has
r.esorted to this old record to divert the attention of
the members of the Council. Thus he has spoken of a
schism in the Arab world, he has spoken of Lebanon
and he has spoken of differences here and there in the
Arab world. We have had occasion in the past to tell
the representative of Tel Aviv that the Arab countries
may have differences of view and perhaps profound
divergences, but I can assure him that he is making
a bad bet if he bets on that division. I believe that what
happened in 1973 should already have served as a
lesson to the Israeli representatives.

123. The Middle East dispute and the situation in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel have engaged the
attention of the Security Council, as well as other
organs of the United Nations, frequently and for a
long time. The last time that the Council debated the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories
was in May of this year. At that time [1922/n/ n?eefi!r,g]
the President of the Council expressed, on, behalf of
the majority, grave anxiety over the present situation
in the Arab territories and the well-being of the population of those territories. He also deplored the measures
taken by Israel to alter the demographic composition
or the geographical nature of those territories and
declared them to be illegal and an obstacle to peace,
Similar opinions have been repeatedly expressed
before by the Council, other United Nations organs
and Member States, and in strong terms.

117. If we listen to the representative of Israel, we
gather the impression that everyone is wrong and only
the representative of Tel Aviv is right. The world is
presented topsy-turvy: occupation becomes the cause
of prosperity and of freedom, and slavery becomes a
desired objective. If we listen to the representative of
Israel, we honestly believe that we are living in a world
that is upside-down.

124. Looking over the few intervening months since
then, we find that Israel, in total disregard of the
international community and of its close friends and
allies-of everyone-has continued the same policy of
insidious annexation. If anything has changed, it has
changed for the worse. With each passing day Israel’s
policy has become more blatant, more flagrant and
more arrogant.

international
community,
118. Everybody-the
which has condemned Israel for its practices, which
has demanded that Israel cease its practices in the
occupied Arab territories and withdraw from those
territories, which has demanded that Israel conform
to the law and to the decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly-everybody
is wrong. And
the representative of Israel now comes before the
Council and tries to moralize. I think that is an insult
to the Council and to the conscience of each and
every one of us.

125. The representative of Egypt, in opening this
debate on 1 November [l966th meeting], described
in detail how Israel was engaged in an organized and
open plan of annexation of the Arab territories
occupied by it and the progressive elimination of every
vestige of Palestinian presence in the area. Those
long-term, systematic and cynical plans have been
set out in Israeli official documents. Those programmes
and actions of the Israeli Government clearly demonstrate its objective of wiping out the name of Palestine
and the existence of the Palestinian people and
pushing its floating boundary further and further in
ever-expanding’drives of colonization,

119. The Arab countries have come before the
Council. They are in a position to respond to violence
with violence. They are in a position not to seize
the Council of the matter, but the Council has a
fundamental responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is the duty of the
Council, without having been seized of the matter by
any Arab country, to deal with the situation on its
own initiative and to show its gratitude to those who
have drawn its attention to the situation.

126. Both those developments hold ominous consequences for the prospect of peace in the MiddIe
East. We have always believed and continue to believe
that full recognition of the national rights, of the
Palestinian people and the evacuation of all the Arab
territories occupied by Israel are two essential conditions of a just and permanent settlement in the Middle:
East. Israel’s policy is clearly designed to thwart the
satisfaction of those two conditions of a settlement,
One is therefore left with no choice but to conclude
that Israel .is not interested in peace, .

120. I believe that the representative of Israel will
see the world as it is-not as he would like it to be-if
he turns himself upside-down.
121. The PRESIDENT
(intetpretotion
from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
122. Mr. KAISER
(Bangladesh): Mr. President,
I should like to thank you and the other members
of the Security Council for allowing my delegation
to participate in the present debate on the situation in
the occupied Arab territories. While doing so, we also
want to extend our congratulations to you and your
country on your assumption of the office of President

127. It is also my duty to bring to the notice of the
Council another aspect of the situation in the Arab
territories which arises from Israel’s policy towards
the Palestinian people and which affects us directly:
it is the status of the religious shrines of Islam. Terri12

sentative of the PLO at the qpening of this debate
when he stressed that the root cause of the problems
in the occupied territories was the occupation itself.
That is to say that as long as Israel continues to
occupy Arab territories and continues to deny the
people of Palestine their inalienable rights, there will
never be peace in the Middle East. It is therefore
incumbent upon Israel to take steps to implement the
relevant Council resolutions in order to facilitate the
achievement of peace in the area.

tories now occupied by Israel contain some of the
holiest shrines of Islam, to which our attachment
is deep and abiding. Fiist among them is, of course,
the Noly City of Jerusalem. My delegation has had
occasion to express the grave concern that Moslems
all over the world feel at attempts by Israel to
desecrate the holy shrines of Islam situated in that
city. That situation has not changed. In addition, we
now find that Israel is pursuing the same policy in
other pal’ts of the occupied territories. Israel must
clearly understand that the Moslem world will never
accept the policy that it is pursuing. To allow Israel
to perpetrate the law of the jungle would be to
condone sacrilege against religious sentiments of a
large segment of mankind-the
adherents to one of the
major religions of the world, Islam, successor to the
religion of Ibrahim Al-Khalil.
It would also be
tantamount
to denying to the Palestinians
their
legitimate right to their country. The world community
must act decisively now or face consequences the
dimensions of which none of us can predict.

132. The Hebron incidents are a warning, and Israel
must realize that if it continues to ignore the repeated
appeals of the Council, resistance in the occupied
Arab territories wil1 continue in the form of strikes
and demonstrations
and in other ways until victory
is achieved, for one cannot defeat the determination
of the human spirit to struggle for a just cause. The
Palestinian people, who are at the cen’tre of the ArabIsraeli conflict, will continue to fight until they triumph.
They cannot remain homeless refugees living in
poverty and misery.

128. The representative of Israel has given us what
we must consider to be a dissertation on both history
and religion. We are here neither to discuss the history
of our forefathers nor to compare the glorious history
of the great religions and ancient civilizations.
Our
concern is with the ugly realities of the Middle East
and its agonies, for which Israel is responsible and of
which it is the sole architect.

133. For this reason, the international
community
has recognized the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination,
including the right to establish an
independent State of their own. In this regard my
delegation, along with others, condemned in June
this year [!9-?8th /l?ccting] the abuse of the veto by
one permanent member which blocked passage of the
report of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. By failing
to affirm the right of the people of Palestine to
independent nationhood, the Council failed in its duty
to help in the attainment of peace in the Middle
East.

129. Mr. NYAKYI (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, permit me at the outset to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of November. I am confident
that your high qualities and experience as a diplomat
will ensure positive achievements by the Council under
your wise guidance. May I also pay tribute to you!
predecessor, Mr. Akhund of Pakistan, for the wise and
able manner in which he presided over the Council
during the month of October.

134. One would have expected
that Israel, which
came into existence through the partition of Palestine,
would have been the first to redress the injustice
committed
against the Palestinian people. Instead,
Israel continues to take measures which are contrary
to United Nations resolutions. For example, in the
report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories,’
there are reports of
serious violations of human rights by the occupying
Power. Israel continues to expel Arabs from the
occupied territories. In occupied Jerusalem and Gaza.
it has transferred thousands of persons from theil
homes in one part to another. It denies the right of
return to their homes of those persons who fled the
occupied territories. It demolishes houses and expropriates property. Worse still is Israel’s policy of
annexation by establishing permanent settlements. By
establishing
Jewish settlements
in occupied Arab
lands Israel presumably wants-to present the world
with a ,firit trc*c+o/rrp/i. My delegation deplores this
state of affairs and calls upon Israel to desist from
furthe]: acts aimed at annexation and changing the
demographic pattern of the occupied lands.

130. Once again the Security Council is meeting to
consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
As was the case in the Council meetings in March
and May, we have before us a specific complaint
against the occupying Power, whose repressive
measures against Palestinian inhabitants are making
the situation in the occupied Arab territories increasingly explosive. The seriousness of the situation was
explained to the Council on 1 November [ihirl.] by the
representatives of the PLO, Egypt, Jordan and Syria.
I shall not, therefore, dwell on the harrowing details
of the acts perpetrated by Israel against the people of
Palestine in those occupied territories.
Instead,
what I wish to do is stress the underlying causes of
incidents such as those at Hebron.
131. As we stated in March, the incidents which are
occurring in Jerusalem and other towns of the West
Bank are a result of the occupation of Arab territories by Israel. This was aptly stated by the repre13

return to Lebanon and that its interests lie in the
continuation of the fighting in that country. But it is
no use shedding crocodile tears with regard to the
situation in Lebanon while Israel is continuing its
crimes in the occupied Arab territories.

135. It is now up to the Council to take positive
action to force Israel to implement
the Council’s
resolutions. For too long now the Council has been
frustrated by inaction because of vetoes. The Palestinian people cannot be prevented for ever from
achieving their aim of an independent homeland.
Throughout human history no people has acquiesced
for ever in such a situation without struggle. For the
Israeli authorities, therefore, to believe that their
repressive actions will break the will and the capacity
of the .Palestinian people to resist is self-delusion. It
is to ignore the lessons of history-particularly
relevant among which is that of the Jewish people
itself. The present oppressors of the Palestinian
people in occupied Arab territories will be no more
successful then were those of the Jewish people
nearly four decades ago. Therefore, it is not a question
of whether the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people will be fulfilled; it is a question of when and
how. Whether this aim is achieved peacefully or
through more violence will depend on Israel’s attitude
and that of its comforters. My delegation believes
that, if those comforters were to be evenhanded with
respect to the rights of Palestinian people, it would be
possible to make Israel fulfil its obligations. But so
long as Israel knows it has the assured support of
those comforters, it will continue its impudent flouting
of United Nations resolutions.

140. I need hardly remind the members of the Council that the Council is meeting to consider Israel’s
illegal measures in the occupied Arab territories and
that conditions in those territories are the direct
concern and responsibility of the Council.
141. The Israeli representative resorted to his usual
and oft-repeated tactic of confusing the issues and
diverting attention by invoking various unrelated
arguments. The crux of the problem before us is the
Israeli military occupation and its obnoxious ramifications and not-1 repeat, not-the internal situation in
Lebanon. What occurred in Lebanon is deeply
regretted, but it can provide no justification whatsoever for Israel’s persistent implementation
of its
expansionist designs in the occupied Arab territories.
142. I do not intend to dwell on the events in
Lebanon, and I shall only say that whatever happened
there is being rectified within the context of the Arab
nations, following the Riyadh and Cairo summit
meetings in October of this year.

136. The time has therefore come for the Council
to exert its collective will and to tell Israel in no
uncertain terms that the highest organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security
will not tolerate indifference to its decisions. The
Council should now give teeth to its decisions calling
upon Israel to withdraw from occupied Arab territories. The Council should demand that Israel carry
out decisions of the United Nations which are designed
to restore to the Palestinian people their birthright of
self-determination. If Israel fails to act in accordance
with the collective will of the Council, then it will be
proper for the Council to apply the appropriate
measures under the Charter.

143. Israel is never reluctant to meddle in and to
attempt to exacerbate internal
Arab problems,
believing that the next best thing to dead Arabs is
disunited Arabs. But, to Israel’s dismay, Arab unity is
restored, and, as The Wrrslzi~~gton Post noted on
28 October:
“There is growing apprehension in Israel that
her vacation may fast be drawing to a close. The
Arab summit meeting conference in Cairo has done
much to restore Arab unity and Arab solidarity has
been strengthened as a result of this Cairo meeting
and the smaller six-party meeting in Riyadh in Saudi
Arabia. Syrian and Egyptian rapprochement is now
a reality.”

137. The PRESIDENT
(intc’l’p/‘c~lntit~/~ ,fionr Spa/ris/r): The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

144. The Israeli representative also saw fit to make
his allegations first outside the Council. He contends,
in the press release issued by his Mission on 1 November, that the contents of my letter to the President of
the Council and the debate are totally unrelated to the
true situation in the area. That letter is before every
member of the Council.

138. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): As usual, the
Council has again been subjected to a barrage of
lies, distortions and allegations by the representative
of Israel. He tried to belittle the intelligence of the
members of the Council, in the hope that, by repeating
again and again the old Israeli story, he might lead
some people to swallow it.

145. Does he dare to challenge any of the points
I mentioned in my letter? Did or did not his Government arbitrarily arrest many people in the West Bank
and Gaza? Did or did not his Government impose
curfews on many cities in the West Bank? Did or did
not his Government condone the acts of desecration
by extremist groups? Did or did not his Government
establish, and is it or is it not continuing to establish,
settlements in the occupied Arab territories? The

139. He even argued in his statement that, when the
Council decides to meet, it is an insult. Again he tried
to distract the Council’s attention from the subject
of its debate by referring to the situation in Lebanon.
Everyone now knows that Israel fears that peace will
14

answers to these questions are well known and they
are even to be found in the statements of leaders of
the Israeli Government themselves. I can only hope
that the Israeli representative will read the article
in this connexion published in The New Yod Tims,
a newspaper which is friendly to Israel and which he
quoted. This article on the treatment of Arabs by his
Government appeared on 2 November, two days ago,
I should like to quote only a few words from it:

AS the Jewish O~SL’I’I~PI~ of September 1976 rightly
put it in describing those Israeli leaders who approved
of the report: “They accepted the findings in principle
but saw in its leaking to the press an act little short of
national treason”.
152. Where is Mr. Koenig now? He is most certainly
still occupying his post; and he will probably be
promoted soon. In fact, the Israeli Government is
starting to implement his suggestions, especially by
establishing new Israeli settlements where Arabs are
located.

“[they are] second-class citizens. The problems of
the Israeli Arabs... have taken on new urgency in
recent months as a result of protests by once-placid
Israeli Arabs and of a controversial report by an
Israeli official that has inflamed many members of
the minority group.”

1.53. The Israeli representative did not deny a word
of the Koenig report. Instead, he tried to use the very
timid statement of his Prime Minister on that report,
forgetting that the Minister of the Interior under whom
Mr. Koenig works declared his complete faith in
Mr. Koenig.

The article was written by Mr. William E. Farrell
and is datelined Jerusalem, 1 November. I shall come
back to this later in my statement.

154. I should like at this point to quote another
excerpt from the article in The NW York Time.~
of 2 November dealing with the Koenig report, to
which I have just referred:

146. The Israeli representative then accused Egypt
of abusing the Security Council, an organ which, in
his words, is devoted to the maintenance of international peace and security. If the Israeli representative
believes that, does he consider that the actions and
measures of his Government in the occupied areas
are compatible
with peace and security? I do not
think that he genuinely believes that.

“The reaction to [the situation in occupied Arab
territories] was intensified by Mr. Koenig’s position
as the Ministry of the Interior’s chief official in
Galilee, with a good deal of say about allocation of
funds to municipalities.”

147. It is a fact that we have asked for these meetings
for the very reason that these acts are endangering
peace and security in the area and that if they continue
they can only lead to an explosion of the situation.

And the article goes on:
“But the failure to dismiss Mr. Koenig is still
a sore point with many Israeli Arabs, and his
memorandum
has provided a good deal of grist for
anti-Israeli propaganda mills.”

148. The Israeli representative also accused Egypt
and the rest of the Arab world of having asked for a
debate in the Council after the Riyadh meeting.
I answer him by saying, yes; we, the Arabs, presented
our case to the Security Council after the Riyadh
meeting and before the Riyadh meeting.

155. The Israeli representative tries to sell the Council the story that Moslem leaders in the occupied
West Bank are content with Israeli rule and Israel’s
behaviour in recent weeks. But I refer him to the
letter sent a few days ago to the Israeli Military
Governor by Moslem leaders. The letter was published
on 27 October in the newspaper Al-Shcrah. It contained the following demands: first, to release the
detained students, whose actions were motivated by
their religious zeal and resulted from the provocative
behaviour of the Kiryat Arba residents who tore up
the Koran without regard for the religious laws,
which do not permit the desecration of the sacred
books of any religion; secondly, to abolish the military
arrangements at the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque which allow
substantial numbers of Israeli soldiers into the Mosque
during Moslem prayers-a fact that contradicts the
freedom of worship at the holy site; thirdly, to keep
the Ibrahimi Mosque purely a Moslem site, as has been
the case since the Moslems entered these lands; and
fourthly, to ensure that the two religions do not hold
prayers at the same time, since this causes sorrow and
constitutes imperfection in regard to Moslem law and
contradicts religion. Never in recorded history has a

149. Does he expect that Egypt or any other Arab
country will stand idly by when they see that their
brothers in the territories occupied by Israel are being
killed, arrested, tortured, deported, their houses
demolished, their land expropriated and alien elements
brought among them to dwell on their own land?
150, If we did not inform the Council, the highest
organ responsible for peace and security in the
world, about these repressive and shameful measures,
we shoutd not be fulfilling our obligations under the
Charter.
151. I understand the embarrassment and shame of
his Government at being exposed in the Council and
other United Nations organs, but what does he
expect? Does he expect the same embarrassment as
his Government
felt because of the Koenig report
-and not because of its content but merely because
it came to the knowledge of world public opinion?
15

then Mr. Herzog called him a sort of liar, and after
that he referred to him as “the distinguished repre.
sentative of Jordan”.

place served as a mosque and a synagogue at the same
time.
156. We know who is making false allegations, who
has the temerity to speak of benevolent occupation
by Israel of Arab lands and Gaza, to speak of how
happy the people there are-when we know that every
week there are more arrests, more houses are
demolished, there are more fake trials, and so forth.
The representative of Israel is the last to speak about
Gaza.

162. How can ane be distinguished and a liar at the
same time? Mr. Herzog contradicts himself, He does
not know what he is saying. He is so arrogant that he
thinks anything he says should be accepted on its face
value.
163. I do not happen to be a Jew, but I think that
Freud, who was a distinguished Jew, could have
analysed Mr. Herzog and found that he suffers from
schizophrenic attitudes towards the Arab representatives.

157. The representative of Israel puts his case as
though Israel can do no wrong; Israel is not to be
blamed; Israel has nothing to be ashamed of; it is we
the Arabs and our friends who are the aggressors.
That is very strange logic.

164. Mr. Herzog brought a Bible here. I did not
think he should have a monopoly on the Bible, so
I have brought a Bible too. He did not quote anything
from the Bible, but let me say forthwith that his Bible
was incomplete: being a Zionist, he would not have
the New Testament. I have both the Old Testament
and the New Testament. I happen to be a humble
student of the Bible. From the time we were seven or
eight years old we were told to read the Bible, But
I have not confined my reading to the Old Testament,
although I have always marvelled at the wisdom
embodied in the Old Testament.
Mr. Herzog’s
Bible is, I repeat, incomplete. But never mind; he
did not even take the trouble to bolster his arguments
about the legality of the Zionists’ carving up of
Palestine to make a State. I was present at Lake
Success when the partition of Palestine took place,
I do not know where Mr. Herzog was. Perhaps he
was in high school in Ireland at the time; he does not
seem to be an old man. I know that the partition was
the result of pressure.

158. The Israeli representative and his Government
must understand that as long as Israel continues to
occupy Arab land, as long as it continues to persecute
and repress the Palestinian people and deny them their
inalienable national rights, including the right to an
independent State, the whole Arab world will be united.
The Arab world will be united until the occupied
territories are liberated and justice and peace prevail
in the area. And we shall continue to expose in the
Security Council and all other international
forums
the true picture of this dangerous Israeli policy.
159. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretaticm
from Spw
ish): The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a ‘place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
160. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): 1 congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the way in which you have
been guiding the deliberations of the Security Council on the item of which it is seized. It is appropriate
for me to say that you hail from the country where
the Panama Canal, which connects two great oceans,
has been a waterway of peace between the peoples
of the northern and southern hemispheres in the new
world. We hope that Panama, which you represent,
will remain a symbol of peace among the various
nations of the world, not only in regard to trade but
also because it is a highway of culture and of the
civilization which your people brought with them from
Spain and with which we Arabs have been associated
iy our history.

165. But of course he has to make a case for his
spurious State, and that is understandable. I am
not saying this with any malice or any sort of irony.
166. If the hour were not late I would read chapter
and verse from this Holy Bible to refute the argument
that God gave Palestine to the Zionists-leave
aside
our Jews, who are Semites, like we are.
167. It so happens that Zionism is a European
ideology based on a monotheistic religion. At one time
Christianity, also, used religion as a motivation for
political ends. That was during the days of the
Crusades. And in fairness to Christianity and
Judaism, Islam once tried to use religion through the
Caliphate. We, the Arabs, thought that through the
Caliphate we could rule over our Iranian neighbours,
who at that time were called Persians. We failed.
And not only in our area but in many other regions
of the world religion has time and again been used as
a motivation for political and economic ends. When
religion lost its grip on the people after the French
revolution, people began to use ideology as a motivation-and
ideology is a new sort of religion which

161. I am not surprised that Mr. Herzog has left the
Council chamber. Indeed, I would rather have him out
of the room than reading a newspaper, which he was
doing while my colleague from Egypt was trying to
refute his allegations. But I promise that I shall not use
Mr. Herzog’s kind of language. Mr. He’rzog is intransigent. And sometimes he does not seem to know what
he is saying. In his statement today he referred to our
colleague from Egypt as “the distinguished
representative of Egypt”. Mr. Nuseibeh was first referred
to merely as “the representative
of Jordan”.
But
16

started with Voltaire and Rousseau and ended up with
Marx and Lenin. Ideologies are a kind of religion,
though they are not exactly religions. And they were
used as motivations for political and economic ends,
Man has to have motivation.

Middle East, and I am a humble student. Do not go
by the letter. They are written in flowery language.
They were written to be intelligible to the tribal people
who lived in the area from 4,000 years ago to 2,000
years ago. Time and again I have mentioned the story
of Noah. He took male and female and he put them
in the Ark. I have asked whether he had a microscope
to see which of the smallest creatures were male and
which were female. These are parables; this is
symbolism.

168. Now, those Zionists who politicized Judaism
were Europeans. You know the protagonist was
Theodor Herzl, who got fed up with the Christians,
and perhaps rightly so, when he was delegated by
his paper to ,represent them in Paris as a correspondent
to report on the Dreyfus affair, when a Jew who
happened to be innocent was victimized because at
that time France had a resurgence of religious
sentiment.

175. And through his representatives I must tell
Mr. Herzog that the Bible is a compendium of man)
books. Its greatness is in its ethics, not the fundamentalism that finds ,expression in literary pictures
and figures of speech and metaphors. Furthermore,
Jewish scholars as well as Gentile scholars have done
a great deal of research and have found that many
things in the Bible were not written’by those that the
fundamentalist
men of religion claim were their
authors.

169. Therefore, when the Israeli representative says,
“Why do not the Palestinians make peace with us?“,
one must answer, “How can one make peace if you
do not allow the Palestinian to return to his home?”
This is a simple matter. How can you expect to eject
somebody from his home and then tell him, “You come
and make peace with us.” L-t him return to his home,
and then we shall see, then there may be an opportunity
to talk peace.

176. For example, any wise saying of those days
was later attributed to King Solomon. We know that
many proverbs pre-date King Solomon. We know of
the Songs of Solomon-Nclshirl
El-Al7shrrd
in Arabic
or the Aramaic, which, incidentally, was the language
spoken by Christ and by the Jews in the days of
Christ: they did not speak Hebrew. This gentleman
comes from Europe, from Ireland. This gentleman,
Mr. Herzog-I
call him “gentleman”:
I do not like to
call him a liar, as he called one of my colleagues,
because we respect his rights as a human being,
regardless of his being a Zionist-thinks
that everyone
here should take every word of the Bible as the
supreme truth. It is allegorical; there are many
allegories in the Bible. That does not detract from
its moral impact on man. “The letter killeth”, but it
is the ethics and the morality of the Bible that count.

170. Theiefore, assuming the motivation was just
and fair, Palestine happens to be holy land to the two
other monotheistic religions, That is why I say that
to us the Holy Bible also embodies the New Testament.
It so happens that I could not get hold of a copy of the
Holy Koran to brandish it, as Mr. Herzog did the
Old Testament, and to say that Palestine is holy to
the Moslems of the world.
171. Starting with the premise that Zionism is a
European political movement that used Judaism-a
noble religion, for that matter, and one of the three
monotheistic religions-as a motivation for a political
end, I must say that there are only about 16 million
Jews in the world. It so happens that Christianity and
Islam, the two other monotheistic
religions, can,
I think, be estimated to have 1,700 million or 1,800
million adherents.

177. Therefore, how do they claim that Palestine
should be theirs? Incidentally, I am so glad that finally
a book has come out,. written by a Jew, a prominent
Englishman
who happens to be Jewish-because
nationality is not predicated on religion-by the name
of Arthur Koestler, and entitled Tlla T/7irteenth Trihc,
in which he proves that the ancestors of the Jews
of central Europe had never seen the Holy Land.
They were Khazars, from the northern tier of Asia,
who moved westward and settled between the Caspian
Sea and what was Bessarabia-southern
Russia-and
who were converted to Judaism in the eighth century
A.D. Having been converted, they became adherents
of a Semitic .religion, but that did not make them
Semites.

172. So, to use the hackneyed democratic “yardstick”, by what yardstick do the Zionists who hail
from Europe and happen to be Jews-forget that they
are Jews, they just happen to be Jews-lay claim to
a land that was populated by its own indigenous
people and claim that they have a right to that land,
and say the other two religions, which number
1,700 million or 1,800 million adherents, should not
refute their claim?
173. “Ah,” they say, “but God gave us Palestine.”
That is their interpretation. They say God gave them
Palestine.

178. But why did the Zionists want to pick on
Palestine? Because it provided them with a motivation
to say “This was given to us by God”. And who
gave it to them‘? God? Lord Balfour and Mr. Truman
gave them Palestine. God had nothing to do with the
business. The Balfour Declaration”
was written

174. Time and again I have mentioned that these
Books, including the New Testament, are written in
parables. I happen to come from the region of the
17

because the Zionists in England had got in touch with
the Zionists in the United States when England was
being beaten by the German armies in the First
World War. And they told them: “We will bring the
United States into the war against Germany.”
In
other words, they railroaded the United States into
the First World War, although Mr. Wilson, the
President of the United States, was as isolationist as
was the leader of the Republican Party, Mr. Cabot
Lodge. The United States wanted to disentangle
itself from Europe, It was the man brandishing the
big stick, Mr. Roosevelt-“Speak
softly and carry
a big stick”- and Mr. Hanna of Cleveland, who earlier
had begun to interfere in territories that were outside
the hemisphere: the Philippines, Cuba, Hawaii. They
forgot that there was a Monroe Doctrine.
179. It was in 1947 when the State Department
experts told Mr. Truman, “Let us delay any action”.
I was here at the United Nations, at Lake Success,
where I spoke to Mr. Warren Austin, the Senator
from Vermont who was the United States representative to the United Nations, to see whether we could
find a solution that would be fair to those Jews who
had suffered at the hands of Hitler, without antagonizing the indigenous people of Palestine; and some of
the State Department
experts, speaking through
Mr. Wadsworth at that time, told the President of the
United States that they would alienate not only the
Palestinians, but all the Arab world. Mr. Truman
said in reply-and I am paraphrasing a quotation from
Mr. Truman’s memoirs; “Tell me, gentlemen: how
many Americans of Arab origin do I have in my
constituency?”
180. That is how Israel was created-by Mr. Balfour
and Mr. Truman. And the Zionist representatives
come and call us Arabs names.
181. Is that fair? I do not call the Zionists
names; I respect their human dignity, because they
are human beings. But they cannot get along with us
as long as they are arrogant and think they are
superior. In fairness to them, I will not name names,
but many times many European peoples have thought
they were a superior race; they carried the white man’s
burden. Where are they now? It is pathetic. Look at
the inflation of their currencies-and
we too are
suffering because of it. The great empires flourished,
matured, fell and went down the drain. And these
people-1 feel sorry for them-hailing
from Eastern
Europe, using Judaism as a motivation for a political
end, what to lord it over us; yet they number only
two or three million people out of 16 million Jews who
want to live in peace in the countries of their birth
or adoption.
182. Many Jzws come and tell me: “Why are these
Zionists doing this for us? We are Americans”, or
‘Lwe are Brazilians”, or “we are Australians”, I said:
“Go and argue with them.” They do not want to be
part of Israel, but the Zionists keep playing on their

sentiments. I would cite the Arabic proverb: “He
hit me and began to weep”. And they are still weeping,
We should be the people to weep. But we are not
weeping: the Palestinians
are fighting for their
homeland.
183. Mr. Herzog, for perhaps the tenth time, says:
“Let the Arabs come and negotiate with us.” How
can they negotiate with the Zionists when they have.
been robbed of their homes?
184. And then I must draw your attention to the fact
that those European Zionists do not want only a
political peace: they want an economic peace, because
they cannot survive, unless they become a viable
State, without their finances always being fuelled by
the United States, whose taxpayers, whether Jew or
Gentile, are sweating to give them billions to survive.
They want to trade with the Arabs. If they had been
wise and not so complacent, they could perhaps have
achieved their goal and even had a State, because
at the beginning, without a State, they could have
traded with the Arabs and established an enclave for
themselves there. Why not? As I have said time and
again, we would eventually have assimilated them by
the process of osmosis.
185. Now I want to show members of the Council
what extra data they took from this Bible. I refer to
chapter 34 of Genesis.
186. We know that Dinah was the daugher of Jacob
and that Jacob had 12 brothers. We know that Joseph
was sold by his brothers into slavery and finally ended
up in Egypt where he became prominent in the court
of the Pharaoh. We know all this. Where did they
come from? From western Iraq. Our Jews, not the
Khazars who came from outside our region. They
came from western Iraq, where Abraham was born,
from Ur of the Chaldees. “Ur” in the ancient Semitic
language means “city”. They were not near the water
in Iraq, Mesopotamia as it was then called, which
had been inhabited by Sumerians, who were nonSemites, 4,000 years before Christ. But our Jews
started about 2,000 years before Christ and were later
called “Hebrews”.
Many think this came from the
word /~IIX~IYI, the Semitic word for “crossed”. It is
not, it is from the word hrrhi/~r, meaning donkeys.
They were of the tribes which had donkeys on which
they depended for transportation. They did not use
camels because the terrain was too rugged and did not
lend itself to the pads of the camel’s feet. Later they
acquired camels when they went south and lived In
.Sinai. So, there was a dearth of rain, a drought, as
happens everywhere, and they moved southward to
the land of Canaan, which was inhabited by Semites
like our Jews. I am trying to instruct those Zionists
that they have no claim. Even our Jews never laid any
claim to the land.
187. “And Dinah, the daughter of Leah... went cut
to see the daughters of the land”. The Canaanites

I

1

Judaism for their own ends, Now they present us with
“We are there, we are Europeans”.
a ,firil ommpli,
So did the imperialists say not.so long ago, “We are
there”. Where are they now?

were urban. Our Jews-incidentally,
the word “Jew”
comes from the name of the fourth son of Jacob which
was Judah. Really they are “habirus”,
Hebrews.
Never mind, what is in a name? “And Dinah, the
daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land”. “And when
Shechem the son of Hamor...”
Hamor was the king
of the Canaanite city, There were city-states in those
days. “... the Hivite, the prince of the country, saw
her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.”
They said “defiled” because in those days there was
intermarriage only. Anyone who was not married to
her cousin was considered to be defiled. “And his
soul clave unto Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he
loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel”.

191. So why will not the Zionists see reason? The
United States will not be able to go on channelling
funds. I do not know what the new President will
do, but there will be another President. We Arabs
cannot wait.
192. When, following
the, 1973 war, a certain
gentleman by the name of Evans was speaking in the
Special Political
Committee
about the Palestinian
refugees, he said, “We gave $500 million over 25 years
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”; everybody
looked at me to reply. I said, “Only last week your.
President gave $2.5 billion with a stroke of his pen to,
sustain Israel against us. We would rather you had not
given a cent to the Arabs and not created this trouble
for us in Palestine.” This is the situation.

188. And now I will paraphrase about a column
or two. When her brothers knew she had fallen in
love with the son of a Canaanite, they were outraged.
So they went to the king and asked him, “Are these
the traditions of hospitality? We came as outsiders
and Dinah has been defiled.” He said, “No, no, wait
a minute”,
as we say in this’ country. “Wait a
minute”. “And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor,
saying, Get me this damsel to wife.” He was a man of
noble intentions. “And Jacob heard that he had
defiled Dinah his daughter; now his sons were with
his cattle in the field; and Jacob held his peace until
they were come. “And Hamor the father of Shechem
went unto Jacob to commune with him. “And the sons
of Jacob came out...” They did not like their father
being on good terms with the king. “when they heard
it: and the men were grieved, and they were very
wroth...” To make a long story short, the king said,
“Come and live here amongst us. We will marry
your daughters and will give our daughters to you
in marriage. Be part of us. In other words, we need
labour, so come and live here.” The others were sturdy
farmers and tribesmen, but they did not want to go.
Without their father’s knowledge they deceitfully told
Hamor, the king, “We cannot give our daughters in
marriage until every male is circumcised”.
So the
king sent his criers out, saying, “I am going to be
circumcised with my son. What about you men here?”
And the people loved their king and their prince. They
were all circumcised, and on the third day when they
could not move-since
they ‘were adults; in Judaism
and in Islam, circumcision is at a very tender agethey were put to the sword. The Jews slew them. And
when Jacob knew this, he was outraged. He said, “Let
us get out of here. Tomorrow, their cousins and
relatives will come and slay us”.

193. We do not hate this people, far be it from us.
Our tradition, the Arab tradition, is that if an enemy
should come to you for protection,
you would not
let any one of your tribe or relatives touch him. And
if one does, he stands to be killed. Why should we
treat those Zionists as badly as they think we would,
even if they are Europeans?
194. The Israeli representative spoke about Lebanon..
The trouble in Lebanon was caused by the creation of
Israel. The Zionists caused trouble in Lebanon, in
Jordan and in Egypt, and they roused the whole Arab
world, stirring up the youth; and the youth will never
keep quiet, generation after generation,
until the
indigenous people of Palestine are given the right to
return to their land. If they return to their land, there
might be a political peace, which the Zionists do not
want; they want an economic peace in order to be
abIe to survive: But they survive now on tension only.
If there is no tension, what will happen? The process
of osmosis and assimilation will take place.
195. You might not believe this. I have mentioned it
10 times, but because you are new here, Mr. President,
I will repeat it. We have an Arab tribe in the northern
part of our peninsula. They are remnants of the
Crusade. The women have golden hair. We assimilated
them. Let us assimilate each other. According to the
Bible, Hamor, the Canaanite, told the sons of Jacob,
“Come, we shall take your daughters in marriage and
give you our daughters in marriage. Live among us
peacefully.”
No. They want to se& themselves apart.
They say they are the chosen people of God. How
many times have I said that God is not a discriminator?
Those European Khazars, those people who are
highly educated, still believe in the serpent speaking
to Eve-I
have never heard of any serpent speaking
to anyone-and
trying to tempt our great-greatgrandfather Adam and involve him in sin. Then

189. Later Joshua came on the scene and took
Jerusalem which had been inhabited by Semites from
the Arabian peninsula for about 1,000 years before
Joshua, one of our Jews, came. And they say, “God
gave us Palestine and gave us Jerusalem”.
These
were inhabited by Semites, as the Jews were Semites.
But they had no right.
190. And now who comes? Those Khazars. And from
where? From Europe. Converts to Judaism, using
19

Moses put down his staff and it became a serpent.
Then God spoke from behind a bush. It is all in the
Bible, but this is allegorical. If they bring me the
Bible, I can give chapter and verse.
196. Mr. Herzog mentioned Isaiah, one of the noblest
prophets of the Old Testament. Allow me to read
three lines from Micah. He is not very well known,
but he is full of wisdom and compassion: “Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself
before the high God? Shall I come before Him with
burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?” These
were sacrificial-before
the Jews of our period. Sacrifices were burned to propitiate God, because people
did not know how they came into this world and why
they should go, and of course the men of religion
had to give them solace until they died, but this is only
a transitory period of life. Do you want to propitiate
God with burnt offerings, with rams and calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of rams or with tens of thousands of rivers of oil
burned as an offering to God? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgressions-as
Abraham, incidentally,
tried to do, you will remember, with Isaac? This is
allegorical. The fruit of my body for the sins of my
soul. Abraham wanted to sacrifice his first-born to
propitiate God. Micah, the prophet, came years after
Abraham. Is this the way? “He hath shewed thee,
0 man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God?”

15 years the United States will still be in a position
to send them aid? Perhaps the whole configuration
of international politics will change. Why should they
bring suffering upon others and even upon themselves? They are human beings. They should be
brothers under the skin. When Mr. Abdel Meguid
was speaking, I happened to be there, and Mr. Herzog
was reading a paper. Who is he’? He calls him “my
distinguished colleague” and he reads a paper. It
is hypocritical, although perhaps I should not use such
a harsh word. He is using the current language that
has lost its meaning.
199. This is by way of introduction.
The hour is
late. I shall speak whenever I see fit, not to harangue
anybody but, I hope, to persuade those misguided
people who have repeated things so often that they
finally end up by believing them themselves. What
have the members of the Council-not
as persons but
as members of the Council-done
since 1947? They did
what our British friends tried to do without successgain time. This step-by-step diplomacy of Mr. Kissinger, the Peel Commission and other royal commissions was to gain time, but for what? For more
suffering and tribulation for Jew and Gentile. The
Security Council-especially
the five permanent
members-is
supposed to preserve the peace and
to bring peace where there is contention. What is it
doing? Nothing. Why? Because, unfortunately, we
do not have a new approach to international affairs.
200. What about spheres of influence? From Maocco
to the Persian Gulf, we are supposed to be in the
Western sphere of influence. The Balkan Statesare in the Soviet sphere of influence. As I have said
time and again, it is a matter of “You scratch my
back and I’ll scratch yours.” We cannot afford this
policy any more. It has plunged us into two world
wars, and I lived through those two world wars. We
cannot afford it. But for the deterrence of terror, we
would have had a third world war, and we do not have
to have nuclear weapons to have dire devastation all
over the world.

197. Ark the Zionists doing anything justly to the
indigenous people, who originally were Jews and later
were converted to Judaism, and many of them to
Islam, with the Khazars coming from abroad saying,
“This is our land.” Do they love mercy? They talk
of terrorism. They taught the people of Palestine
terrorism. Who blew up the King David Hotel? Who
hanged those British Tommies from the trees? The
British thought that they had made a mistake by
letting them come in droves and that it was not the
right thing to do and hence they sent one royal commission after another. I remember that that happened
between 1922 and 1939, until they gave up when the
Second World War came. What happened when they
wiped out Deir Yassin? The indigenous people of
Palestine, including the Jews of Palestine, were a
peaceful people, because they depended on the pilgrimage. The pilgrims wanted peace and they came to
Palestine to visit Jerusalem, whether they were Jews
or Gentiles.

201. Therefore, Mr. President, although you hail
from a small country like mine, thi-ough your instrumentality the members of the Council may perhaps
be told to bring this matter to their leaders; because,
after all, they are held in the straitjacket of instructions. They have to get instructions from their capitals.
Coming from a small country like mine, perhaps you
can play a role in telling our brothers around this table
to make sure that their leaders ‘take Micah’s advice
and do not engage in ritual in the Council-which
is
equivalent to the burning of rams and oil-but
do
justice, love mercy and walk humbly before the truth,
which is the embodiment of the Creator of the
universe.

198. They talk of the Bible; they should study the
Bible. They have no place there, but we will accept
them if they adapt themselves and adjust themselves
and seek acceptance by the indigenous people of
Palestine. They cannot be accepted by the whole
Arab world, the Moslem world, because Palestine
is also holy to them, from Morocco to the confines
of China. How can they survive? Can the representative of the United States or I guarantee that in 10 or

202. The PRESIDENT
(itzterpretntiotz
from Spnnish): Some representatives have asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call first
20

on the representative of Jordan, whom I invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

representative
of Israel to reply to those specific
questions. In a nutshell, I said that many people in
the world think that the situation in the Middle East
has reached a stalemate because Secretary of State
Kissinger
is no longer carrying on his shuttle
diplomacy and that, therefore, they can wait for a later
period. To our people in the occupied territories,
however, it is for from having reached a stalemate,
because the occupied territories are being systematically and deliberately devoured, so much so that if
we should ever sit around to hold a dialogue over a
peaceful solution to the twin problem of the Middle
East and the Palestinians we would find very little
left over to talk about.

203. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I wish to express
my thanks to the representative of Israel for focusing
his venom upon my humble self. That, apparently, is
his way of saying welcome to a newcomer to the
United Nations. I can only assume that it must have
hurt him most, because my theme was one revolving
around the achievement of an equitable and just
peace before it is too late.
204. I have committed many sins during my lifetime
but I would like to assure representatives that lying
is not one of them. I will not degrade myself by
answering in kind the ill-mannered
and abusive
reference made to me by the representative of Israel.
But, at the same time, it is not surprising, because
he seems to be suffering from a hangover from the
time when he was an exalted military governor ruling
over 1.5 million innocent Palestinian Arabs, thousands
of whom, young boys and girls, he must have put
into gaols with instructions that they be interrogated.
I have seen some of those people; they were maimed,
perhaps for life. But I need go no further on this
particular issue, because, if Mr. Herzog has succeeded
in anything, it is in his attempt to divert the attention
of the Council from the purpose for which my
colleagues from Egypt and Syria and I had requested
that the Security Council be convened.

208. Mr. Herzog has referred to a private visit, after
I had quit the Government two yeai-s ago, to my ailing
mother. She is 75 years old and had suffered a heart
attack. Formerly, when she was able to do so, she
would come to Amman. It was an agony for me to see
my country under occupation and emasculated; but
I felt in duty bound, since my mother was unable to
come to Amman, to suffer that agony and visit her.
209. I suppose that most of the things about which
I am talking today were inspired not by what I have
read in the papers-although
I regularly read the
papers-but
by what I have seen with my own eyes.
210. Of course, all the electronic devices were used
to make sure that I was not carrying a bomb.
I happened to have carried two pencils and they
seemed to have had some metal in them; so I suppose
I was suspected of carrying. those things and they
searched me thoroughly. What an irony that a son of
Jerusalem whose family has lived there for 1,400 years
should only be able to go to Jerusalem to visit his ailing
mother at the sufferance of the military governors who
today are occupying our territories.

205. He said that calling a meeting of the Security
Council-although
I know that we are imposing on the
precious time of representatives-is
an insult to the
Security Council. I think the greater insult is that
Israel has been adamantly and without reservation
refusing to implement
Council resolutions which
would have solved this problem. Which is the greater
insult?

211. Not surprisingly, the representative of Israel
resorted here, as we have witnessed in other committees, to his weird, diversionary tactics, to evade
facing the real and crucial issue of the future of
3 million Palestinians, who, I have said, have no
hope, no future and no abode. Do you want to send
them to outerspace? We have not advanced sufficiently
technologically
to send them there.

206. In my statement before the Council at its first
meeting on this subject [/96&h nle~ti/lg] I pointed out
that there were two basic aspects: one was transcending and tragic; it contained the events in
Hebron. Of course, similar events have been occuring
in the occupied territories ever since the occupation
started, and I am sure that. the Council is very
familiar with what has been happening. If Mr. Herzog
wants me to quote the number of young and old
people-people
of all ages-killed
and tortured over
the years, I think that I would be able to do so. But
I shall not waste the Council’s time today by giving
those figures.

212. They must have a land in which to live, and
their land is the land which has been their ancestral
homeland for thousands and thousands of year, long
before a few Israeli tribes infiltrated into Jerusalem
and found the Jebusites there who had built the city
a thousand years earlier.

207, I pointed out, in my first statement, that the
reason why we have requested a meeting of the
Council-and
we thank the Council for acceding to
our call-was that there are indeed very fateful, very
crucial, very pivotal issues pertaining intimately
to
the prospects of an equitable peace in the Middle
East. 1 asked specific questions and respectfully
requested the Security Council in turn, to request the

2 13, The representative of Israel has, of course, shed
crocodile tears over the events in Lebanon. I regard
Lebanon as my second country. I had my undergraduate education at the American University of
Beirut. I love Lebanon and I have relatives there.
Every time I think of its prolonged agony it literally
21

gives me nightmares. But who is the culprit for what
is happening in Lebanon? It is not the Lebanese and
it is not the Palestinians. I do not intend to digress
into discussing the Lebanese problem, which I hope
will be resolved very shortly as a result of Arab
intervention. The real culprit is Israel for allowing
those hapless half a million Palestinian refugees to
remain in their squalor in their camps for 25 years.
Where do those refugees hail from? Mr. Herzog, of
course, knows where they hail from-from Galilee and
froni other parts of Palestine, or what is now Israel.
They are human beings. They want to go back to
their homes. Nobody carries a gun for the fun of it,
except the criminal. Anybody who carries a gun and
kills also gets killed. The Palestinians and the
Lebanese, without distinction as to creed or party
affiliation, have paid the terrible price of almost
150,000 in dead and wounded. The guilt for that
terrible ordeal and terrible toll must weigh heavily
upon the conscience of Israel for perpetuating the
helplessness and the despair of the refugees in Lebanon
and for the attacks which have been carried out
against their camps over the past eight years, as the
Security Council is well aware.

themselves to the following declaration on 1.5November 1949:
“The Governments of Egypt, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria undertake
to guarantee freedom of access to the Holy Places,
to religious buildings and sites situated in the territory placed under their authority by the final settlement of the Palestine problem, or, pending that
settlement, in the territory at present occupied by
them under armistice agreements; and, pursuant to
this undertaking, will guarantee rights of entry and
of transit to ministers of religion, pilgrims and
visitors, without distinction as to nationality orfaith,
subject only to considerations of national security,
all the above in conformity with the stutm qlro
prior to 14 May 1948.“3
217. At the same time, a similar request was made
to Israel by the Conciliation Commission for Palestine.
In a letter of 8 November 1949 from Mr. Arthur
Lourie, representative of Israel to the Chairman of the
Conciliation Commission, it was stated that Israel was
“of the opinion that it would, in the circumstances,
be in the interests of a constructive and final settlement
if the matter of formulation were dealt with after more
far-reaching considerations of these problems by the
General Assembly”.3 Members know what the reason
was. The Israelis had a choice as to whether or not to
return the Arab civilians to two thirds of western
Jerusalem which they had built with their own sweat
and toil between 1920 and 1948, to open the conventional
short road between Jerusalem
and
Bethlehem, to restore the normal water supply of
RaselEin in the plains of Palestine to supply Jerusalem, and to restore the electricity. They were faced
with one of two choices-either
to do this in exchange
for having fi~ll access to their Holy Places, or not to do
it and not to have that access. The Israelis apparently
put their sequestration of Arab homes and Arab
property and all the rest above their concern for
access to the Holy Places. That was not our fault.

214. The Lebanese are victims and so are the
Palestinians. Let us mourn the tens of thousands of
our people, whether they be Palestinians or Lebanese,
who lost their lives because of the selfishness of
Israel and its refusal to redeem those Palestinians,
215. The representative of Israel referred to Abraham
as Jewish. We claim that he was also our forefather,
and that is one of the reasons why we revere him.
One of the reasons why the Ministry of Charitable
Organizations in Jordan sent our delegation its cable
on the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi events was not simply
because a few people quarrelled. It was because they
felt so strongly about seeing a Holy Place which is
sacred to both Moslems and Jews being desecrated
by the kind of people that I described in my statement
when I first spoke at the previous meeting of the
Council. I believe that that place deserves more
reverence than is being accorded to it under the
occupation.

‘!

218. I remember those days very well. There were
30,000, 40,000 or 50,000 Jerusalemites who had built
and normally inhabited the modern city of Jerusalem,
All those people became refugees, living in overcrowded conditions, in old houses and monasteries
in the Old City of Jerusalem, watching their houses
being taken over by conquest. How could we have
allowed anybody to cross into the Old City, when
there were 40,000 or 50,000 displaced persons living
8 or 10 people to a room, seeing their houses just
across the line, a mere 200 or 300 metres away?
I leave the decision to the members of the Council,

216. The representative of Israel made many references to Jordan. He accused Jordan of preventing
aticess to the Holy Places. I happen to belong to
that generation which witnessed the almost daily
events of those times. I should like to explain what
happened between 1948 and 1967. As I have said, the
Israelis have never ceased to attack Jordan with this,
as we believe, unjust and monstrous accusation. They
have done so in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly. The Jordan delegation has consistently refuted that fabrication and distortion of
facts. The truth of the matter is that in response
to an appeal by the Conciliation Commission for
Palestine-the
Commission that was brought into being
again two or three years ago-the Arab Governments
of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria pledged

219. It is therefore distinctly clear that Israel itself
refused to make a declaration on visiting the Holy
Places similar to the one made by the Arab
Governments.
220. Another point was raised by the representative
of Israel pertaining to the desecration of the Jewish
22

cemetery and the destruction of synagogues. I should
like to read out a few notes on this subject which
I found in my office.

humans and animals to trample over as any visitor
to Jerusalem can see for himself.
226. As for the shrine of a great religious leader in
Jaffa, which dates back several hundred years, if
anyone happened to visit Jaffa and felt like having
a drink in exotic surroundings he could go there, walk
down a few steps and see.for himself.

221. The alleged desecration of a Jewish cemetery
on the Mount of Olives is again a subject which
Israel should not raise because of the invidious comparisons which reference to it would necessarily
evoke. To start with, that Jewish cemetery is only
100 years old and is located on a piece of land
which belongs to the Moslem lVrrq/‘, the charitable
foundation which leased it for a Jewish cemetery for
a period of 100 years, which period expired a few
years ago. As a matter of fact, we were so wellintentioned towards Jews pc~r SP before we knew what
Zionism was aiming at that even the famous and
oldest Jewish quarter in Jerusalem-the
Montefiorewas given as a grant by one of the Jerusalem families
for Jews to settle and live there. That was, of course,
in the latter part of the nineteenth century.

227. The mosques of Safad and Tiberius have been
converted into art galleries, and I need hardly remind
the Council of the attempt to burn down the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, which was of course attributed to a deranged
Australian citizen. But, from all I have read, I wonder
what the Israelis plan for the future for this sacred
area.
228. Mr. Evan M. Wilson, whom I quoted previously,
had this to say in his book, Jerusalem, Key IO Peace:
“After the war of 1967, Christian authorities who
had been unable for many years to visit certain
Christian properties on Mount Zion... because they
were... .closed off by the Israeli military, found that
some of these institutions had suffered severely”
-that is on the Mount of Olives-“The
tombs of
the Armenian Patriarchs, in the courtyard of the
Armenian Church of St. Saviour, had been broken
into and the bones scattered about.”

222. However, the damage to this cemetery on
Mount Scopus was done when the Israeli gangs and
forces barricaded themselves in it and bombarded the
Old City in their attempt to occupy it at the end of
1947 and the beginning of 1948.
223. As a matter of fact, the Israelis also complained
about the destruction of 48 synagogues in the Old
City. I enquired into this and asked many of the
elderly people-because
my knowledge is limited
on this matter-and
they all assured me that as far
as they were concerned there were only four major
synagogues. Now, what happened? Why were they
destroyed? We as Moslems believe that Judaism and
Christianity are the foundations of our Islamic religion.
All one has to do is to read the Holy Koran to find
this out. We could never, if we are true Moslems,
allow ourselves to desecrate a Jewish synagogue or
Holy Book, because that is part of our faith. We
would become non-Moslems if we did that.

As all the members of the Council know, similar acts
were perpetrated at the Holy Sepulchre.
“A famous mosaic floor had been removed from
the church during or just after the war, and the
church itself was in a deplorable state of disrepair.
Several Christian cemeteries in the vicinity were
in bad condition, with thick vegetation and opened
graves... There is reason to believe, moreover, that
this vandalism.. . is continuing. It was found in the
spring of 1968, after the war, that the crosses on
83 tombs in the Catholic cemetery on Mount Zion
had been shattered. It was in this area also that the
tower of the Dormition Basilica was used for many
years as an Israeli machine-gun nest.”

224. As soon as the Jordan civil administration was
established in the city, the municipality
undertook
the task of its maintenance and protection by assigning
special watchmen and caretakers to it.

229. The question then arises: did the Jordanians
wilfully destroy the two main synagogues in the Old
City? The gentleman here talks.about two synagogues;
my information is that there were four. But that does
not matter. The truth of the matter is that some
months before the end of the British Mandate, the
Jewish leadership had decided to plant close to
1,000 of their troops representing the Haganah and
the Irgun in the Jewish quarter of the Old City as
a springboard to be used from within, simultaneously
with an onslaught from without, to occupy the Old
City when the appropriate time arrived.

225. What do we find on the other side of the scoreboard? Without exaggeration, we find one of the most
massive and sinful programmes of desecration that
the world has ever known. One of the most
hallowed Moslem cemeteries, the Ma’manallah, which,
during the British Mandate, was shortened to Mamilla,
in the western section of Jerusalem, is at least 1,000
years old. It contains the remains of men great by any
standard, in all fields of achievement-saints,
warriers,
leaders of men and historical figures. What is its
present fate? I should like one of the Americans
residing in the American Consulate in Jerusalem,
because that consulate is contiguous to the cemetery,
to tell us what is now the fate of the Mamilla cemetery,
which is over 1,000 years old. It is a public park for

230. And that is precisely what they did. I can never
forget those days between 15 and 18 May 1948 when
the Israelis went all out in the Al-Khalil area to OCCUPY
23

the City from without while fighting was going on
within. Our civilian population,
who had been
abandoned without arms and without any preparation
whatsoever except for 300 rifles which had been given
by the disintegrating British authorities to 300 pohcemen, and who had had no military training, had
valiantly to man the walls of the city and fight it
out, It was only on 18 May, when they had exhausted
their ammunition and had nothing left to fight with
except stones and, fortunately, a few sticks of
dynamite, that they were able to repulse the ultimate
attack.

235. Finally, Mr. Herzog asked why we state thatthe
PLO is the representative of. the Palestinian ,,eople
rather than the Pa1estmmns In, let us say, the ~~~~
Bank or the West Bank. Apart from the fact that the
Conference of Heads of State or Government ef the
Arab Countries held at Rabat from 26 to 2g October
1974 unanimously decided that the PLO is the repre.
sentative of the Palestinian
people, apart +f,.om
formalities, apart from everything else, the situation
now is that we are dealing with and discussing the
overall Palestinian problem, and not merely, as wBs
true in 1967, the occupied territories,

231. It was on that day that they made appeals to
Jordan to send its 4,000 or 5,000 troops to Palestine
to rescue the population from being slaughtered.

236, Which Arab ruler could agree that Palestinian
territory should be given UP’? If the Israelis were wise,
they would insist that there should be Palestinian
participation. The Palestinians are the only ones who
can say, “We accept this and we refuse that”, If we
were to agree that Palestinian territory should be
given up, we would all be repudiated as net
representing the Palestinians.

232. On many occasions Israeli representatives
have used the term “Jordanian conquerors” ot
“Jordanian invaders”. If we are to be told that the
Jordanian army was an invader, I must remind the
Council that the Jordanian army was a part of the
allied armies; it was affiliated with the British army.
The Jordanian army was actually in occupation of
most of the key posts in Palestine. However, because
the Jordanian troops were disciplined and respected
the United Nations resolutions, they withdrew a day
before the end of the Mandate. They were already in
occupation, but they left Palestine and the key positions there because they were part of the allied
armies. The United Nations had decided on the
partitioning of Palestine, and so they withdrew to the
East Bank.

237. I am a Palestinian myself, but I am the representative of Jordan. I should like to remind the
Council that in 1950, when the East Bank and the West
Bank were unified, it was specifically stated in the
Constitution of the unified State of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan that all arrangements were valid
until such time as the Palestinian problem became
ready for solution. In other words, our unity was
without prejudice to the ultimate equitable and just
solution of the Palestinian problem.
238. I know that the people in the East Bank and
the people in the West Bank are brethren. They belong
to the same families, This is a family affair which can
best be settled by dialogue and amily between the
PLO and Jordan, rather than by the attempts of the
representative of Israel to sow the seeds of conflict
between two brothers-as
Israel has succeeded in
doing in other parts of the world.

233. The people of Jerusalem, having used up all
their arms and ammunition-and
they had little
enough-implored
the late King Abdullah to send
help. And what did he send? A batallion-600
riflemen. Fortunately, they were able to save the day.
234. I believe that Mr. Herzog has succeeded in
diverting the discussion to issues which have nothing
to do with the issue which we respectfully asked the
Council to examine. He has asked today why the
Arabs do not behave rationally, why they do not come
round and talk about an equitable peace, and so on.
What can we do but repeat in every statement we make
that that is precisely our goal. We do not want the
situation to continue to fester, We are ready and
willing to have a dialogue on the solution of the
Middle East problem and the Palestinian problem. For
there are two separate things involved here. One
question is the withdrawal from the occupied territories. And I must state that if withdrawal is delayed
much longer, there will not be very much left of the
West Bank or Gaza to talk about. I have said that
before and I want to repeat it again and again and
again. The second question is the restoration of the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to their homeland.
The Palestinians have rights there. That fact is
reiterated every year in resolutions of the United
Nations.

239. The PRESIDENT
(itlterpr’etcrtiotr Jiw?z $?nf!ish): I invite the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
240. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): The hour
is very late indeed. I shall therefore confine myself
to some very brief comments about the statement of
the Israeli representative, reserving my delegation’s
right to make a more detailed statement to the Ceuncil at one of its future meetings.
241. I shall not repeat all the brilliant refutations
made by the previous speakers. I shall not say that the
real insult was not the convening of the SecuntY
Council to discuss a very serious situation; the real
insult was to permit a representative of a racist regime,
an aggressive regime, to sit here in the Council: The
proper place for representatives of such regilresp
which violate the principles of the United Nations.
24

and its Charter, is not only outside the Council but
outside the United Nations. If it were not for certain
Powers that protect that rkgime and its representatives, the Zionist representatives would be waiting
outside the United Nations alongside the representatives of South Africa, for instance.

discriminate against our own brothers of Jewish faith
or our own brothers of Christian faith. As a matter
of fact, a lot of our troubles during the recent crisis
in Lebanon arose precisely because we did not want to
discriminate against any brother because of his faith
or religion. That is what the Zionists do not understand. We believe we are all brothers, whether we
are Moslems, Christians or Jews, and our enemy,
our only enemy, is Zionism and imperialism, So, we
cannot have discrimination against Jews, and anyway,
this lie will not deceive anyone anymore.

242. I shall not refer, either, to the many other
distortions and fabrications indulged in, as usual, by
the Zionist representative. As the previous speakers
said, he spoke about everything except the main
issue, the real issue-the explosive situation in the
occupied Arab territories. This is the tenth year of the
occupation of those territories, and Israel continues to
defy world public opinion, the United Nations itself
and all the principles of international and humanitarian
law. Israel carries out a policy of repression, oppression and expansion in the occupied territories. It really
wants to swallow up all the occupied territories.

246. I do not have to quote many persons or sources;
I shall simply refer tb an important and respected
magazine, The Nntionol Geogrcrphir, which published
a report on our Jewish community, and other reports
such as that of none other than Mr. Mike Wallace,
who happens to be a Jew himself, and who three times
insisted, despite the threats of the Zionists here in the
United States, that he had been to Syria and had seen
that the Jews were treated like any other members
of the Syrian citizenry. He came back with documentary films and testimonies from those Jews.
I need not, then, dwell on the matter.

243. Because the representative of the Zionists did
not want to speak about the real issue, he referred to
irrelevant issues, and he repeated the usual lies.
I would advise him not to rejoice very much about the
Arab differences, because, as we have time and again
repeated, those differences are a sign of the name of
the Arab nation and we are not afraid of them because
many other great nations have passed through similar
phases in their history, and from those differences
and difficulties they emerged great nations. I do not
have to name all of them. The one in which we are
now guests, the great nation of the United States, is
one of them. It had a very terrible internal war, and
it emerged a great nation. Many other nations, the
Soviet Union and the European nations among them
have passed through similar differences and emerged
great nations. We are confident that such is the future
of the Arab nation.

247. And I need not say anything about the old
imperialist theory that the aggressors are in a territory in order to raise the standard of living of the
people of that territory. As members are aware, that
is the excuse and pretext used by all colonialists and
imperialists, but unfortunately, the Zionists have not
learnt that the era of those lies and the era of classic
colonialism is over. Even the neo-colonialists do not
dare use that pretext any more.
248. Our people want to live in freedom, even if
they are in poverty. They do not care about prosperity
if it is to come to them under the yoke of alien
occupation, under the feet of the soldiers of their
aggressor. They want to live free, to be free. And,
thereafter, they can look after their development and
prosperity.

244, Also, the main reason for the differences
between the Arab nations is in fact the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people and the Arab
countries. We differ not on the ultimate aim, which
is to get the Israeli aggressors out of our land; we
differ on priorities and the best means of reaching
that noble and ultimate aim, which is the aim of every
nation and every people wanting to live in freedom
without aggression and alien domination.

249. At this late hour I wish to make just three
important points.
2.50. First, the Zionist representative said that the
Koenig report is not important because it does not
reflect the policy of the Government. But whenever
such a thing has happened we have been told that it
does not represent the policy of the occupier, that it
does not represent the policy of the Government.

245. Because he did not want to speak about the real
issue, the Israeli representative referred to what are
called the Syrian Jews. I need not repeat that these
are lies concerning the Syrian citizens of Jewish faith,
because if we Syrians wanted to discriminate against
people of Jewish faith, or people of Christian faith,
we would not have objected to the Zionists. We would
not have objected to the idea of a Jewish State being
based only and exclusively on religion. That is what
the Zionists do not understand. They do not understand that we do not consider religion a reason fol
discriminatitig
or differentiating
between people.
Even if we wanted to, in our country we cannot

251. I need only quote from T/w JP/w.s~//P/II POST
of 9 September 1976. It says:
“Koenig’s
proposals amount to wholesale discrimination, but they are nothing new. Judaization
is 1sraeI’s official policy for solLing the demographic
problem in Galilee. Arab lands have long been
expropriated for Jewish settlement in what is called
the Northern District.”
25

252. There have been others, who have differed from
Mr. Herzog. They have even gone as far as to say,
as did Mr. Baruch Wagner, the Jewish Mayor of
Carmel, “Let us not be ashamed to state publicly
that we want a Jewish majority in Galilee.”
And
Moshe Kahn, the Israeli writer, has said, “The document’s detractors largely forget that Zionism’s primary
aim was not to establish the world’s first model
liberal or socialist democracy. It was to restore
sovereign Jewish life.” That is all I have tp say,as far
as the Koenig report is concerned.

tions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The Zionist representative referred to resolution 338 (1973) without
mentioning the paragraphs of that resolution. There
are three paragraphs only. The first calls for an
immediate cease-fire; the second paragraph calls for
the immediate
implementation
of resolution 242
(1967); the third refers to negotiations under the
auspices of the United Nations in order to establish
a just and lasting peace in the region.
259. Resolutibn 242 (1967), in spite of all its shortcomings, required Israel to withdraw immediately
from all occupied Arab territories, because in the
preamble to that resolution the principle of the nonacquisition of territory by force was recognized and
affirmed.

253; The second important point is Lebanon, and
time and again we have seen the Zionist representative shedding crocodile tears about what is happening
in Lebanon or what was happening there, because,
happily, the Arab countries are, with their united
efforts, beginning to be able to bring peace back to
Lebanon, despite all the plots and conspiracies of the
Zionists and the colonialists.

260. Later, in the operative portion, Israel was
requested to withdraw from the territories which were
occupied in 1967; and there were other conditions,
because it was known that after withdrawal, a situation of peace could be established in the region.

254. Everybody knows the Israelis were at the root
of all that happened in Lebanon. They caused it, and
if real peace comes to Lebanon, they will be the
first to be angry and sad about real peace returning
to Lebanon. And for two reasons alone.

261. Resolution 338 (1973) acknowledged that resolution 242 (1967) was not sufficient for real peace, but
only for partial peace. Therefore, we had in resolution 338 (1973) the decision that, after the immediate
implementation of resolution 242 (1967), there should
be negotiations for a just and lasting peace. That was
because in resolution 242 (1967) the Palestinian
element was lacking. Resolution 242 (1967) referred to
the Palestinians as mere refugees, whereas resoiution 338 (1973) attempted to remedy that by calling
for negotiations aimed at a just and durable peace.

255. Because in Lebanon if the Arabs, Christians,
Moslems and others succeeded in continuing to live
in peace and harmony, as they have done for many
centuries, then the idea of a democratic kind of State,
which is the dream of our brothers the Palestinians,
would be proved to be very possible and viable. The
Zionists wanted to destroy that idea and that ideal,
that example of coexistence between different faiths
in Lebanon. That is why, since 1969 and before that,
they have through their aggression been jt the root of
all the events in Lebanon. They have attacked the
Beirut airport many times; ‘they have carried out
terrorist raids against Beirut and they have repeatedly
bombarded the villages and towns of the Lebanese
territory and the refugee camps in Lebanon,

262. Thus Israel, if it sincerely wants peace, is
requested to withdraw from the occupied territories:
that is the first condition. There cannot be any negotiations under the weight of aggression. As long as the
occupation lasts, however temporary, it is an act of
aggression. As long as the soldiers of Israel are
occupying Arab territory, Israel is lying when it
says it wants peace.

256. So their first aim is to destroy the dream of the
Palestinian people who appeal and call for a democratic
State in which everybody can live side by side,

263. If Israel wants peace, it has to implement the
United Nations resolutions, withdraw its troops from
the occupied Arab territories and recognize the rights
of the Palestinian people. Only then can real peace
come to t,he region.

257. The second thing is this. If, God forbid, they
had succeeded in their conspiracy in Lebanon,
Lebanon would have been partitioned as Palestine was
partitioned,
and there would have been a Moslem
State of Lebanon and a Christian State of Lebanon.
If that had happened, it would have been justification
for the racist idea of having an exclusively Jewish
State. They have wanted Lebanon to be partitioned;
they still want it to be partitioned, and they are still
conspiring against Lebanon. So the Israeli representative should not mention Lebanon.

264. The PRESIDENT
(intupretrrtion
Jion~ S:~tr~rish): I call on the representative
of the PLO in
exercise of his right of reply.
265. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
If members are being held in deliberations for a few
hours, my people has been enduring dispersion and
misery for 30 long years; but thanks to our perseverance and struggle, and thanks, to the support we
receive from the peace-loving nations and peoples,
this state of misery and dispersion will not be
perpetuated. The day of our return to our homes,

258. The last comment I would like to make concerns
the reference by the Zionist representative to peace
negotiations
and resolutions,
particularly
resolu26

where we shall exercise our inalienable right to selfdetermination, is drawing near. We sincerely hope that
these hours of deliberation here will help bring us
closer to our target and aims for the sake and’ benefit
of world peace and security.

269. We were told that the Mayor of Hebron and
Sheikh Al-Muhtasib had appealed to the people to calm
down, and that the Moslem leaders had condemned the
desecration of the Tomb of Abraham, who is the
Patriarch of the Christians, of the Jews and of the
Moslems.

266. Reference was made in the Council to our
presence in Lebanon. The presence of the Palestinians
in Lebanon is not a voluntary act; it is not an act of
their own choosing. In order to create an exclusive,
racist homeland of their own, the Zionists forcibly
expelled and evicted the Palestinian people from their
country 28 years ago. Some of them were driven by
force of arms across the Palestinian-Lebanese
frontiers, to be reduced to the status of refugees in
Lebanon, living in appalling misery and wretchedness.
267. The President of the Council of Ministers
Lebanon, Mr. Rashid Karame, stated that

270. We have not been shown such big advertisements calling for religious incitement as this: “Can
your Jewish conscience remain quiet?” We have not
seen any such publication in any Arab or Moslem
paper. The ~gcizrs provoccrteurs referred to by the
representative of the Zionist entity are the people
who publish these advertisements. May this, with your
permission, Mr. President, be included among the
documents now under consideration.
271. What is happening in the occupied territories
is that the Zionist authorities are still applying that the
British left for us: something called the Defence
Emergency Regulations of 1945, a most arbitrary type
of regulation. Even some Jews, and quite a number
of them, have condemned those so-called Defence
Emergency Regulations of 1945.

of

“[The] Palestinians came to Lebanon after being
evicted by Israel in 1948, and they settled in camps.
But since then they have been exposed to all
kinds of fear, misery and aggression by Israel. The
wanton attacks by the Israelis against the refugee
camps caused thousands of victims, and the
numerous complaints of Lebanon against Israel to
the Security Council are probably still fresh in the
minds of Members of the United Nations. And as
a result of these attacks, the Palestinians, in selfdefence, felt the need to arm, and this led to the
conclusion of agreements between them and the
Lebanese authorities.

272. Mr. Ya‘acov Shimshon Shapiro, who later
became an Israeli Attorney-General and a Minister
of Justice, made the following remarks about that
law:
“The system established in Palestine since the
issue of the Defence Laws is unparalleled in any
civilized country. There were no such laws even in
Nazi Germany. It is our duty to tell the whole
world that the Defence Laws passed by British
Mandatory Government, of Palestine destroyed the
very foundation of justice in this land.”

“The Agreement between the Lebanese authorities and the Palestine Liberation Organization
in 1969 regulates the Palestinian armed presence
on Lebanese soil, and this was also approved by
the Lebanese Parliament.“4

SO long as such laws and the occupation persist in
Palestine, we in the Security Council will be seized of
an explosive situation.

268. When we cited Hebron during the course of this
debate, it was only as an example. It is not the reason
for which the Council is meeting.. We are meeting
here to consider the situation in the occupied territories, and the situation in the Palestinian territories
under Zionist occupation is a direct result of occupation, per se, and also of the behaviour of the Zionists
towards the Palestinian people.

Notes

27

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

UNITED

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may bc obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

COMMENT

NATIONS

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications

des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
des ventes,
New York ou Gendve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nnciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas est&n en venta en librerias
a su librero o didjase
a: Naciones

004co

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoms
en
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

83-60801-April

1985-%2m

4
