S/PV.7912

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7912th meeting

Tuesday, 4 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2017/250)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-08905 (E)
*1708905*

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should first like to publicly thank
the representative of the United Kingdom, who did a
fantastic job as President and left us with big shoes
to fill; we appreciate his sacrifice and leadership
during the past month and congratulate him on a very
successful month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2017/250)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/250, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation in Darfur for the
first time since having been appointed head of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
The three strategic priorities established by the
Security Council in its resolution 2148 (2014) continue
to provide a framework within which UNAMID
implements its protection-of-civilians mandate,
mitigates intercommunal conflicts and mediates
2/20

04/04/2017

between the Government of the Sudan and the
non-signatory armed movements.
We continue to work with the Government at
all levels in pursuance of this mandate with the full
understanding that the primary responsibility for
the protection of Sudanese civilians rests with the
Government of the Sudan.
The Darfur of today is a very different place
from what the region was in 2003, when the armed
conflict began, and from that of a year ago. Fighting
between the forces of the Government of the Sudan and
the main three non-signatory armed movements has
considerably diminished.
The Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid al-Nour
(SLA/Abdul Wahid) is no longer capable of mounting
and sustaining significant military operations and
has experienced a series of defections that have left it
weakened by defections to the Government side. As a
result of the military campaign of the past three years,
the Government has been able to take control of every
area previously held by the movement in and around
its heartland of Jebel Marra, leaving SLA/Abdul Wahid
with a few pockets of resistance.
The unilateral ceasefire that was extended by a
further six months in January is largely holding. SLA
Minni Minawi and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the
Justice and Equality Movement have also declared a
ceasefire, with SLA Abdul Wahid consistently refusing
to do so.
Against the backdrop of economic hardship and
social depression, however, banditry and criminality
continue to be widespread. The proliferation of
small arms and light weapons feeds those negative
phenomena, as does intercommunal violence, which
is usually triggered by competition, mostly over land,
water, grazing and mineral resources. The efforts of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
with the support of UNAMID, to get the parties to
the conflict in Darfur to sign a cessation of hostilities
agreement and to start direct negotiations towards an
inclusive peace agreement to end the conflict have
remained inconclusive. The current status is hurting
all parties and, most importantly, is not sustainable and
can only lead to more bloodshed.
On 8 March, President Al-Bashir issued a decree
pardoning 259 rebels captured in the fighting with
Government forces, including 66 combatants from
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Darfur armed movements who were on death row. That
is a welcome development that we hope will contribute
to affirming mutual trust between the Sudanese parties.
SLA Abdul Wahid continues to refuse to join the peace
process and seems to want to continue to fight. We
would like to appeal to the Council and those with
influence and leverage over him to persuade him to
recognize the importance of a political settlement and
to desist from bringing more suffering upon the very
people that he professes to represent.
With regard to the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, the 12th meeting of the
Implementation Follow-up Commission was held on
6 March under the chairmanship of the State of Qatar.
Efforts will continue towards improving coordination
and mobilizing resources for the implementation of
the remaining issues related to the Doha Document,
particularly with the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs).
The past three months have also witnessed a
continued reduction in the number of intercommunal
security incidents, in particular as a result of the more
effective involvement of the native administration
and the impact of security measures taken by State
Governments, leading to an increased number of peace
agreements, the implementation of which is supported
by UNAMID. Seasonal disputes over access to land
and resources during the migration and farming season
have nevertheless continued.
According to figures provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 97,400 people
were newly displaced in 2016. Of those, approximately
39,600 have reportedly returned, including some 25,500
who were verified and assisted in Golo, the centre
of Jebel Marra. An additional 99,400 people remain
unverified. We have not seen any new displacement in
2017. IDPs continue to recquire UNAMID protection
and humanitarian assistance on a daily basis. Durable
solutions to enable their return to their places of origin
or reintegration have to be identified and should be the
main priority of our collective efforts.
The cooperation of the Government of the Sudan has
noticeably improved. Although UNAMID experienced
intermittent movement restrictions during the reporting
period, there has been significant improvement in that
regard. In addition, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team have repeatedly been able to visit areas in
Jebel Marra that were previously off-limits. Our United

S/PV.7912

Nations humanitarian partners are commencing regular
helicopter flights to Golo. UNAMID remains focused
on efforts to work with authorities of the Government of
the Sudan to overcome the remaining access challenges.
We have also seen some improvement in the issuance
of visas and the clearance of essential equipment.
However, delays in the clearance of UNAMID goods
and equipment remain a concern, with some shipments
pending since 2015.
The African Union, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan are actively discussing how
best to configure a strategy for UNAMID to eventually
leave Darfur as part of constructive discussions
within the joint working group. On 26 February, the
joint working group met in Khartoum and referred
its conclusions to the strategic tripartite mechanism,
which will meet later this month. From 5 to 17 March,
UNAMID received an African Union-United Nations
strategic review team, which met with the Government
of the Sudan in Khartoum and Darfur and travelled
throughout Darfur. UNAMID awaits the outcome
of these deliberations. However, without necessarily
prejudging the outcome of the strategic review, I should
like to say that, in view of the current circumstances in
Darfur, a pragmatic reconfiguration of UNAMID will
become necessary, and the AU and the United Nations
will have to focus on how best that could be done
without compromising the gains made thus far.
In conclusion, I would like to express UNAMID’s
appreciation to the Council for the support we have
received. We continue to count on it as we continue
to implement the mandate given to us by the United
Nations and the African Union.
The President: I thank Mr. Mamabolo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Allow me to begin
by expressing my condolences to the representative of
the Russian Federation for the terrorist attack in Saint
Petersburg yesterday that caused such senseless loss
of life.
I should also like to wish you, Madam President, all
the very best for your month in the hot seat, and thank
you for your kind words about last month.
I would also like to warmly welcome and
congratulate the Joint Special Representative on his

17-089053/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

appointment. I thank him for the briefing that he has
just given us.
Darfur is at a crossroads. Down one path lies the
continuation of 14 years of conflict, bloodshed and
impunity. It is a path that has forced 2.6 million people
from their homes. It is a path littered with persistent
violations of international humanitarian law, human
rights violations and abuses, and persistent sexual
and gender-based violence. It is a path that Darfur has
simply been on for too long.
But there is another road to take, and in recent months
we have seen a welcome absence of violence between
the Government of the Sudan and opposition groups.
We have seen the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) being granted access
to areas that were previously cut. Vital humanitarian
assessments are now under way.
Today, therefore, we need to send a clear message
to the Government of the Sudan: choose the right path.
Choose the path that will improve the lives of the
people of Darfur. Choose the path to sustainable peace.
Thats means tackling the culture of criminality and the
banditry in Darfur. It means ending the abundance of
small arms and light weapons, which are only adding
fuel to the fire. And it means bringing to justice,
domestically and through the International Criminal
Court, all those who have carried out violence and who
have failed to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights — no matter their allegiance or their
links to the Government.
In truth, Darfur will remain unstable and
unpredictable so long as the root causes of conflict
remain unaddressed. Let us therefore all encourage the
Government of the Sudan to use the current cessation
in the violence to shift its effortrs away from counterinsurgency and towards building sustainable peace.
They will need the support of the Security Council and
of the international community as a whole as they do so.
The first step has to be political. A political
agreement between the parties to the armed conflict
would not only secure a permanent cessation of
hostilities, it would also be a significant step in
addressing the drivers of intercommunal violence. We
therefore call upon all parties to the armed conflict to
engage meaningfully with the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel for the peace process in
order to secure a political agreement.
4/20

04/04/2017

The second step towards a long-term solution is
long-term access to Darfur. In order for UNAMID to
fulfil its mandated duty to protect civilians, the mission
requires unfettered access throughout Darfur — not
just for a few days, or even for a few weeks, but on a
sustained basis. The recent access is welcome, but it will
count for little if it is not maintained. We are concerned
that security agents of the Government of the Sudan
continue to impose unnecessary access restrictions
on UNAMID. That is particularly troubling when
the mission is prevented from accessing vulnerable
populations of internally displaced persons and those
most in need. Let us insist today that UNAMID be
given unrestricted access throughout Darfur, in order
to enable the mission to fulfil its mandate effectively.
That brings me to my final point. As penholder on
UNAMID here in New York, we believe that, if there is
to be sustainable peace in Darfur, UNAMID must evolve
with the security situation. The strategic review will be
crucial in that respect, and we welcome the help of the
Government of the Sudan for the visit by the strategic
review team to Darfur. We are encouraged that they
could visit all five states, including areas previously
denied, such as Golo and Nertiti in Jebel Marra.
However, if UNAMID is to be adapted, as we hope,
we all need to be confident that the Government of the
Sudan is willing and able to protect its civilians in areas
where UNAMID’s presence is altered. That requires
more than just unfettered and reliable access; it requires
the Government of the Sudan to commit to the principle
of operational flexibility for UNAMID and to commit
to improving its own ability to protect civilians.
In conclusion, until the Government and the parties
to the conflict take those steps, Darfur will remain at
that crossroads. The people of Darfur cannot afford
a wrong turn. They have suffered for too long. It is
incumbent upon us all to ensure that the path chosen is
the right one, and the one that will improve the lives of
civilians and lead to sustainable peace.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam President, my delegation congratulates
you and expresses its commitment to supporting you in
your presidency of the Security Council. I also thank
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft and the entire United
Kingdom delegation for their outstanding presidency
last month.
I also join others in expressing our condolences to
our colleagues from the Russian delegation and to the
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government and the people of the Russian Federation
in conneciton with the cowardly attack that took place
yesterday in Saint Petersburg. We convey to them our
full solidarity.
We thank Mr. Jeremiah Nyamane Kingsley
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/250).
Uruguay would like to highlight the report’s
observations that there have been no significant armed
clashes reported in Darfur for several months now and
that, as compared with previous years, there have been
fewer clashes between communities. It is important that
the current calm in the armed conflict be maintained
in order to halt violence against civilians and allow for
conditions to emerge that are conducive to encouraging
a secure environment for the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons and communities.
We welcome the fact that the Government of the
Sudan and the non-signatory movements to the Doha
Document for Peace have maintained the unilateral
ceasefire. We encourage them to resume direct talks,
with a view to forging a formal agreement on the
cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access, as
well as to move swiftly towards political negotiations
that can pave the way towards a lasting solution to
the conflict.
I would like once again to underscore the key role
played by UNAMID, in an operational environment that
is far from free of difficulties. With regard to the issue
of protecting civilians, we urge the mission to continue
focusing on protecting internally displaced persons,
who still number more than 2.6 million. We also urge
it to concentrate on preventing and mediating local
conflicts, including supporting reconciliation efforts
and peace processes among the various communities.
With regard to the operational environment — from
a systemic perspective — my colleagues on the Security
Council will not be surprised to know that Uruguay
is concerned any time that one State undertakes
unilateral actions that interfere with the normal and
proper functioning of a peacekeeping operation. In
the specific case of UNAMID, we take note of the
improvement in terms of issuing visas for staff and
with regard to dispatching containers holding rations
intended for UNAMID troops. Nevertheless, those are
in fact obligations incumbent upon the State in order to

S/PV.7912

facilitate the operation of the mission. We reiterate that,
in line with the obligations assumed under the statusof-forces agreement, the Government of the Sudan
must take the measures necessary to eliminate all
bureaucratic impediments and to ensure that UNAMID
has appropriate conditions in order to be able to fully
comply with its mandate. That includes the points raised
by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom: sustained,
ununimpeded access to Darfur and all areas where the
mission should be present.
In conclusion, allow me to convey Uruguay’s
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations
country team on the ground and all humanitarian staff,
who continue to work tirelessly, in often very difficult
circumstances, in order to achieve lasting peace
in Darfur.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by congratulating
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I wish to assure you of my delegation’s full support
and cooperation. I would like to thank Ambassador
Matthew Rycroft and his team for their very successful
presidency. Much was achieved in March.
Before I proceed further, on behalf of my
Government I would like very strongly to condemn the
heinous and vicious terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg,
as well as to express our solidarity with the people and
the Government of the Russian Federation. We will
always be second-to-none in our readiness to cooperate
in the fight against this scourge. All can count on that.
I am very pleased to see our good friend and brother
Ambassador Jeremiah Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo,
who did so much here at the United Nations when he
was the Permanent Representative of his country. I
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
appointment as the new African Union-United Nations
Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator for
Darfur. I also thank him for his informative briefing.
I would also like to express our appreciation to his
predecessor for his notable contributions.
The situation in Darfur continues to show marked
progress as was acknowledged in the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). Indeed, no major
fighting has been reported since the beginning of
this year, and the security situation has significantly
improved. We commend the Government of the
Sudan for extending the unilateral ceasefire for an

17-089055/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

additional six months. The Council should continue to
exert pressure on the armed movements to negotiate
seriously ending the suffering of the people of Darfur
and holding the spoilers accountable. The leadership
of Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid should also
be called upon to join the peace process in earnest
without preconditions.
Of course, we all recognize that much remains to
be done in addressing the root causes of the conflict
in Darfur and ensuring long-term stability. In that
regard, we appreciate that the Government established
the Darfur Peace Follow-up Office and took forward
the implementation of Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. Addressing the challenge of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is vital to bringing lasting
peace to Darfur, and we note the efforts that are being
taken in that regard, including facilitating the voluntary
repatriation of IDPs. It is important that those efforts be
supported by the United Nations and the international
community in general.
The National Dialogue process is indeed a step in
the right direction. We note that the Government has
begun implementing the National Dialogue document,
and we welcome the appointment of Barki Hasan
Saleh to the post of Prime Minister. Support for the
implementation of the National Dialogue is critical for
sustainable peace and security to prevail not only in
Darfur but in the Sudan, in general. Those outside the
National Dialogue process able to exercise leverage on
the parties should exercise pressure on them so that
they join the implementation phase. The Government
should also be encouraged to remain committed to
ensuring inclusivity.
With regard to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we note the
improvements made in connection with visas and
customs clearance. Furthermore, the revision of the
directives and procedures for humanitarian action in
the Sudan by the Humanitarian Aid Commission eased
the regulations governing the delivery of humanitarian
aid as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/250). It is our hope that all remaining challenges
facing UNAMID operations will be resolved through
taking advantage of the existing arrangements.
We appreciate the personal involvement of the
Secretary-General in resolving the impasse between
the Government of the Sudan and the Secretariat
concerning the way forward in implementing the exit
6/20

04/04/2017

strategy. That led to the finalization of the report of the
joint working group following the successful meeting
that the group held in Khartoum on 26 February and
the commencement of the joint African Union-United
Nations report on the strategic review. We look forward
to receiving the report that we expect will take into
account the outcome of the aforementioned joint
working group meeting.
Finally, the Sudan has been playing a constructive
role in dealing with peace and security issues in the
region. The relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan is improving. The Sudanese Government has
opened humanitarian corridors to deliver assistance
to South Sudan. Although there are still a number
of outstanding issues, the improvement of relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan is indeed a
welcome development. In the same vein, the Sudan’s
improved relations with Chad and Uganda are also very
encouraging. The facilitation roles played by Presidents
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Idriss Deby Itno in
support of the Sudan’s peace efforts are a testament to
the confidence that the Sudan has recently achieved in
its relations with those countries, and we hope that that
will make a positive contribution to peace and stability
in the region.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the United States of America on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We wish you, Madam, every success. We
appreciate the work of the United Kingdom delegation
and its effective presidency of the Council during the
month of March. I thank Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), for
his valuable briefing.
I would like to take this opportunity to offer the
delegation of the Russian Federation our condolences
and most vehement condemnation of the cowardly
act of terrorism that claimed the lives of innocent
civilians. We stand ready to support the Government
and the people of the Russian Federation during this
difficult time.
Over the past month, the situation on the ground in
Darfur has seen major improvement, and security has
improved. Our delegation has repeatedly stressed that
the Security Council should change the way it addresses
situation in Darfur to reflect those developments on the
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ground. We should therefore focus on addressing the
root causes of the conflict and seriously seek a final
political settlement to the situation in the region that
would ensure the humane and voluntary return of
millions of internally displaced persons.
UNAMID has made outstanding efforts to establish
peace in the region over the course of the years-long
conflict. However, the Mission should not remain
indefinitely without a deadline for the modification or
termination of its mandate. That is impractical. We must
achieve the formulation of a clear exit strategy for the
Mission that corresponds with the improvement of the
situation on the ground and the relative calm in Darfur.
The Mission should focus on peacebuilding activities.
In that regard, we reaffirm the role of the joint working
group and the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on
Darfur as a main framework to explore the practical
aspects of the exit strategy. At the same time, the
improvement in the situation on the ground does not
mean that challenges do not remain in the region.
Intercommunal violence and criminality, which are
directly linked to the root causes of the conflict, must
end. There must be reconciliation and the establishment
of structures and institutions responsible for natural
resources, as well as governance, economic and social
development, the rule of law and the judicial system.
UNAMID should focus on developing the region and
rebuilding its institutions in cooperation with the
United Nations country team.
On the political level, the necessary political
support must be extended to the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel chaired by former President
Mbeki. Support must be given to the regional mediation
efforts of the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Sudan Liberation Army. The different channels of
negotiation need to be coordinated so as to avoid
any duplication or conflict in carrying out its work
and optimize progress in that regard. Moreover, it is
dangerous for the international community to overlook
the intransigeance of a number of armed opposition
factions that refuse to join the peace process, through
refusing to sign the road map — in particular, the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction. The
Council must therefore shoulder its responsibility and
seriously consider taking action against the leaders of
the armed groups that are obstructing the political path
and continue to refuse to join the political process.

S/PV.7912

In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms its support
for UNAMID and the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, to bring
peace to Darfur.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my hearty congratulations to you, Madam,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of April. Japan very
much looks forward to working closely with you in the
successful management of the Security Council.
I also express my deepest gratitude to Ambassador
Rycroft for his splendid work at the helm of the presidency
during the month of March. I join previous speakers
in expressing our deepest condolences and sympathy
to the people and Government of Russia, following the
heinous terrorist attack that took place yesterday.
I thank Ambassador Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo
for his informative briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment as Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Japan looks forward
to continuing to work with him in his new capacity.
Japan is encouraged that there has been no major
fighting in Darfur during the current reporting period. To
avoid any relapse and to completely eliminate conflict,
all parties must reach a permanent peace agreement
based on the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel road map. In that regard, we continue to support
President Mbeki and the Joint Special Representative’s
good offices. We are also pleased with the Sudanese
Government’s improved cooperation with UNAMID
and encourage further cooperation to enable the
mission to implement its mandate with full freedom of
movement. We understand that a new Government of
National Reconciliation will soon be formed with the
participation of a wider range of parties. The new Prime
Minister of the Sudan stated that the new Government
would make an effort to implement the outcome of
the national dialogue. We strongly hope that the new
Government will continue to play an active role in
achieving more inclusive political participation.
Ongoing intercommunal violence should be
addressed. Many of the root causes of that violence lie
in conflict over resources such as water and land. We
must support efforts made by the national and local
Governments to address that issue, and we appreciate
UNAMID’s dedicated mediation and facilitation
efforts. Japan, the African Union and UNAMID

17-089057/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

recently completed a project to rehabilitate 100 natural
water storage areas called rihoods. We believe that such
projects can play an important role in addressing the
root causes of conflicts.
We welcome the confirmation in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/250) that the humanitarian
situation has improved in most of Darfur and that some
progress has been observed in the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). However, we must also
recall the report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs that there are still 3.7 million
IDPs in Darfur. The problem is far from over. Support
for the safe and voluntary return of IDPs should be
prioritized with the utmost respect for the wishes of
the IDPs. Japan believes that development assistance
to consolidate peace in Darfur plays a major role in
preventing the relapse into conflict and supporting the
return of IDPs. To that end, we pledged an additional
$4.3 million to United Nations agencies in January.
It is particularly important that the people of Darfur
experience peace directly.
There is no doubt that the situation in Darfur has
improved, and the Council has the responsibility to
review UNAMID’s mandate accordingly. Japan looks
forward to concrete recommendations after the strategic
review on UNAMID’s possible reconfiguration, as well
as an assessment of progress and benchmarks. The time
is right for the Council to reconsider how UNAMID
can most effectively undertake vital tasks such as the
protection of civilians, the safe and voluntary return of
IDPs, the reduction of intercommunal violence and the
strengthening of institutions and police capacity, in close
coordination with the United Nations country team.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, on your country’s
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for this month. China looks forward to
successful meetings of the Security Council under your
leadership. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the Ambassador of the United Kingdom and his team
for their work during their presidency of the Council
last month, and commend their efforts.
China strongly condemns yesterday’s terrorist
attack in Saint Petersburg that targeted civilians. We
express our deepest sorrow about the lives lost. We
extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved families
and our best wishes to the injured. China is firmly
against terrorism in all its forms. We stand in resolute
8/20

04/04/2017

support of Russia in combating terrorism and are ready
to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation with the rest
of the international community.
China thanks the United States of America for
convening today’s meeting. We have listened attentively
to my good friend, Joint Special Representative
Mr. Mamabolo. I would like to welcome Ambassador
Mamabolo to his new capacity. China will actively
support his work.
The current situation in Darfur is gradually
improving. The Sudanese Government has announced
a unilateral ceasefire in Darfur and made vigorous
efforts to promote the peace process in an effort to
maintain stability in Darfur and start reconstruction.
China commends those efforts. The Darfur issue
involves a multiplicity of factors such as the politicals
security, development and humanitarian dimensions,
and must be resolved in a comprehensive manner.
Political settlement is both the foundation and the key.
The international community must continue to support
the mediation efforts of the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel in order to provide immediate
assistance to the Sudanese Government, the Darfur
armed groups and opposition groups in implementing
the road map agreement and resolve differences
through dialogue so as to seek a sustained and peaceful
settlement of the Darfur issue. We hope that relevant
donors can actively honour their commitments and assist
the Sudanese Government in enhancing infrastructure
development in Darfur in order to improve local
development capacity and achieve sustained economic
and social development in the region.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of UNAMID’s
deployment. In the past 10 years, UNAMID has made
tremendous efforts to promote the Darfur political
process, maintain stability in Darfur and reconcile
intercommunal differences. The United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government hosted
a joint working group meeting, which affirmed the
progress achieved in the Darfur security situation and
recommended the gradual withdrawal of UNAMID.
China hopes that, while fully listening to the views of
the Sudanese Government, the United Nations and the
African Union can, on that basis, submit to the Council
a report on a UNAMID drawdown.
The deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is an innovative
peace and security approach in Africa that was adopted
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by the two parties. It provides enlightening guidance
to the Council’s approach to resolving flashpoint
issues in Africa. It is now a consistent belief that the
Security Council should support Africa in resolving
African issues, the African way, by giving full play to
the strength and role of the African Union and other
regional and subregional organizations in Africa and,
by carrying out results-based cooperation in relation to
specific situations in Africa in order form a synergy.
The United Nations peacekeeping operation must follow
the changing dynamics and the will of the host country
and adjust its mandate and size as appropriate. It will
not just improve the mission’s efficiency and efficacy;
it can also concentrate limited peacekeeping resources
on countries with greater needs in order to optimize
resource allocation, in particular African countries, so
as to provide tangible assistance in promoting peace
and stability in Africa.
China has continued to support the Darfur peace
process and is one of UNAMID’s founding troopcontributing countries. The Chinese engineering unit
was the first of the mission’s peacekeeping troop
contingents to arrive in Darfur to perform its duties.
Over the years, it has made a sterling contribution to
maintaining stability in Darfur and to developing the
mission. China is ready to join the rest of the international
community and continue to play a constructive role in
restoring peace, stability and development in Darfur.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April, and to wish you every success. We are
confident that under your leadership the Council will
be able to make a breakthrough on many of the issues
on its agenda.
We would like to express our heartfelt condolences
to the delegation of the Russian Federation in the wake
of yesterday’s terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg.
We want to convey our sympathy and sorrow to the
relatives of the victims and wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery.
We welcome the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Mamabolo,
and we are very grateful to him for his briefing today
in his new capacity. My delegation would like to make
the following observations in support of the mission’s
commendable work.

S/PV.7912

With the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/250)
reflecting the real situation on the ground and showing
that there has been considerable improvement in the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, we
are pleased to see that the number of armed conflicts
between Government forces and insurgents has
fallen, with fewer incidents of intercommunal clashes
compared to last year. In that regard, we commend the
Government’s declaration on 15 January extending the
unilateral ceasefire for another six months. Kazakhstan
supports the inclusive political process being organized
under the leadership of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and encourages every effort
by all of the parties to fully implement the roadmap agreement.
The decision to create a Government of National
Reconciliation and a post of Prime Minister, as well
as to reconstitute the composition of the National
Assembly to make it more representative, is a step
in the right direction. Respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan
and the Government’s ownership and leadership of the
political process are crucial elements for establishing
long-term peace and reconciliation in Darfur. We also
commend the efforts of President Museveni of Uganda
and President Deby Itno of Chad to resolve the crisis
in Darfur, and we hope that the parties, including the
United Nations, will benefit from their good offices.
Kazakhstan underscores the importance of the
work of the tripartite group on the gradual drawdown
of UNAMID and the transfer of its relevant functions
to the United Nations country team. We welcome the
general consensus that has been reached on the issue and
hope that the so-called pending issues will be resolved
by the next meeting. We have seen the important work
being carried out by the joint strategic review mission,
which visited Darfur from 15 to 17 March, to develop
proposals for implementing UNAMID’s exit strategy.
Similarly, UNAMID’s gradual reduction in personnel,
based on the capability of the Government and the armed
groups, should be conducted so as to ensure continued
progress towards peace, and will require more effective
and discerning spending of United Nations resources
during the current period of economic stagnation. The
report of the strategic review mission, which is expected
in May, should give us more directives and reflect the
relevant recommendations.
We also believe that the right-sizing of UNAMID
should be implemented in parallel with the provision

17-089059/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of development assistance to the country, especially
assistance in addressing the problems of internally
displaced persons. We encourage donors to make
good on their commitment to helping the vulnerable
population through support to the developmentpeace nexus.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, and congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We feel
we are in very good hands. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Rycroft and his excellent team for a very
effective presidency last month. Like everyone else, I
would like to express our sympathies and condolences
to my Russian colleague and to the Russian people, as
well as our strong condemnation of the attacks in Saint
Petersburg yesterday.
It is very nice to see my friend Ambassador
Kingsley Mamabolo back in the Chamber, and I would
like to thank him for the work he is doing on the ground
and for his briefing today.
Conflict and instability have stalked Darfur for
more than 13 years. In that time, several million people
have been displaced, many have lost their lives and
many more have sought shelter in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), some for more than a decade.
We now see a glimmer of hope. The consolidation of
progress in some areas of Darfur, and the reports that
the ceasefire is holding, is therefore very welcome. We
now need to continue the steps towards consolidation
and addressing the root causes of conflict.
Dialogue and diplomacy are the only guarantees
of lasting peace and stability. The remaining armed
groups, especially the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid, must be persuaded to join the peace process. We
should all support the efforts of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel and of President Mbeki and
other key regional actors, including President Museveni
and President Deby Itno, in that regard. In addition, we
welcome the efforts to implement the conclusions of the
National Dialogue and the preparations for forming a
Government of National Reconciliation. That process
must remain flexible and open to further input and
adjustment as a comprehensive agreement is developed.
Regarding the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we welcome
the improvements in the Government of the Sudan’s
cooperation during the reporting period. We expect
the remaining impediments to UNAMID’s freedom of
10/20

04/04/2017

movement to be addressed as soon as possible. That is
particularly important right now, as the Council needs
a balanced assessment of the mission’s effectiveness
ahead of the renewal of its mandate in June. In order
to ensure that the mission is appropriate to its context,
the developments on the ground should be reflected in
its next mandate. We welcome the fact that the Council
will be able to consider input both from the strategic
review and the joint working group when reviewing
the mandate.
It is essential to take a holistic approach that
addresses the current situation and longer-term
development in Darfur, and it is therefore critical to
ensure that the renewed mandate addresses how the
United Nations as a whole can contribute to sustaining
peace in the Sudan. The United Nations country team,
together with UNAMID, must continue to identify areas
where development cooperation can effectively and
comprehensively address the root causes of instability,
including through building effective institutions. It is
important for UNAMID to have the capacity and the
right operating conditions to enable it to focus on the
remaining challenges, such as supporting the peace
process, protecting civilians, addressing the situation
of IDPs and monitoring, reporting on and advocating
for the prevention of human rights violations.
We note with great concern the findings in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/250) that human
rights violations and abuses continue to be committed
on a daily basis. We are particularly concerned about
the 44 reported cases of sexual and gender-based
violence, including cases involving children. In that
regard, the joint efforts of UNAMID, the Office of the
Resident Coordinator, the United Nations Development
Programme and UN-Women to transfer tasks in the
gender area from UNAMID to the United Nations
country team are important. We encourage the United
Nations system to continue addressing such issues and
to report back, including in the light of the UNAMID
mandate renewal.
We welcome the Government of the Sudan’s
continued commitment to implementing its action plan
for ending and preventing the recruitment and use of
children, and we encourage it to take the necessary
measures to address the loopholes that have enabled the
armed and security forces to recruit and use children.
Lastly, we need to be alert to tensions and challenges
at the regional level, which are aggravated by drought and
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

refugee flows. We welcome the Sudan’s recent positive
engagement in South Sudan, including its facilitation of
relief efforts by opening a second humanitarian corridor
to the famine-stricken areas that will help to ensure that
food assistance reaches those in need before the rainy
season. It is also important to recognize that the Sudan
itself is also feeling the effects of the drought. Lower
than expected rainfall, exacerbated by the effects of the
El Niño phenomenon, is resulting in food insecurity and
water shortage across the greater region of the Horn of
Africa. Addressing needs across borders will require
a comprehensive regional approach that builds the
resilience of individuals and communities throughout
the region.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. Of
course, it is not the first ever United States presidency,
but it is your first, so I wish you every success in what
we hope will be a long list of successful presidencies
of the Council. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Rycroft and his team for their hard work in March
during the brilliant British presidency. And I join
others in expressing our condolences to the delegation
of the Russian Federation in the wake of yesterday’s
senseless attack in Saint Petersburg. They can count on
our Government’s support.
It is a pleasure to welcome back Ambassador
Mamabolo, whom we thank for his briefing and
congratulate on his appointment as Joint Special
Representative and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
are ready to work with him.
The situation in Darfur is changing rapidly and
unevenly. Nevertheless, Italy’s assessment of it remains
clear and is based on three crucial aspects — the
political and security dimensions; the root causes of
instability in Darfur, starting with the humanitarian
and human rights situations; and the strategic review
of UNAMID.
First, with regard to the political and security
dimension, in the past year the Sudanese Government
has demonstrated its wish to find a political solution
to the Darfur question, as attested to by the unilateral
ceasefire and the pardoning of more than 250 rebels.
This is further confirmed by Khartoum’s signing
of the road map and the willingness it has shown so
far to negotiate with the non-signature parties on

S/PV.7912

their association with the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.
Despite the commendable efforts of President
Thabo Mbeki, Head of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which Italy supports, the
non-signatory groups continue to delay. We renew our
invitation to the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid to
abandon military means and to join the political process,
and we renew our call on the Sudan Liberation Army/
Minni Minawi, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North to sign
the road map.
The time has come to assess the credibility of those
who claim support for peace on the basis of their broad
commitment to the pacification of Darfur through
peaceful means and for achieving political solution.
The Government must also persist in the approach it is
taking. We hope that the implementation of the Doha
Document can be rapidly completed, which could
send a clear signal in the right direction on the part of
Khartoum — one that the Council could not ignore.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian and
human rights situation, despite progress made at the
military level, peace continues to evade Darfur. The root
causes of the instability have not been addressed yet.
This scenario is not helped by the ongoing impediments
that UNAMID has to face, despite recent, positive
measures by the Sudanese Government. Darfur suffers
from a lack of development. In this regard, my country
will continue to do its part, helping the Sudanese
Government at the bilateral level, as well as through
programmes of the European Union and the United
Nations. But there are other areas where the Government
is called upon to act without delay: inter-community
conflicts; banditry; human rights violations, including
gender-based violence and military use of schools;
impunity and the lack of accountability; attacks on
internally displaced persons, such as recent episodes
at the Sortony Camp in northern Darfur. Italy stongly
condemns these crimes. There can be no solution to the
problems that foment instability in Darfur without an
inclusive, conciliatory and constant action led by the
Sudanese Government.
In closing, with regard to the strategic review
of UNAMID, the recommendations, which will be
delivered to the Council by May, will provide us
with options to discuss the continuation or the exit
strategy of the mission. The Sudan has demonstrated a

17-0890511/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

constructive spirit in breaking the impasse in the United
Nations-African Union joint review process. We attach
great value to the collaborative approach of the Sudan
and its involvement in the exercise. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his personal contribution in
this regard.
While waiting to receive and carefully assess
the recommendations, we take good note, with a
spirit of openness, of the assessments made in the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2017/250).
Improvements still need to be made in the political,
humanitarian, security and rule of law areas, while
progress has been achieved in meeting the benchmarks
for a future phased drawdown of the mission.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, as you begin your presidency of the Security
Council. We wish you every success in this crucial role.
We would also like to express our gratitude for
the solidarity shown in connection with the tragic
events in Saint Petersburg yesterday. We appreciate
the words of sympathy and support. The tragedy
once again underscores the need for the international
community to scale up its collective actions to counter
the terrorist threat.
We thank Joint Special Representative Mr. Mamabolo
for his briefing. We note the significant improvement in
the security situation in Darfur. Not a single incident
of clashes between the Government and the armed
opposition was reported in any of the five states. At
the same time, we are concerned about the ongoing
intercommunal conflicts, rampant crime and attacks on
internally displaced persons.
We welcome the measures taken by Khartoum to
implement the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
which includes the demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. We support the Government’s plans
to organize the voluntary surrender of weapons, to
successfully conclude the work of the Darfur Regional
Authority, to create the general office for Darfur and
a number of specialized commissions. We hope that
the outcome of the work of the National Dialogue
conference will serve to ensure national consensus and
resolve the conflicts in Darfur, as well as in other parts
of the country.
We welcome the extension of the obligations under
the cessation of hostilities by the Government and
12/20

04/04/2017

non-signatories of the Doha Document, as well as the
reciprocal release of prisoners in March. At the same
time, it is alarming that, despite the signing by the
Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition
of the Mbeki road map, the peace process remains at
a standstill. The Government can hardly be blamed
for this. It is no secret that the August negotiations
in Addis Ababa on the cessation of hostilities and
ensuring humanitarian access in conflict areas fell apart
because of rebels, in particular those who supported
the unacceptable conditions of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North for the direct provision
of assistance from abroad. It is telling that even the
guarantees by the United States representatives on
the fair distribution of humanitarian assistance were
rejected by this armed group. In addition, we recall that
the leader of the movement, Abdul Wahid Mohamed
al-Nour has categorically refused any dialogue with
the Government.
We believe that the foreign sponsors of the
Sudanese opposition should more forcefully urge
their protégés to act in a constructive manner and to
give up their unrealistic demands. Effective means of
bringing pressure to bear on the intractable opposition
exist. Many of these individuals regularly travel to
and organize events in certain Western countries.
It would be a good idea to think seriously about the
introduction of Security Council sanctions against
these intractable groups.
We think it is impossible to achieve a full settlement
in Darfur without resolving the issues of the camps of
internally displaced persons. We note with concern the
increase in crime in two of the largest camps, Sortony
and Kalma. Furthermore, among the internally displaced
persons, there are many supporters of the radical
opposition and they are well armed. As members know,
the Sudanese police do not have access to camps and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) does not have a mandate to conduct
relevant activities there. As a result, robbers, murderers
and rapists go unpunished, and representatives from the
Hybrid Operation risk their own lives to protect one of
the parties to the conflict. We should think about how
this situation could be rectified.
We note breakthroughs in resolving the problems
facing UNAMID, including the issuance of visas and
customs clearance for contingent-owned equipment.
Progress has also been made in granting access. It
is our understanding that the Government of the
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan is approving the vast majority of requests and
negative responses are being given only when there is
a security threat to staff. In the case of incidents with
peacekeepers, blame could be laid only on Khartoum.
Recently, humanitarian workers were able to visit
some areas of Jebel Marra. The Government issued new
directives on procedures for humanitarian assistance to
facilitate the movement of humanitarian staff. These
aspects must be considered when coordinating with
Khartoum. We also welcome the Government’s decision
to open new humanitarian corridors from El Obeid to
the South Sudan area of Bentiu.
The work of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism
is helping to clear the obstacles to UNAMID. We
call upon UNAMID and the Secretariat to continue
this cooperation in order to dispel any remaining
disagreements. With the positive trend in Darfur, we
think the issue of the drawdown strategy of UNAMID
is all the more relevant.
Progress in developing a UNAMID exit strategy
also determines its relationship with the host
country. Attempts to impede this process, let alone
using UNAMID to put pressure on Khartoum, is
unacceptable. Indeed, peacekeepers could be hostage
to this type of political game. In this regard, we note
the holding in early March of a joint strategic review of
the mission’s activities, conducted with the Secretariat
and the African Union. We are pleased that this event
was coordinated with the activities of the specialized
joint working group. We stand ready to consider the
proposals in the joint report of the Secretariat and the
African UNion Commission for adapting the mission
given the changing situation on the ground.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. You can count on the full support of
the French delegation. I would also like to pay tribute
to the excellent manner in which the United Kingdom
presided over the Council during the month of March.
I also wish to join others at this very difficult
time in condemning the terrorist attack that took
place in Saint Petersburg yesterday. As my President
did yesterday, I too express our solidarity with the
Russian people.
I also wish to thank Joint Special Representative
Kingsley Mamabolo for his briefing, as well as to

S/PV.7912

congratulate him on his appointment to the helm of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). My delegation wishes him every
success in his new post. He can count on our continued
and determined support.
This July it will have been 10 years since the
Security Council established African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which took over
from the African Union Mission in the Sudan with the
task of helping to restore peace and stability in Darfur
following the atrocities that took place in the region in
the early 2000s.
The Council must regularly assess the results of the
operations it deploys. It is in that spirit that I visited
the Sudan last week. I thank the Sudanese authorities
for their welcome, and UNAMID for its support. The
meetings I conducted in Khartoum and El Fasher, as
well as visits to two camps in Darfur for displaced
persons, were very useful for me to better understand
the complex reality of the region, which the Sudanese
authorities, along with UNAMID, face today.
My visit to the Sortony camp in particular enabled
me to better understand the challenges in protecting
civilians in Darfur. There has clearly been a decrease in
the level of violence in some areas of Darfur, as noted
in the recent reports of the Secretary-General. The
decline in the intensity of fighting between rebel groups
and Government forces is obviously encouraging news,
and we welcome the decision made by the Sudanese
Government in January to extend the ceasefire by
six months. We again call on the rebel groups to do
the same.
What is striking is that the displaced persons who
found refuge at Sortony, in the foothills of Jebel Marra,
are now facing a different sort of threat. Following the
aerial bombardments in January 2016, and in the face
of attacks by armed groups and militias, people had to
flee their villages, settling around a UNAMID camp
in a valley. The vast majority of them tell us they want
to return to their lands but cannot because they are
harassed by members of the militias and armed groups,
who continue to commit abuses against civilians who
leave the camp. On far too many occasions, women
fall victim to rape as they collect firewood. As some
of the displaced persons said clearly, they would have
died if they had not been able to find refuge near the
UNAMID camp. I would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the men and women of UNAMID who are

17-0890513/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

implementing the mandate to protect civilians. Their
work is decisive in a place like Sortony. The more than
20,000 displaced persons in Sortony represent only a
small percentage of the 2.6 million displaced people
in Darfur. With a population of 7 million, that means
one out of three people in Darfur are displaced. What
we are seeing and hearing in Sortony should lead us to
reflect on what action the United Nations should take
on the ground.
The challenge in terms of security and protecting
civilians from the armed groups and militias is
certainly one of the main challenges faced by the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID. The return
of displaced persons to their villages will be possible
only when their security is assured in those areas. The
Government of the Sudan must fully play its role in that
regard, in accordance with its primary responsibility
for protecting civilians, as has been consistently
reaffirmed by the Council and earlier this morning
by the Joint Special Representative. The international
community, through UNAMID, can be a partner in
that effort. To do so, UNAMID must be able to operate
under good conditions. It must be able to benefit from
the sound cooperation of the Sudanese Government in
the exercise of its mandate.
During my visit, it became clear that the stability
of Darfur, and more broadly that of the region, requires
addressing the root causes of instability. We have all
spoken of this in our statements up until now, but I wish
to recall that among the causes are the proliferation of
weapons, the plight of displaced persons, the handling
of the issue of land and natural resources, the need to
strengthen the rule of law and, of course, combating
impunity, whether at the local and national levels or
at the international level through the International
Criminal Court. The country team contributes to
promoting development in Darfur, often under difficult
conditions, but it is clear that it cannot be the only
partner of the Sudanese authorities in responding to
these complex challenges.
From my discussions with the Sudanese authorities,
both in Khartoum and El Fasher, and with the displaced
and UNAMID, disarmament emerged as one of the
most important current challenges. There is in fact a
proliferation of weapons in Darfur. It is said that there
are as many weapons in Darfur as there are inhabitants.
Again, the international community can partner
with Sudanese authorities to take a step in the right
direction where the issue of disarmament is concerned.
14/20

04/04/2017

We therefore need to move forward in our collective
thinking in order to find solutions that respond to
these challenges.
We are committed to the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping, which is an essential tool for
maintaining international peace and security. In view
of the evolving challenges in Darfur, UNAMID will
certainly need to evolve to provide the best response. In
that context, we support the initiative of the Secretariat
and of the African Union Commission to conduct a
strategic review of UNAMID. That work should assess
the effectiveness of UNAMID with regard to its goal of
contributing to sustainable peace and stability in Darfur.
We therefore look forward to the recommendations
that will be made by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
will be based on the review assessment. It is on that
basis that we can consider what adjustments can be
made to UNAMID to allow it best to respond to the
current peace and security challenges in Darfur.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to offer my best
wishes to you, Madam Presidenet, as you take on the
crucial role of Security Council President. I would also
like to convey my very special thanks to Ambassador
Rycroft and his team for the excellent way they
conducted business doing the eventful month of March.
I would also like to express my condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack that took
place yesterday in Saint Petersburg.
I join others in congratulating Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo on his appointment as Joint Special
Representative for Darfur. Ukraine fully supports his
efforts aimed at advancing the achievement of peace
in the Sudan. In the light of the information presented
during Mr. Mamabolo’s briefing, my delegation wishes
to highlight the following points.
First, Ukraine welcomes the fact that the security
situation in most parts of Darfur remained stable over
recent months. Although no major fighting between
Government forces and rebel groups has been observed
as of late, attacks against internally displaced persons
committed by armed militias continue to occur and
must be halted immediately. We hope that the unilateral
ceasefire declared by the Government of the Sudan and
the non-signatory movements to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur will continue to hold. We also call
on the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan Liberation
Movement Army to refrain from military activity and
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to join the peace talks. In that vein, we expect that
all parties will continue to undertake genuine efforts
aimed at preserving the positive momentum with
a view to resolving critical issues related to the safe
return of internally displaced persons and the renewal
of peace talks.
That brings me to my second point, on the
political process. There has been visible progress on
the political track. The endorsement of amendments
to the Constitution and the establishment of the
Government of National Reconciliation and the post of
Prime Minister, as well as the separation of the posts
of Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice, are
steps in the right direction. My delegation also notes
the positive engagement by the Government and the
Sudan Liberation Movement-North, which resulted in
the mutual release of respective prisoners of war. We
urge the Sudanese Government and the opposition
parties to continue to implement the recommendations
of the National Dialogue. Ukraine also looks forward to
the resumption of talks facilitated by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel.
My third, and last, point is on the African
Union-United Nations (UNAMID). Given that the
situation in Darfur has evolved since 2015, we believe
that the current mandate and tasks of UNAMID deserve
close consideration. We look forward to the conclusions
of the strategic review that was conducted by the joint
African Union-United Nations team last month. The key
priority in that regard should be to ensure the gradual
transfer of tasks from UNAMID to the United Nations
country team in the framework of peacebuilding efforts
in Darfur. Meanwhile, we are concerned by continued
restrictions and impediments to UNAMID’s work,
which include delays in the clearance of containers
with equipment and supplies for the mission, as well
as denial of access into some parts of Darfur. We
call on the Government of the Sudan to remove these
restrictions in line with its obligations under the statusof-forces agreement.
Finally, as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, I remain committed to continuing
to engage closely with the Government of the Sudan on
issues within my mandate. I recognize the positive and
constructive role in that regard played by the delegation
of the Sudan in New York.

S/PV.7912

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Madam President, my delegation wishes
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We wish
you every success and pledge our cooperation. I would
like also thank and congratulate the delegation of the
United Kingdom and Ambassador Rycroft for having
led the Council in March.
At the outset, Bolivia offers its most sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of the
Russian Federation for yesterday’s terrorist attack in
Saint Petersburg. As stated by President Evo Morales
Ayma, Bolivia emphatically condemns that cowardly
terrorist act, which claimed the lives of many and
injured dozens. We convey our sympathy to the families
of the deceased and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
My delegation warmly welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo as Joint Special
Representative for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
African Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator.
We have witnessed the leadership and professionalism
of Ambassador Mamabolo, not only as his country’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations but
also when he was President of the Group of 77 and
China in this Organization.
I should like to make the following brief comments.
Bolivia welcomes the good news that the situation
in Darfur has taken a positive turn. As the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2017/250) indicates, there
have been no serious conflicts over the past three
months and hostilities in the Jebel Marra region have
diminished considerably. We welcome the fact that the
Government of the Sudan, the signatory movements
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as well as
non-signatory movements have all upheld the ceasefire.
We urge the leaders of the non-signatory movements,
especially the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction, to join the negotiations under way and work
on a formal agreement that shows their commitment to
stability and peace in Darfur.
In that connection, we encourage the efforts of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
represented by former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Abdulsalami Abubakar, to advance the peace process
in Darfur. In that regard, we also take note of the steps
taken by the Presidents of Uganda and Chad to foster

17-0890515/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

dialogue among the parties. Regional cooperation is
fundamental to the political process.
Similarly, we would like to highlight the decrease in
intercommunal violence. We recognize the efforts of the
Government and UNAMID to promote understanding
and reconciliation in order to reduce tensions between
members of those communities. Nevertheless, despite
such improvements, the situation of internally
displaced persons remains a great concern. According
to the Secretary-General’s report, their number has not
decreased. There are approximately 2.6 million people
exposed to some form of violence, of which women
and children are the most vulnerable and the most
seriously affected.
We must support the plan of the Government of
the Sudan for the voluntary resettlement of internally
displaced persons. In that connection, we trust that the
Government, consistent with the progress it has shown,
will ensure the necessary support so that UNAMID
can freely carry out its mandate of guaranteeing the
necessary access to humanitarian actors so that they
can verify and deliver humanitarian assistance.
As for the exit strategy and the transfer of
UNAMID tasks to the United Nations country team, we
welcome the efforts of the joint working group, whose
recommendations, we believe, can be key in the joint
African Union-United Nations report on the strategic
review of UNAMID, to be submitted in May.
We also highlight the Sudanese Government’s
solidarity in alleviating the humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan by opening up a humanitarian aid corridor from
central Sudan to northern South Sudan, particularly in
the areas of greatest conflict, such as Upper Nile and
Bahr El Ghazal states.

04/04/2017

to the Government and the people of Russia. Senegal
echoes the appeal just made by the Chargé d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for
greater and more coordinated voluntary mobilization in
the fight against terrorism, whoever its perpetrators.
On behalf of the delegation of Senegal, Madam
President, I warmly congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council. I assure
you of our full cooperation. I also thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting on the
important issue of Darfur. I also thank and congratulate
Mr. Matthew Rycroft and his entire team for an active
and productive presidency during the month of March.
I am very pleased to see my dear friend and colleague
Mr. Mamabolo, former Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations and current Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). His
concise and clear briefing shed light on the situation, as
did the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/250) and the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) (see S/2017/22).
Senegal wishes to pay well-deserved tribute to
UNAMID, which has teams on all fronts in Darfur
working to tackle the security challenges, support the
political process and facilitate access to humanitarian
aid. We also pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries for their commitment to peace in Darfur. I
should recall that Senegal has deployed 800 military
troops, two 140-person police units, eight observer
officials and eight police officers — a total of
1,096 people.

Finally, my delegation pledges its support to the
work of UNAMID and the United Nations country team
with a view to achieving the main goal of lasting and
sustainable peace in Darfur. We reiterate that the work
and efforts of the Council must respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

As for the security situation, the delegation of
Senegal welcomes the fact that the Government and
several armed groups are respecting the ceasefire and
the cessation of hostilities, with the notable exception of
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction. Such
confidence-building measures must be commended and
strengthened. Although there continue to be sporadic
intercommunal clashes, their intensity, on the whole,
has diminished.

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
as my Government did yesterday morning, I would
like to echo my delegation’s firm condemnation of
the terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg, which resulted
in many deaths, numerous injuries and considerable
property damage. Our sympathy, solidarity and
condolences go out to the families of the victims and

The Senegalese delegation nonetheless wishes to
deplore the numerous human rights violations reported
in Darfur, which target in particular internally displaced
persons (IDPs), women and children. We call for the
voluntary and secure return of IDPs, which requires a
safe environment and a long-lasting commitment by all
parties to reconciliation and recovery. In that context,

16/20

17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

my delegation welcomes the holding of the national
dialogue and encourages the effective implementation
of the recommendations arising therefrom so that the
Government and the opposition can reach a common
understanding so as to bring about a lasting solution to
the conflict and a lasting peace.
Concerning the relationship between UNAMID and
the Sudanese Government, we welcome the progress
that has been made with regard to the issuing of visas
and the releasing of containers, particularly those
containing food rations. That is thanks to the efforts
of the Sudanese authorities, which have, inter alia,
appointed a focal point who will bear responsibility for
these issues. That said, some containers remain held
up in Port Sudan, which leads to difficulties for troopcontributing countries, my own included, in importing
spare parts for key equipment. In order to alleviate this
situation, we call for greater cooperation on the part of
the Sudanese authorities so that these containers can
be released.
With regard to transferring UNAMID tasks to the
United Nations country team and the handover process,
we look forward to seeing the joint report of the African
Union and the United Nations on the strategic review
that is under way, in particular as concerns ways of
reconfiguring UNAMID, bearing in mind the positive
evolution of events on the ground. It is in that spirit
that the delegation of Senegal reiterates its support and
extends once again its congratulations to UNAMID, to
the United Nations country team and to the humanitarian
personnel involved for the outstanding work they are
doing in order to usher in lasting peace in Darfur.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
commending the work that the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel is doing to promote the
political process by facilitating direct, inclusive
negotiations. We pay tribute to their outstanding
mediator, President Thabo Mbeki — Mr. Mamabolo’s
compatriot — who held a very fruitful interactive
dialogue with the Security Council last February, under
the Swedish presidency.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I wish to thank Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo for his update on the activities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The Darfur mission was a lifeline
when its peacekeepers deployed 10 years ago. In 2007,

S/PV.7912

Darfur was one of the most brutal places on Earth.
After four years of violence, more than 200,000 people
were already dead, and 2.4 million people had fled
their homes. Many people were stuck in refugee camps,
petrified that Government-backed militias would
murder them if they ventured out. The world looked
to the Security Council to save lives. The mission
answered the call.
The mission was never perfect; it was by far the most
complex and most expensive peacekeeping mission in
United Nations history, and the Sudanese Government
has tried to obstruct it from day one. But against all of
these odds, the mission has helped to protect civilians.
Its peacekeepers deployed with great courage and
bravery, and 63 UNAMID troops and police have paid
the ultimate price. The United States is deeply grateful
for the sacrifices that all of the mission’s troop and
police contributors have made.
But 10 years after the Darfur mission began its
work, it is time to consider where Darfur stands today
and what comes next. The Sudanese Government is still
failing to protect its people in Darfur. In some areas,
civilians are still at grave risk of widespread violence
from Government-backed militias and armed groups.
In other places, the Government does almost nothing to
provide security when local disputes turn bloody.
The Council needs to see the Sudanese Government
do far more to provide for its people by meeting the
agreed-upon benchmarks for Darfur, supporting an
inclusive peace process, protecting civilians and
preventing community violence. It is not enough for
the Government to promise to do better; we need to
see proof.
It is also disheartening that the Sudanese
Government is still obstructing the mission after all of
these years. Over the past year, the Government held
back hundreds of shipping containers of food, and the
Darfur mission is still waiting for no fewer than 182
containers of its equipment to be released.
It is true that the Sudan has started processing
United Nations paperwork faster and that it has
improved humanitarian access for the United Nations
and its partners. We welcome those changes. But the
Government is not doing enough. The Government
must grant freedom of movement to all peacekeepers
and all aid workers. The Government must release all of
the mission’s equipment. It also has to grant visas for all
United Nations officials, including human rights staff.

17-0890517/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

04/04/2017

These are all demands the Council has made many
times before. Council members need to stand by them.

access unhindered, and we need to see conflict within
communities addressed through mediation.

Our long-term goal for Darfur is still the same: a
negotiated, lasting peace. The United States welcomes
the fact that both the Government and opposition groups
have announced unilateral ceasefires. Both sides now
need to turn these ceasefires into real progress towards
peace talks, based on the road map that the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel has laid out.
We call on the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid to
immediately declare a unilateral cessation of hostilities
and join the negotiations.

For each one, we expect that the SecretaryGeneral’s reports will clearly spell out where Sudan
meets these benchmarks and where it does not, and
we expect that all of us on the Council will be just as
diligent in tracking that progress. If the Government
falls short, the Council has a responsibility to act. The
Council has to be willing to criticize and call out the
Government in our statements and when we review the
peacekeeping mission’s mandate, in June.

We also need to look at the Darfur mission’s future.
The situation in Darfur is still far from what we had
hoped it would be 10 years ago, but Darfur today is
changing. In many areas, the immediate threat of
violence from Government confrontations with the
armed opposition has passed. The people need the rule
of law; they need police who will respect their human
rights and protect them from criminals and militias;
and they need help to mediate local disputes so that
they do not flare up and spread.
So as the situation changes, the tools to prevent
violence must change too. We need to ask if the mission
to Darfur’s current force structure and size are still
appropriate. We might not need 17,000 uniformed troops
to tackle these challenges. We need the United Nations
to start using new tools, and we need the Government
of the Sudan to step up.
So UNAMID should review its mission to ensure
it still matches the conditions on the ground. This
includes how the mission can reposition its forces to
stop recurring violence and to quickly get to the areas
where people need the help the most.
The mission’s restructuring will also require the
Sudanese Government to show that it is ready to govern
all areas of its territory and protect all of its citizens.
The Government will need to work with the United
Nations as a partner to build local institutions and to
provide basic services.
We have the benchmarks, so we need to assess the
Government’s progress based on them and be honest
in our evaluation. If the Government believes that it is
ready to govern, it needs to show us. The expectations
are well known. We need progress on an inclusive peace
process. Civilians must be protected and humanitarian
18/20

Helping the people of Darfur means that we need to
see change. Above all, the responsibility rests with the
Sudan’s Government. We can and should reconfigure
the mission to Darfur to make it more effective, but
what will really bring peace to Darfur is holding the
Government accountable. The Sudan’s leaders must
disarm the militias that still terrorize Darfur’s people.
They must support United Nations peacekeepers and
staff in accomplishing their missions, and they must
commit not just in words but in deeds to building
sustainable peace for Darfur’s people. I look forward to
working with all participants in the coming months to
help bring about these changes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my condolences to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation
in connection with the terrorist act in Saint Petersburg
and to condemn this cowardly act in the strongest terms.
I would like to congratulate you, Madam, on your
appointment to the position of Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
and for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of April. I assure you of my
delegation’s readiness to cooperate with you, Madam
President, to carry out your presidency’s mandate.
Furthermore, I would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom for his delegation’s outstanding
presidency of the Security Council during last month.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his substantial
report (S/2017/250). And I congratulate Ambassador
Mamabolo on his appointment to the position of Joint
17-08905

04/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We stand in full agreement with his briefing on the
situation in Darfur, as the Darfur of today is not the
Darfur of 2003. Moreover, I commend the high level
of cooperation between peacekeeping management
and UNAMID, on one hand, and the Government
of the Sudan, on the other hand. Such is the level of
cooperation to which we have been aspiring over past
reporting periods, and especially since 2007.
The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the progress achieved in Darfur during the latest
reporting period and notes the unprecedented stability
in terms of security owing to the efforts of Government
forces to securing the state of Darfur and ending clashes
attributable to certain armed movements. That has had
a positive impact on the situation in terms of security
and stability in the various states of Darfur, with the
exception of a few enclaves in the country. In the report,
we note that the Jebel Marra is mostly secure, except
for a few pockets in which remnants of the rebel faction
of Abdul Wahid are positioned. The adhesion of many
of the leaders of that movement to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur was of great importance.
Owing to the efforts that were carried out by the
Government and regional partners, a number of the
opposition factions became signatories to the Doha
Document. The Government’s six-month extension
of the ceasefire demonstrated its serious intentions to
revive the peace process and end violence in that area
of the country and begin rebuilding and development.
In all our statements addressed to the Security
Council, we have reiterated the determination of the
Government of the Sudan to revive peace throughout
the country. Furthermore, we have stressed that it is
very important that the international community exert
pressure on the opposition movement, as it obstinately
continues to refuse to sign the peace agreement despite
defections. The leader of the rebel movement, Abdul
Wahid, continues to receive support, which only serves
to encourage his intransigence and refusal to sign the
peace agreement. That disadvantages other movements
and prevents them from seriously negotiating a lasting
peace and ending human trafficking and mercenary
activities. All of those points were mentioned in the
report by the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) in February.
With regard to internally displaced persons (IDPs),
we should acknowledge that the movement of all the

S/PV.7912

IDPs in 2016 — I am happy to say that we have not
witnessed any IDP movement in 2017 — was the result
of Abdul Wahid’s determination and insistence to resort
to armed violence.
The humanitarian situation in Darfur is a major
concern for the Government of the Sudan, not to speak of
the increasing number of returning IDPs. Moreover, the
continuing presence of IDP camps in Darfur following
the breakthrough in peace, stability and security is
unjustifiable, especially as the peace partners in Darfur
have made considerable efforts to prepare and equip
villages for their voluntary return, through providing
all their basic needs as well as restoring security in the
IDPs’ villages of origin. International efforts therefore
should continue to encourage IDPs to voluntarily return,
and the Government of the Sudan developed a plan
based on three options. The first option involves the
voluntary return of IDPs to their villages — and I stress
the word “voluntary”. The second option is to integrate
IDP camps into neighbouring cities after ramping up
their latter’s capability to provide them with basic needs
and services. The third option provides IDPs with the
freedom to choose the area in which they would like to
be relocated, especially in Darfur.
The implementation of any one of those options
lacks the financial resources and the technical expertise,
as well as the international community’s cooperation.
Again, it requires the cooperation of it international
community. In that regard, I would like to commend the
assistance offered by Qatar, the Leauge of Arab States
and other friendly countries ,such as China, Japan
and others in the framework of the Doha Document,
which was front and centre as the primary document
recognized by the Security Council. We must reiterate
that the Document is critical to peace, and we are not
here to call for a new agreement. However, we must
make every effort to commit to the Document, which is
at the core of the peace process that was initiated by the
Security Council. We call for the implementation of the
Doha Document, which should be followed up by the
establishment of an international commission including
the Security Council members and the peace partners.
If the implementation of Doha Document fails,
any such failure should therefore be referred to the
committee that meets every six months. That is one of
the very positive points that we found in the Document.
It also provides a window of time for the international
community to follow up on developments every six
months. Accordingly, I also refer members of the

17-0890519/20

S/PV.7912

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

04/04/2017

Council to all the recommendations of the committee.
The committee meets every six months in Khartoum
and Doha.

before the Security Council, my country is hosting a
conference for African directors of intelligence services
on counter-terrorism efforts on the African continent.

The significant improvement in the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur and the reduction
of activity by the rebel groups, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s latest and previous reports, as well
as the report (see S/2017/22) by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), serve
to underscore that what the Government of the Sudan
had been calling for since 2014 was justified, namely,
the need to establish a strategic plan to phase out
UNAMID in Darfur. Moreover, developments in the
situation demonstrate daily that UNAMID is no longer
the appropriate framework for security engagement
by the international community, because our main
focus — especially with regard to Darfur — should
now be on development. I recall that the Sudan — or,
rahter, Darfur — is a least developed country. We must
realize the need for inclusive development, including
its economic, social and environmental dimensions.
In that regard, we refer to the important role that
should be played by the international community on
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of the former combatants. All of those tasks could be
undertaken by the United Nations country team, as long
as the international community provides the necessary
financial and humanitarian assistance.

With regard to humanitarian issues, the Sudan
has continued to cooperate with the international
community. The Government of the Sudan agreed to a
proposal that was made by the United States regarding
humanitarian access to South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. That same proposal, however, was refused by
the rebels. The Sudan has also consolidated its role in
providing relief to South Sudan.

My country’s delegation hopes that the
recommendations put forward at the most recent
meeting of the joint working group, held on 26 February,
will be considered in order to develop a strategy for
the phasing out of UNAMID — a gradual exit strategy.
That should serve as an example for other United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
The Sudan has consolidated its regional and
international partnerships in areas of vital importance
for the international community, in particular counterterrorism, illegal immigration, regional peace efforts
and humanitarian assistance. You, Madam President,
are also aware of how far the cooperation between the
Sudan and your own country has come. As I speak here

20/20

All of those developments prove that the Sudan is
an effective member of the international community
and a reliable partner. It is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to cooperate with the Sudan.
Finally, we would like to thank UNAMID for its
efforts in the various areas. We would also like to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate the readiness of the Government of the Sudan
to cooperate with all regional and international partners
on the UNAMID mission, until the very last UNAMID
components leave the Sudan after completing their
mandate. Peacekeeping missions should not be deployed
indefinitely. If the mandate is finalized, it means that
peace has been restored.
The President: Before concluding, I would like
to say that we all stand unified in our sympathy for
the people of Russia following the attack on Saint
Petersburg. We stand with the families and hope that
we can find those who perpetrated that heinous act. We
support them through that process.
We have all seen the reports of the terrible
chemical-weapon attack in Syria. In my capacity as
President, I would like to inform the Security Council
that the presidency intends to convene a meeting in
briefing format here, in open Chamber, tomorrow at
10 a.m. to discuss the attack. We will move our briefing
and consultations on Colombia to the afternoon so that
we can hold that emergency meeting. We hope to get as
much information on the Syrian attack as we can.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

17-08905
