S/PV.7689

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7689

th meeting
Friday, 6 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marachesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Tenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/372)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
2233 (2015) (S/2016/396)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12919 (E)
*1612919*

S/PV.7689

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Tenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution
2107 (2013) (S/2016/372)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 7 of resolution 2233 (2015)
(S/2016/396)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kubiš,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Baghdad.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/372, which contains the tenth report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well as to
document S/2016/396, which contains the third report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 2233 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: I have the honour to present the third
report S/2016/396 of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 7 of resolution 2233 (2015), as well as
the tenth report (S/2016/372) of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013), on the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
and property.
Since my previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7623), a profound political crisis has engulfed
Baghdad and the country and brought paralysis and
deadlock to the work of the Government and the Council
2/9

06/05/2016

of Representatives. The failure of Iraq’s Government
and political class to agree and carry on genuine reforms
that would improve governance and accountability and
include equal justice for all, jobs and services while
curbing corruption, as demanded by the Iraqi people,
notably in Baghdad and southern Shiite provinces since
last August, prompted the demonstrators to request
reform of the whole Government and political process,
abandoning the ethnic and sectarian quota approach
that has been in the fundament of the Iraq political
system since 2003.
In February a mix of civil-society protesters was
joined by the supporters of Sayed Muqtada Al-Sadr.
Spurred by that pressure, Prime Minister Al-Abadi
attempted to accelerate the delivery of his reform
programme and to replace the Cabinet created on the
basis of party affiliation or ethnic or sectarian identity
by a so-called technocratic Cabinet, requested, among
others, by Al-Sadr. For the majority of Iraqi protesters,
such a Cabinet is needed to enact genuine reforms, get
rid of a powerful patronage system and achieve success
in fighting corruption. However, the majority of Iraqi
political blocs reject such a fundamental overhaul of the
political process. They view such attempts as efforts to
delegitimize not only the Government or the Council
of Representatives, but the whole political system.
Notably, they also view Al-Sadr’s action as an attempt
to take over the power on the back of the Shiite street.
Following months of controversy and weeks
of political paralysis and split in the Council of
Representatives, the promise of a solution to the
political deadlock came with some new ministerial
appointments at the parliamentary meeting of 26 April.
Yet that hope suffered a significant setback on 30 April.
Once it was clear that voting would not take place on
another set of ministerial candidates, Sadrist and civilsociety demonstrators breached the entry checkpoints
of the Green Zone and stormed the Parliament building.
Acts of vandalism and attacks on some members of
Parliament, sadly, broke with the practice of many
months of peaceful protests. The protesters withdrew
from the Green Zone the following day, yet they pledged
further action in series of escalating steps — the
dismissal of the three constitutional leaders of the
country, early elections culminating, if necessary, with
attacks on the seat of power, civil disobedience or a
general strike — unless the Government and Parliament
made rapid progress on reforms. At this stage, although
16-12919

06/05/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

the situation has calmed down, it remains unpredictable
and could unfold in many different directions.
Since the beginning of the pro-reform protest
movement in August 2015, the Shiite religious
leadership, the Marja’iya, has backed the people’s
requests for political solutions to the current deep
political crisis, as well as for progressive reforms in
Iraq, including through the most recent statement by
the Office of Grand Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani on 4 May.
In it, the Marja’iya renewed its warning to the parties
against a continuation of the current course in dealing
with the country’s issues and its many crises and called
on them to think of the future of their people and
take serious and tangible steps to resolve the current
situation.
I strongly urge the Government, constitutional
and political leaders and civil society to work together
in a constructive dialogue that will not only resolve
the political impasse, but give a clear perspective of
better a future for the people, which will unite them
and their leaders. Maintaining focus and unity of effort
in fighting the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) remains a critical priority, followed by
mobilizing international assistance to help alleviate
a deep economic, fiscal and humanitarian crisis, and
promote stabilization and the return of internally
displaced persons (IDP). A business-as-usual approach
simply will not be enough for the people. They want
genuine change that will improve their lives.
It is imperative to resume soon the work of
the Council of Representatives and to confirm a
Government that will be able and willing to promote
genuine reforms. Iraq’s political groups must together
find a political solution based on the Constitution, the
law and the principles of democracy, in order to respond
to the needs of the people, put an end to the split and
paralysis in Parliament and enable the rapid enactment
of the necessary reforms and anti-corruption measures,
and the smooth functioning of State institutions, without
threat or intimidation. I also call on the Government to
take specific steps to promote women’s participation in
politics as part of the reform process.
Despite the notable and consistent progress on
the ground against ISIL, it remains a formidable and
determined enemy that constantly adjusts its tactics
and attack patterns, while also taking into account
of developments in Syria. As the Secretary-General
has advised the Council on numerous occasions, ISIL

S/PV.7689

cannot be defeated by military means alone. Without
addressing the root causes of violent extremism and the
underlying ideology, efforts will not be sustainable or
lasting. Military victories need to be complemented by
support for displaced people and increased stabilization
and rehabilitation efforts that prioritize the rule of law
and good governance and allow for the safe return of
IDPs to their places of origin. Simultaneously, Iraqis
must prioritize political and community reconciliation.
The recent resumption of contacts and dialogue
between Baghdad and Erbil should be turned
into a genuine partnership of mutually beneficial
cooperation. Reconciling differences and working
together on the necessary reforms will create the
conditions for enhanced financial and technical support
by the international community to Iraq, including the
Kurdistan region.
The visit of the Secretary-General to Iraq on
26 March, accompanied by Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President
of the World Bank Group, and Mr. Ahmad Mohamed
Ali Al-Madani, President of the Islamic Development
Bank, was an illustration of the seriousness of the
international community in its support for Iraq. The
world must recognize that Iraq requires more, not
less, international support at this critical juncture as it
struggles with many challenges and to break from past
legacies of poor governance and corruption. While the
international community is ready to offer more support,
Iraqis themselves must implement reforms that will put
their country on the road to recovery.
I welcome the progress achieved during Iraq’s
negotiations with the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank, which should be finalized during
another round of negotiations in Amman in mid-May.
Positive results will also be needed in order to promote
Iraq’s case at the forthcoming Group of Seven Summit
in Japan.
Stabilizing newly liberated areas remains a
priority, and is key to laying the groundwork for future
reconciliation. The problems are immense, as shown
by the example of Ramadi, with the huge challenges
that are posed by the vast degree of destruction and
unprecedented contamination by explosive devices.
Despite the Government’s warnings about the threat
of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), thousands of
desperate families have already returned to the city
of Ramadi and its surrounding areas. We are very
concerned about reports of dozens of civilian casualties

16-129193/9

S/PV.7689

The situation concerning Iraq

from booby-trap IEDs placed by ISIL, as well as
remnant explosive devices. In close collaboration with,
and under the guidance of, the national and provincial
authorities on mine action, the United Nations Mine
Action Service has played a role in helping to mobilize
international capacities to address explosive remnants
of war, including IEDs, at the local level.
I am concerned about the reports of ISIL’s use of
weaponized chemicals in its attacks on civilians and
security force personnel, as has been happening recently
in Bashir, Taza and Matar. I urge the international
community to support the ongoing investigation into
those incidents by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and to ensure accountability for
anyone found to be involved in, or facilitating the use
of, weaponized chemicals.
The humanitarian crisis in Iraq remains one of
the worst in the world. The number of Iraqis in need
has doubled over the past year. Nearly one third of the
population, more than 10 million people, now require
some form of humanitarian assistance. Depending
on its scope and intensity, the military campaign will
almost certainly lead to mass displacement in the
months ahead. In a worst-case scenario, another more
than 2 million Iraqis may be newly displaced by the end
of the year. The United Nations is especially worried
about humanitarian conditions in Fallujah, which
remains under ISIL’s control and effectively under siege.
The Government is bringing to safety families that
manage to reach mustering points. The humanitarian
community has been mobilized to provide lifesaving
support to them and to the people trapped in Fallujah.
The 2016 humanitarian response plan requests
$861 million to provide lifesaving assistance to 7 million
Iraqis. Disappointingly, only a quarter of that has been
secured so far. Unless $300 million is received by June,
dozens of front-line lifesaving programmes will be cut
back or closed. The priority humanitarian plan for this
year is intended to cover existing needs in the country.
It does not include the additional needs included in the
contingency plans for Mosul’s liberation. The amount
required to help those who will be affected by the
military operation in Mosul will depend directly on
the type of the operation. If destruction is widespread
and there is mass displacement for a long period, the
cost of supporting the populations will be enormous.
We also need to step up human resources and funding
to address the immense needs of displaced women and
4/9

06/05/2016

girls, which include specialized psychological care and
education.
I would now like to turn to the tenth report
(S/2016/372) of the Secretary-General on the issue
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives. Iraq’s Ministry of Defence has officially taken
over the technical overview of the missing Kuwaiti
persons file, resuming the work and undertaking a
number of activities since the transition. That is an
encouraging and welcome step, which I hope will
add impetus to the Government of Iraq’s efforts.
Unfortunately, a stalemate still persists with respect to
missing Kuwaiti property. In a follow-up to his visit,
the Secretary-General and I visited Kuwait at the end of
March, encouraging the Iraqi leadership to take every
possible step to achieve tangible progress concerning
the issues of both missing persons and property. In order
to contribute more actively to that effort, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq will be reaching
out to various stakeholders to seek their assistance
with various aspects that will help to push the process
forward.
However, I would like to emphasize that the main
responsibility for ensuring progress lies with the
Government of Iraq. While we remain cognizant of the
sheer volume of challenges that Iraq is currently facing,
its international obligations have to be fulfilled and that
issue cannot fall by the wayside.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Arab Republic
of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and for its especially
transparent efforts in organizing the Council’s work. I
would also like to thank you personally, Mr. President.
And I thank the People’s Republic of China for
its leadership of the Council last month. I am also
grateful to Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his briefing,
and commend him and his teams in both Baghdad and
New York for the outstanding service they are providing
to Iraq at a difficult time.
16-12919

06/05/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

The three leaderships — the presidency, the Speaker
of Parliament and the Prime Minister — are working
with the major political blocs elected by the people to
implement the Prime Minister’s reform programme
and enact legislation in the House of Representatives,
including on Government reform, the provision of
public services and the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) to liberated towns, with the assistance
of the United Nations and donor States, which I would
like to thank.
I would like to stress that 2016 is a crucial year for
Iraq, with regard to combating terrorism and recovering
all the territory that has been taken over by the terrorist
gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Iraq urges the international coalition to build on the
victories that have been achieved to date in military
operations and to take advantage of the weakening of
the ISIL groups in order to liberate Mosul. Operations to
regain control of Mosul under joint military command
are in their early stages, beginning with efforts to take
over surrounding villages. My Government commends
the Iraqi army for the successes in Ramadi that have
enabled us to retake Ramadi and Hit and continue
working to clean up remaining pockets in Anbar,
paving the way for IDPs to return.
Our forces are working hard to regain the cities and
towns occupied by ISIL’s terrorist gangs in Iraq and to
reopen the road between Baghdad and Amman. In that
regard, we welcome the fact that United States Secretary
of State John Kerry has said that he considers ISIL’s
actions in Iraq to be acts of genocide and crimes against
humanity, particularly those against minorities such as
Yazidis, Christians and Shiite Muslims. We urge the
Security Council to set up a specific international legal
mechanism for investigating and bringing to justice
the criminals of ISIL. We urge all States to implement
the provisions of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), in particular the those
pertaining to stopping the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters from more than 100 States Members of the
United Nations. We also urge them to eliminate the
sources of financing and put an end to the smuggling of
Iraqi oil and archaeological artefacts across the Turkish
border.
The war against terrorism must be based on the
principle of respect for all States, especially neighbouring
States, and respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq and the non-intervention
in its internal affairs. We stress the Security Council’s

S/PV.7689

responsibility to demand that Turkey withdraw its
forces, which have penetrated 110 kilometres into
Iraqi territory without prior authorization from the
central Iraqi Government. We consider that a flagrant
violation of Iraqi sovereignty. It is also a violation
of the principle of good neighbourliness and other
principles of international law, as well as the Charter
of the United Nations. It undermines confidence in the
Security Council’s role in safeguarding the principles
of the Charter. Furthermore, Iraq calls on the Turkish
Government to urgently withdraw its forces from Iraqi
territory. We urge it to respect international law and not
to base its actions on utterly unfounded pretexts.
Iraq values the positions taken by the international
coalition and its participation in the efforts to regain
stability and rebuild the areas recovered by Iraqi forces
from the ISIL terrorist gangs. The objective is to lessen
the humanitarian crisis of IDPs. It requires overcoming
the dangers posed by the remnants of explosives and
mines left behind by those gangs. It also requires the
provision of fundamental services that are essential for
the return of IDPs to those towns and regions. I would
underline the effective participation by the coalition to
rebuild recovered areas and to ensure that locals are
able to fight and hold territory.
We thank all States participating in the international
coalition, in particular the United States of America
and the member States of the European Union, as well
as other States outside the coalition, for their efforts
in confronting terrorism and for their military and
logistical assistance to Iraqi security forces, all while
respecting be sovereignty and sanctity of the Iraqi
territory and coordinating with our security forces.
We call for further support and cooperation and
coordination at the operational level. We also call for
air support, the building of better capacities and the
provision of military equipment required by Iraq, in
particular for de-mining. We call for the exchange of
information, for intelligence support and for help to
develop the military capacities of our security forces.
Iraq has always been, and will remain, an important
fundamental partner of the international coalition
until the terrorist gangs are thrown out by Iraq and
eliminated. We recognize the threat of terrorism, the
need to work and coordinate and cooperate to combat
such gangs in all places. We will not forget the role
of friendly countries that have stood alongside us in
our time of need and in our war against international
terrorism.

16-129195/9

S/PV.7689

The situation concerning Iraq

With regard to the efforts of the Iraqi Government
to promote the efforts aimed at national reconciliation,
the Government has adopted a series of legislation in
implementation of its national programmes, including
the law on accountability and justice and the adoption of
the draft law on general amnesty. The Government has
also approved the national guard law, providing for the
absorption of the fighters of the popular mobilization
forces and the tribal members outside the Ministries
of the Interior and Defence who all participated in
defending Iraq and combating the terrorist ISIL gangs.
The aim is to reintegrate them into the national guard
in accordance with the matrix of the Iraqi armed forces.
The Iraqi Government is working to complete
military and logistical requirements to retake the city
of Fallujah from ISIL by opening safe corridors for the
people of Fallujah towards Amiriyat, Habbaniyah and
Subaihat. In order to shelter civilians who have been
able to leave the city, camps have been set up with
food, medical supplies and humanitarian assistance.
However, ISIL is preventing people from leaving the
city in order to use them as humans shields, just as they
did when we retook Ramadi. Let me tell the Council
that our security forces have, and continue to, allow the
entry of foodstuffs and medication to Fallujah. We have
never prevented that.
With regard to the Mosul dam, the Iraqi Government
has taken major precautionary measures by lowering
the water level in the reservoir behind the dam to 307
metres. We have called on our citizens to exercise
great caution and to remain a safe distance from the
dam in case it collapses. We have contracted the Italian
company Trevi to repair one of the floodgates and to
train Iraqi personnel to use modern technologies. Our
engineers are currently undertaking that work. In that
regard, Iraq appreciates the efforts of the United States
of America and Italy, which are both working hard with
Iraq to find a lasting and final to the problem of the
dam.
Iraq is making continuing efforts to strengthen its
relations with Arab other States of the region. Allow
me to mention in particular Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as our constant
contacts with the Syrian Government. It is essential to
find a speedy solution to the Syrian question. We must
put an end to the humanitarian crisis in order to avoid
its escalation and to find a political settlement that is
satisfactory to all parties and serves to safeguard the
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian State and
6/9

06/05/2016

its international borders. That includes guarantees of
non-intervention by neighbouring States and stopping
the flow of terrorist fighters through Syrian borders.
We appeal to the Security Council to sanction States
that allow the mobilization of terrorist fighters on their
land and who direct them to other States in a dirty war
against humankind, stability and development. Iraq
supports the United Nations and international efforts
in finding a political solution that includes all Syrians,
including Syria’s Kurds.
The Government of Iraq is committed to making
exceptional efforts aimed at achieving progress with
regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and
to the national archives. The joint national committees
are meeting witnesses in connection with the missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. On 21 March,
they interviewed a witness with regard to suspected
burial sites holding the remains of a number of missing
Kuwaiti nationals in the Al-Jahrah and Al-Khamisiyah
regions. The operation to collect and document all
information is ongoing.
Let me stress how deep the relationship between
Iraq and Kuwait runs. We value the support of the State
of Kuwait, its Prince, its Amir and its people in our
war against terrorism and in providing humanitarian
assistance to Iraqi internally displaced persons. Today
we enjoy exceptional bilateral relations. There are
joint visits and meetings of joint committees, and we
welcome the increasing number of Kuwaiti tourists
to holy sites in Iraq. We are also working to increase
investments between our countries.
Iraq is committed to providing protection to those
in temporary transit camps. We urge States to repatriate
their citizens from those camps. We would like to thank
Ms. Lute for her efforts at finding durable solutions.
In conclusion, let me express our thanks and
appreciation to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš and his team in providing advice to the
Iraqi Government and for the daily efforts carried out
daily by UNAMI, aimed at ensuring Iraq’s unity and
stability and that it is free of terrorism. We condemn
the recent killing of a UNAMI staff member. In that
connection, Iraqi authorities are carrying out an
investigation in order to find those responsible for that
murder and to bring them to justice.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
16-12919

06/05/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council has been increasingly
working in open formats, occasionally in breach of
earlier agreed-upon formats. I wanted to speak at this
public meeting today, which, as we know, is permitted
under the rules of procedure.
We are grateful to Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing
and for having presented the report (S/2016/396) of
the Secretary-General. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations and, above all those of United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We are
grateful to the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
substantive statement.
Iraq’s tragedy has continued for 13 years, with
significant consequences for the entire region. At this
juncture, we note the need to overcome the internal
political crisis as soon as possible. We understand
the importance of reforming the system of State
governance. However, what is most important in today’s
context is the task of achieving national reconciliation
and joining efforts to overcome the country’s problems.
That can be achieved only through a broad national
dialogue and agreements based on consensus among all
the participants of the internal political process, while
maintaining the unity and ethnic and confessional
diversity of the country.
United efforts will enhance effectiveness in
combating terrorist organizations. We fully support the
fight of the Iraqi Government against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Lebant (ISIL). We have noted successes.
However, the rapid increase in terrorist activities,
in particular in Baghdad, forces us to be concerned
and to question the effectiveness of the actions of
the coalition, which lately, for some reason, has been
referring to itself as the global coalition. Yet the area in
which terrorists are active continues to expand beyond
the region — into Libya, Afghanistan and Europe. We
are convinced that only a comprehensive approach
in combating terrorism, while strictly adhering to
international legal standards, can produce the desired
results. There should be no double standards. We need
a consistent and principled position on the part of all
members of the international community to combat this
absolute evil.
We are particularly concerned about reports of
ISIL using weaponized chemical agents, which the
report mentions. One of those cases was reported to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

S/PV.7689

Unfortunately, nothing is said about investigating such
cases. Weaponized chemical agents are spreading
throughout the region and are being used by terrorists.
Some Member States continue to pretend that that is
not happening and blame the Al-Assad regime for
everything. Yet analyses of the primary chemical
components of weapons seized from insurgents in
Tikrit, with the subsequent identification of producers
and terms of sales to other countries, show that they
were in fact manufactured in Turkey or supplied to that
country without the right of re-export.
In that context, our initiative on developing an
international convention to combat chemical terrorism
is becoming increasingly timely. They same can be
said in connection with the Russian and Chinese draft
resolution. We are in favour of strict respect for Iraqi
sovereignty, which is regularly violated by Turkey
through air strikes. Those can lead to the death of
civilians, as noted in the report. Under the pretence of
combating terrorists, Turkey continues to maintain a
presence in the Bashiqa camp, and the protests from
Baghdad are simply disregarded.
The humanitarian situation in the country is a
cause for concern, in which the number of people
requiring assistance is now more than in Syria. At the
same time, however, the main problems with regard
to humanitarian access are located in areas under the
influence of terrorist organizations. The report states,
“[h]undreds of thousands of people are ... in
desperate need of assistance, with little or no
opportunity to exit. Thousands of families are
already caught between the front lines of opposing
forces [,] and many more are likely to become so in
the coming months.” (S/2016/396, para. 54)
A catastrophic situation can be seen in Fallujah. Over
the course of the so-called liberation, Ramadi was first
blocked and then practically destroyed by air strikes.
Together with you, Sir, and other colleagues from
Security Council — just recently during a working
lunch with the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross — we discussed the fact that we are not
all attaching equal importance to different situations.
Some situations receive more attention than others. That
is probably for political reasons. For example, every
day and week, we discuss the humanitarian situation
in Syria, whereas in Iraq, which is also combating a
terrorist threat, the humanitarian situation is rarely the
focus of our attention. That needs to be rectified, and

16-129197/9

S/PV.7689

The situation concerning Iraq

we should invite Mr. O’Brien to examine the situation
very carefully.
In conclusion, I would like to express my wish for
the people of Iraq overcome this long-running crisis as
soon as possible.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Organizationf the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš him for his briefing and want to commend
him and his team for all of their efforts and operating
under such difficult circumstances. I also thank the
Ambassador of Iraq for his briefing this morning.
I wanted to comment on just one aspect of the
intervention made by the Russian delegation. Of course,
we all recognize that the terrorism of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remains a determined and
pernicious enemy in Iraq. Nearly every day, we hear
of ISIL bombings in civilian areas, resulting in high
numbers of casualties. The United States is a committed
partner of the Iraqi Government, of the Iraqi people
and, indeed, of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq. Vice-President Biden strongly reaffirmed his
own commitment during his recent visit to Iraq last
week.
We are encouraged by the recent military progress
in Anbar with the liberation of Hit and the breaking of
the siege of Haditha.
But I want to note that it is important that we work
together as a Council on a consensus-based appraoch.
We welcome cooperation among Council members so
that we can look for a constructive way to orient our
work. For example, we worked together on the chemical
weapons portfolio in Syria, adopting a number of very
important resolutions — resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015). We regard that success as the
result of our joint productive work at the Council. I think
those resolutions have removed significant amount of
chemicals weapons. The resolutions condemned the
use of chlorine gas as a weapon and established the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. We want to keep the
Mechanism focused on the use of chemical weapons by
any actors in Syria.
As we look at the challenges posed by terrorism
in Iraq, including the use of any such weapons by any
actors, we want to look towards a constructive way of
focusing on a consensus-based approach.
8/9

06/05/2016

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his useful briefing.
Egypt would like to express its concern about the
recent political developments in Iraq, in particular in
view of the difficult security situation prevailing in
that fraternal country. Egypt appeals to all political
blocs in the Iraqi House of Representatives to respect
and safeguard national institutions of the State, to
unify its national vision and make every possible effort
to overcome the current crisis, which could lead to a
political vacuum, the repercussions of which will be
felt by all groups in Iraqi society.
Egypt emphasizes the importance of supporting
the three leaderships and agreeing on a comprehensive
political reform programme, including, inter alia,
ending the quota system and fighting corruption. The
Security Council and the international community
must support every effort to strengthen the concept of
a national State.
We would also like to express our firm position
on safeguarding the unity and sovereignty of Iraq over
its national territory. We stress the pivotal importance
of the Arab character of Iraqi society, but also of the
need to preserve its ethnic, sectarian and confessional
character. That identity is the unifying element for all
the Iraqi people. It constitutes a safety valve to prevent
the Iraqi people from falling into the abyss of separatism
and division — sectarian trends that some forces in the
region are trying to foment.
Egypt would like to stress the importance of
ending the flagrant incursions by Turkish forces into
Iraq. I note Iraq’s failure to date to heed regional and
international calls to withdraw Turkish forces from
Iraq. In that regard, Egypt calls on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq to follow-up once again
on the withdrawal of the Turkish forces from Iraqi
territory. We would also like to stress the importance of
Iran’s refraining from interfering in the internal affairs
of Iraq by encouraging trends that would threaten the
unity of the Iraqi society.
We welcome the victories achieved by the Iraqi
army in the past few months by liberating many areas
and removing them from the authority of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham. We stress the importance of
16-12919

06/05/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

developing a comprehensive vision to achieve stability,
an approach that is not limited to the security and military
aspects but also includes national reconciliation, the
integration of Sunnis and reconstruction.
We emphasize the importance of concerted
efforts by the international community to assist Iraq
in demining activities, including when it comes to
explosive remnants preventing the return of displaced
persons to Ramadi and other liberated areas. The
Egyptian Ministry of Defence has already approved a
training programme for Iraqi forces in that regard.
Egypt has also provided the Government of
Kurdistan, Iraq, with humanitarian assistance for
displaced persons. Egypt underscores the importance
of the humanitarian aspect of the Iraqi situation, which

S/PV.7689

includes finding missing Iraqi prisoners of war and
returning Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, which have been the subject of many United
Nations resolutions. Those issues have also been
the subject of the requisite importance in numerous
statements of the Security Council. Egypt believes that
it is important that the Council continue to shed light on
those matters, in view of their humanitarian and legal
ramifications.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

16-129199/9
