A/S-25/PV.6

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-fifth special session

6th meeting
Friday, 8 June 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/S-25/4/Add.1)
The President: In a letter contained in document
A/S-25/4/Add.1, the Secretary-General informs me
that, since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/S-25/4, Haiti and Vanuatu have made
the necessary payments to reduce their arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 8, 9 and 10 (continued)
Review and appraisal of progress made in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda
Note by the Secretary-General (A/S-25/3
and Add.l)
Further actions and initiatives for overcoming
obstacles to the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda
Declaration on cities and other human settlements in
the new millennium
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Tony Kandiero, Chairman of the delegation of
Malawi.

Mr. Kandiero (Malawi): I consider it a very
great honour indeed, and a rare privilege, to lead
Malawi’s delegation to this very important special
session and to be given the opportunity to address such
a distinguished group of representatives. Please allow
me, Mr. President, to convey to you very best wishes
for the success of this special session from the
President of the Republic of Malawi, His Excellency
Mr. Bakili Muluzi. It is with a deep sense of pleasure
that, on behalf of my delegation and of the Government
of the Republic of Malawi, I congratulate you on your
election to steer our deliberations. Let me also pay
tribute to the Secretariat for the excellent arrangements
made to organize this session. My delegation and I
have no doubt that with these excellent arrangements,
and under your able leadership, Sir, we shall achieve
fruitful and meaningful results.
It is five years since the adoption of the Istanbul
Declaration and the Habitat Agenda. Here we are in
New York at a special session which offers
opportunities to review our accomplishments and our
challenges. Also, we have an opportunity to reach
consensus on forward-looking strategies for the
realization of our objectives in shelter and human
settlements development.
For Malawi, the session has afforded us the
opportunity to learn from the experiences of other
countries, and to take stock of our own achievements,
failures and constraints in the implementation of our
national plan of action and the Habitat Agenda since
we last met.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-40419 (E)

*0140419*

A/S-25/PV.6

Since Istanbul, Malawi has undertaken many
activities and initiatives to improve human settlements.
Among these are, first, the merger in 1997 of the
former Ministries of Lands and Valuation, Housing and
Physical Planning and Surveys and the Department of
Buildings. That merger has enhanced our opportunities
to ensure efficiency and to carry out effectively our
programmes in the sphere of human settlements
development.
Second, we have formulated a national housing
policy, which benefited immensely from the Habitat
Agenda.
Third, we have formulated a national land policy
that aims at fostering a more economically efficient,
environmentally sustainable and socially equitable land
tenure system.
Fourth, we have formulated a national
environment policy and enacted an environmental
management act; these guide the review of sector
policies in order to make them consistent with
sustainable environmental management principles.
Fifth, we have formulated a decentralization
policy and have enacted a new local government act;
these devolve wide-ranging powers of local governance
and development to elected local government councils,
which we call assemblies. The policy also advocates
well coordinated participatory methodologies in which
the State, the private sector and civil society organize
themselves to explore grass-roots solutions to poverty
alleviation and sustainable human settlement
development.

Ninth, we have enacted a privatization act geared
towards increasing efficiency, enhancing competition,
reducing monopolies and promoting and expanding
Malawi business ownership.
And tenth, we have launched a poverty
alleviation programme, which is the linchpin of
Malawi’s development policy; its objectives are to
raise the productivity of the poor and increase income
and employment opportunities for all vulnerable
groups.
Despite those achievements and initiatives,
Malawi continues to face serious major challenges.
More than 60 per cent of our population lives below
the poverty line.
This lingering high incidence of poverty has been
compounded by unfavourable economic conditions
inside and outside our country, as well as by a lack of
capacity in human, technical and financial resources.
The situation is exacerbated by a lack of international
support. Unless and until international declarations
translate into actual international support, most of our
plans will remain dreams.
However, Malawi’s commitment to the Habitat
Agenda and its implementation is total and
unwavering. Malawi will support the declaration and
other outcomes of this special session, because we
believe that the Habitat Agenda and the outcome of this
session provide the correct vision for improving human
settlements and the quality of life of our respective
citizens. We are ready to work with all willing partners
in our common struggle to turn this vision into reality.

Sixth, we have revised an inheritance act, which
protects widows from relatives of deceased husbands
bent on grabbing property.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Blaise Ouo Foromo, Minister of Town
Planning and Habitat of Guinea.

Seventh, we have implemented Local Agenda 21
in our two major cities of Blantyre, the commercial
centre, and Lilongwe, the capital city, along the lines of
the sustainable livelihoods approach. I am delighted
that the mayors of both those cities are amongst my
delegation.

Mr. Foromo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere
congratulations on your brilliant election as President
of the current session. I also wish to extend
congratulations to the other members of the Bureau,
under whose guidance the future of the Habitat sector
is going to take shape. I am convinced that, with your
far-sighted leadership, this special session will produce
results which will respond to the hopes it has generated
among our peoples.

Eighth, we have launched our enterprise
development and employment creation programme,
which aims at ensuring that the desperately poor,
especially women in rural and urban areas, are
identified and assisted in establishing adequate
capacities, structures, means and incomes to meet their
basic requirements.

2

His Excellency General Lansana Conté, President
of the Republic of Guinea, and his Government believe
that this meeting is an opportunity to be taken

A/S-25/PV.6

advantage of, to expand the progress made and to
correct the weaknesses found in the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda. This summit, therefore, represents
the legitimate hopes of all of humanity aspiring to
sustainable development within its life’s framework.
The African continent is particularly concerned
about the serious deterioration in terms of trade and
living conditions resulting from the critical economic
situation and the adverse effects of factors that are
acting in combination and have proven difficult to
master,
including
the
population
explosion,
exacerbated and accelerated urbanization and armed
conflicts.
The crisis which has resulted from this process
has not spared my country, where people today aspire
more than ever before to live in safe, equitable and
sustainable settlements that are conducive to their
integral fulfilment in a movement towards participation
in the urban economy. Accordingly, the Guinean
authorities have done everything possible to ensure that
the representatives of our country are present at all of
the major meetings which have been part of the
preparatory phase for the present session. The
Consultative Committee of Habitat II, established by
my Government in the context of following up the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, organized broad
consultation among all actors concerned with the
improvement and modernization of human settlements.
A national evaluation report was prepared for this
purpose and was confirmed during the workshop.
Among the results obtained, one can note the
following: the efforts to provide secure accommodation
following the promulgation of the Land Code in 1992;
the guarantee of equal access to land; a dynamic
partnership between the private and public sectors,
non-governmental organizations and communities,
which has led to the implementation of major
development projects; access to essential services, in
urban as well as in rural areas; the promotion of
decentralization and the strengthening of local
authorities; and social integration and assistance to
underprivileged groups, particularly women.
The main efforts of the Guinean Government are
currently directed towards actions favouring the
implementation
of
policies
guaranteeing
the
development of the habitat sector in Guinea, with the
assistance of the international community.

Putting these policies into practice will enable the
Guinean Government to direct its development efforts
towards participatory approaches, which, inter alia,
will make the following changes possible: promoting
the involvement of non-governmental organizations
and civil society in development of the habitat sector;
pursuing efforts undertaken in the context of assistance
to groups at risk and women; facilitating access to land
and guaranteeing further secure tenure; strengthening
the partnership between public, private and community
sectors
for
their
development;
promoting
decentralization; and strengthening local authorities
and international cooperation.
These are but a few of the priority activities
already undertaken, and we propose to make these even
more dynamic in the coming years in order to deal with
urban crises and the main difficulties facing the urban
economies, which is a very serious problem in our
countries. Added to these priority activities are
emergency actions, such as the reconstruction of
stricken areas following the aggression against our
country along its southern borders with Liberia and
Sierra Leone over the past 10 months.
The Guinean Government is more determined
than ever to go beyond the results already achieved in
order to respond to the ever-growing aspirations of our
people. In this perspective, and from that of Habitat II,
my Government is firmly committed to promoting all
forms and levels of partnership necessary for the
mobilization of resources and essential investment.
The United Nations has made many efforts to find
a just and lasting solution to the various problems of
habitat. However, the people of non-industrialized
countries continue sliding into poverty, misery and
precarious situations. This special session should take
into account the great changes of the third millennium
in order to make the international community more
aware, so that the development of habitat can be
recognized as a necessary transition period for all
attempts to revitalize the economy.
It is important to specify that the challenge of the
third millennium should be the redeployment of
economic, financial, technical and human data so that
habitat’s problems may be resolved in a lasting way,
thanks to a dynamic and effective partnership and the
assistance of the international financial community.
Our mission, that of the States of the United
Nations family, is to adopt specific resolutions and to

3

A/S-25/PV.6

make a firm political commitment to carrying them out.
For our part, I can confirm my country’s commitment
to respect and apply all of the recommendations
adopted at this twenty-fifth special session of the
United Nations General Assembly.
I wish to conclude by asking the Assembly to join
in the warm congratulations that the Guinean
Government wants to express to all of the eminent
personalities present here for their participation in the
success of this meeting.
Lastly, I wish to express sincere gratitude and
profound thanks from the Republic of Guinea to the
Preparatory Committee of this twenty-fifth special
session for the hospitality given its delegation.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. André Tsala Messi, Secretary of State of Cameroon
for Town Planning and Housing, in charge of Land,
Registration and Surveys.
Mr. Tsala Messi (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
It is a great honour and privilege for me to take the
floor at this twenty-fifth special session of the General
Assembly on behalf of the head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, and of the Government of
the Republic of Cameroon.
Allow me to ask you, Sir, to convey to the
Secretary-General the satisfaction of the President of
the Republic of Cameroon with the efforts made and
action undertaken to cope with the economic, social
and environmental consequences of rapid urbanization,
as well as to improve living conditions throughout the
world. Allow me to extend to you, as well as to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat), the congratulations of
the delegation of Cameroon on the excellent
organization and flawless direction of our work and the
quality of the documents that have been provided.
Cameroon is gratified, on the one hand, to have
made a significant contribution to the preparatory
process for the Habitat II Conference, and, on the other
hand, to have actively participated during all the
preparatory phases of the current special session of the
General Assembly.
Despite an economic recession, our country has
dedicated itself to implementing the Habitat Agenda
through a set of policies, programmes and projects
involving institutional, economic and social reforms, as
well as through the establishment of an urban,

4

environmental and managerial development strategy.
This work includes, inter alia: the national anti-poverty
programme, the urban strategy declaration, the national
environmental management and protection plan, the
national governance programme and the national
health, fertility and nutrition programme.
Here I would like to thank Habitat, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the African Development Bank, as well as all the
agencies engaged in bilateral and multilateral
cooperation, for their valuable assistance to the work
that has already been carried out in implementing these
programmes.
The adoption of the millennium declaration on
cities and other human settlements at the end of this
special session will send a strong signal prompting all
Governments to implement effectively the Habitat
Agenda, at the local, regional and national levels. This
is why Cameroon — while in solidarity with the
African position taken during the regional ministerial
conference held in Addis Ababa — hopes that the spirit
of Istanbul will reign during the consideration of the
draft of the declaration that we are going to adopt. This
declaration should include the following: the effective
contribution by the developed countries of 0.7 per cent
of their gross national product to development
assistance and the strengthening of international
community support for the efforts to combat poverty
and HIV/AIDS. It should also cover the establishment
of an intergovernmental forum to discuss the guidelines
for a local-autonomy charter that would provide an
international framework for guiding national legislative
reforms
aimed
at
establishing
an
effective
decentralization policy that takes into account the
specific characteristics of each State. The declaration
should also promote an ethic of international solidarity
for dealing with the debts of poor countries. Such an
approach was advocated by His Excellency Mr. Paul
Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon, in his
statement at the Millennium Summit on 7 September
2000, here in New York.
In order to achieve the objectives defined in the
Habitat Agenda — “adequate shelter for all” and
“sustainable human settlements development in an
urbanizing world” — it would be highly desirable if the
production of community housing, the rehabilitation of
squatter districts and the provision of social services
were integrated into the international anti-poverty
initiative.

A/S-25/PV.6

In conclusion I would like to wish our work every
success. I am convinced that it will lead to the adoption
of specific measures and initiatives to overcome the
obstacles that have been encountered in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda since the
Istanbul Conference.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Laurent
Nkusi, Minister of Lands, Human Resettlement and
Environmental Protection of Rwanda.
Mr. Nkusi (Rwanda): On behalf of the Rwandan
delegation, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to chair this important conference. Indeed it is
a privilege for me and members of my delegation to
address this session.
Five years ago nations gathered in Istanbul to
address two themes of equal global importance, that is,
adequate shelter for all and sustainable human
settlements development in an urbanizing world. As
you are aware, the Istanbul Conference took place
when our country was emerging from genocide, the
worst of its kind in the last millennium. While the
whole world watched, the periodic massacres that
culminated in the 1994 genocide not only led to the
killing of 1 million Rwandan, but also resulted in the
total destruction of the socio-economic infrastructure.
This tragedy seriously disrupted the whole shelter and
human-settlements sector. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the international community for
its continuing support to my Government’s
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes.
The plan of action that was established in Istanbul
required nations to review policies and implement
programmes to ensure adequate shelter for all and
sustainable human settlements development in an
urbanizing world. Our country has made some progress
in this respect. Allow me to highlight some of the
major achievements of the Government of National
Unity in implementing the Habitat Agenda. The central
areas of focus are shelter, social development and the
eradication of poverty, environmental management,
economic development, governance and international
cooperation.
In 1996, my Government adopted the national
human settlements policy. The underlying rationale of
this policy is to transform the rural scattered settlement
pattern into grouped settlements — Imidugudu — with
the primary purpose of ensuring optimal land use, the
cost-effective provision of social infrastructure,

security, national unity and reconciliation. In the urban
areas the objective is to ensure that construction is
carried out only in the surveyed plots and to upgrade
slums and squatter areas. A ministerial decree was
released in January 1997 to spell out this policy.
In the last five years, the Government has
constructed about 177,000 low-cost housing units for
the rural poor with financial and technical support from
the international community, including the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations, and with
the participation of beneficiaries. While my
Government gratefully acknowledges this support, I
would like to inform the Assembly that today in
Rwanda, there are still about 2 million people — close
to 370,000 families — living in makeshift structures,
often made only of plastic sheeting.
This is the part of Rwandan population that was
not supported by the shelter programme operations of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other organizations. My
Government reiterates that it was premature for
UNHCR to phase out when returnees were still coming
from neighbouring countries.
In addition, the housing programmes that were
implemented responded to emergency situations and
carried out life-saving activities, such as providing
shelter, food and so on, and, therefore, many settlement
sites lack basic infrastructures. The provision of basic
infrastructures in this area is therefore very important
in order to ensure its sustainability.
Regarding security of tenure, our country is in the
process of reviewing its land policy and law to ensure
equitable land ownership and management.
In the areas of social development and
eradication of poverty, the main developments includes
cross-subsidization of social services.
Regarding economic development, the fact that
60 per cent of the Rwandan population lives under the
poverty line has prompted our Government to
undertake major economic policy reforms.
Turning to environmental management, we
recognize the reality that the environment is a critical
cross-cutting issue in all human settlements
programmes.
of

Significant advances have been made in the area
governance, including constitutional reviews

5

A/S-25/PV.6

designed to institute decentralized systems of
governance and policies to increase citizen
participation and public-private partnerships in the
delivery of services.

of the obstacles that have hampered the implementation
of the objectives of the international community aimed
at creating an appropriate environment for the
inhabitants and populations of the world.

Last year, cell and sector local-level elections
created committees which increased peoples’
participation in the decision-making process. National
elections will follow after the transition period in 2003.

In this context, I should briefly like to speak to
the efforts made by the Government of Kuwait, which
are compatible and consonant with the resolutions of
the Istanbul Conference.

As far as international cooperation is concerned,
my country is encouraged by the warm cooperation we
enjoy with the different nations represented here and
all our development partners.

First of all, in the area of housing, the
Constitution of Kuwait guarantees in many of its
articles the right of each citizen to adequate shelter as
well as to health care and education. In order to enable
people to enjoy these rights, the State of Kuwait, since
its independence, has been providing housing to
citizens, in accordance with systematic planning that
provides guarantees of adequate shelter; of all
communal services and equipment in the area of health
and education; and of infrastructures related to
electricity, drinking water, water filtration, sewage and
so on. All of this serves to create an appropriate
environment and adequate living conditions.

The Government of National Unity and the
people of Rwanda recognize that development can take
place only in an atmosphere of peace and stability in
our country and region and in the world at large.
Rwanda fully supports the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and all mechanisms that support conflict
prevention. It is in this respect that the Government of
Rwanda
is
convinced
that
the
successful
implementation of the Lusaka Peace Agreement forms
the only basis for sustainable peace and security in the
Great Lakes region.
The threat to peace and security caused by the
circulation of Interahamwe militia and the former
Rwandan armed forces in the region cannot continue to
be ignored. There cannot be any sustainable settlement
without peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to
Mr. Mohammad Al-Sarawi, Chairman of the Board and
Director General, The Environment Public Authority of
Kuwait.
Mr. Al-Sarawi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Sir, I should like to congratulate you on
your election to preside over this special session of the
General Assembly. We are convinced that thanks to
your wisdom and skill, the work of the session will be
crowned with success. I should like also to pay tribute
to the efforts made by the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements during the preparatory phase of
this important session.
This session has particular significance, as it is
being held five years after the second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements in Istanbul in June
1996. Clearly, five years is enough time to be able to
undertake
an
objective
assessment
and
a
comprehensive consideration of the progress made and

6

The State has so far provided nearly 62,000
housing units to its citizens. Other Government
projects, as well as joint projects with the public sector,
are also under way in order to build more housing units
to meet the needs of citizens.
The State, moreover, has been providing many
services, too numerous to mention here due to time
constraints. The most important is our system of social
security, which guarantees assistance after retirement
and enables older persons to have a dignified existence
that allows them to fulfil their needs.
Secondly, in the area of the environment, the
State of Kuwait attaches particular importance to urban
planning policies. This was illustrated by the
establishment in 1996 of the High Council for the
Environment, which is chaired by the First Deputy
Vice-Premier and the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, who was
entrusted with finalizing the environmental policies
and plans which are being implemented by the public
authorities. That agency has elaborated a national
strategy designed to deal with environmental problems
and, most importantly, has carried out performance
studies on the implications of human settlements for
the environment, taking into account the nature of the
land, in order to guarantee a life in conditions of safety
for future generations.

A/S-25/PV.6

This agency has also been entrusted with dealing
with the serious environmental problems created by
Iraqi aggression against the State of Kuwait in August
1990. The invading Iraqi forces perpetrated crimes
against the marine environment, as they deliberately
dumped enormous quantities of oil into the Gulf and
carried out other environmental crimes, burning more
than 700 oil wells, thus creating clouds of smoke and
more than 320 lakes of oil that took a long time to
drain. Dealing with these is a source of concern for
Kuwait.
I would be remiss if I did not thank the United
Nations and its specialized agencies for the technical
and material assistance provided to Kuwait to help it
cope with the consequences of these problems. Ten
years after this aggression, Kuwait hopes that its
demands for compensation, now being considered by
the Compensation Commission, will be met so that
these environmental problems can be solved.
The challenges we face in implementing the goals
of the Istanbul Conference require significant effort.
The deterioration of human settlements is illustrated by
the acts of the Israeli authorities, who are violating
United Nations resolutions, particularly the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, by
creating new settlements, expanding existing ones, and
by demolishing Palestinians’ houses, confiscating their
lands and blocking Palestinian territories — measures
that helped create difficult economic and social
conditions.
This is why we are asking the international
community to exert all pressure necessary on the Israeli
Government to force it to abide by United Nations
resolutions and to withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories and respect the bilateral agreements
concluded with the Palestinian Authority within the
framework of the peace process.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that Kuwait will
continue its efforts and initiatives to ensure respect for
the Habitat Agenda. We hope that the international
community and the international financial institutions
will be able to complete their efforts in the new
millennium to implement the Habitat Agenda,
eradicating poverty, ensuring the availability of
drinking water, health care and rehabilitated land and
coping with the problems of human settlements,
particularly in the developing countries.

The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Abdessalam Ould Mohamed Saleh, Commissioner
for Human Rights, Poverty Eradication and Social
Integration of Mauritania.
Mr. Saleh (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): The
opportunity provided us today to discuss the progress
made since Istanbul in implementing the Habitat
Agenda is an important occasion for us all. Managing
urban development, and particularly access to housing
for the poorest people, are two significant problems
faced by the developing countries.
These traditional challenges are compounded by
others, such as globalization and the need to create
competing cities that can advance economically and
attract foreign investment. Within this framework,
protection of the environment and reduction of
inequality among cities become more urgent.
While the Istanbul programmes form a good basis
for a national policy in the area of human settlements,
we are forced today to re-evaluate our attitudes towards
the problem of urbanization and poverty. In that
context, the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania reaffirms the need to implement the Habitat
Agenda and hopes that this session will serve as a
starting point for balanced urban development that
takes into account the demands of combating poverty,
integration of poorer classes and protection of the
environment.
Mauritania has experienced a devastating
drought, which has placed pressure on the collective
infrastructure and the environment, creating significant
areas of marginalized housing. To meet these
challenges, the Government of Mauritania has
implemented a set of programmes aimed at improving
basic infrastructure and at ensuring that the poor
benefit from social services and from decentralization.
This policy has been able to reduce poverty. Urban
development is considered one of the strategic
elements for eliminating poverty by the year 2015. This
plan was decided on by the Government of Mauritania
and was developed by local authorities, nongovernmental
organizations
and
international
institutions. An urban development programme to
cover the next 10 years has been established based on
an integrated approach that has four major objectives.
The first objective is to rebalance the urban
structure in the country, put an end to marginalized
housing, integrate poor neighbourhoods by creating

7

A/S-25/PV.6

investment possibilities, establish urban planning,
establish sanitary conditions and base urban
development on new practices so that authorities can
ensure the participation of the entire population in the
decision-making process. All these factors will be
supplemented by a professional training programme
aimed at women and young unemployed individuals.
The integrated approach of the Government of
Mauritania to urban development is based on the firm
will of the President of the Republic to put an end to
marginalized housing areas and to provide equal
development opportunities for all the citizens of
Mauritania. Based on our experience of the last few
years, the Mauritanian policy is innovative and is
focused on providing loans. The promising results of
this experience will make it possible to put an end to
marginalized housing areas throughout the country.
To conclude, allow me, on behalf of the
Government of Mauritania, to express the hope that
this twenty-fifth special session will mark a new
beginning for international solidarity for the urban
development and for implementing the objective of
decent housing for every inhabitant of our planet.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Padilla Tonos, Chairman of the
delegation of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Padilla Tonos (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic attaches great
importance to this special session of the General
Assembly to review and appraise the implementation
of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II), and to adopt
additional measures aimed at overcoming obstacles in
the implementation of the Agenda. Putting the topic of
housing and human settlements on our national
development agenda represents a great challenge for
my country because of its impact on the quality of life
and on poverty.
As the report of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) emphasizes, Latin America and the Caribbean
is the most highly urbanized region in the developing
world. Between 1950 and 1990, the population changed
from predominantly rural to predominantly urban in
nature, and this brought with it enormous social and
economic problems that have made the exercise of
democracy and good governance more difficult. These
problems include the lack of housing, education, health

8

care, transportation, security and basic services such as
the provision of drinking water and energy. Such
shortages can become tragic at times of natural disaster
or when external events have a negative impact on the
fragile economies of developing countries. Such is the
case with the external debt, the increase in oil prices
and the massive migration of thousands of dispossessed
people who come from other areas seeking to find a
better future than they have in their own lands.
My country has not been spared this
phenomenon. A large part of the population is
concentrated in cities and urban centres, creating in
many of them so-called “poverty belts” and
marginalized neighbourhoods which require a series of
measures and efforts on the part of the authorities that,
more often than not, exceed their capacity, and where
each day poverty becomes greater.
Throughout the developing world, including in
my country, poverty has very deep roots. Hundreds of
thousands of people are very poor. Indigence is
widespread in rural areas, but marginality and harsh
poverty are also emerging in the main cities, where
education, food, health care and housing — the basic
infrastructure for survival — are in short supply. In
some sectors there is no security and communities live
in fear, shaken by the knowledge that civil safety
mechanisms are weak and delinquency and criminality
are increasing. Hundreds of men are unemployed,
hundreds of thousands of children from humble homes
have no school to go to, no books and no food, and
hundreds of women are completely marginalized.
No other example so reveals the abysmal gap
between
speech
that
deceptively
advocates
modernization in this era of globalization and the
reality in which the developing world lives, confronted
with a huge social debt. The Dominican Government
believes that paying off that social debt should be the
primary objective of any serious and responsible
Government — any Government that cannot accept
injustice and extreme poverty.
That is why we are involved in an ambitious
social programme aimed at combating poverty and
improving the urban and rural environment, with
special emphasis on constructing housing for people
with few resources. That should help, if not to
eliminate, at least to curb and limit the scope and the
consequences of the problems, in keeping with the

A/S-25/PV.6

individual and social rights of all Dominicans, as
confirmed in the constitution of the Republic.

and design standards for building adequacy, so as to
meet health, sanitation and safety requirements.

To attain these objectives, however, public and
private efforts at the national level will not be enough;
international cooperation is required. That is why the
Dominican Republic attaches great importance to this
special session of the General Assembly. We must
urgently muster the necessary and sufficient political
will to evaluate the measures adopted at Habitat II and
to implement additional measures, understanding that
the main purpose of this meeting is to try to resolve
one of the problems that highlights to the greatest
extent the difference between rich and poor and that
starkly reveals the real situation of the underprivileged
who aspire to enjoy adequate living conditions, which
they deserve as human beings.

Human settlements planning, management and
development are effectively provided for by existing
legislation, with clear and mutually agreed roles for
central, regional and local levels of government. The
New Zealand Government is committed to facilitating
access to affordable and sustainable housing for people
on low incomes and to providing appropriate housing
for people with special needs, thereby contributing to
the well-being of communities and individuals.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Don MacKay, Chairman of the
delegation of New Zealand.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At last year’s
Millennium Summit, the Prime Minister committed
New Zealand to a wide range of principles and
development targets for the coming years, many of
which are relevant to our meeting here today. These
include the reaffirmation of the principles of
sustainable development and poverty eradication, and
specific time-bound goals on access to basic services,
including health, education and safe drinking water.
The Millennium Declaration also committed United
Nations Members to seeking significant improvement
in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers by
2020. The commitment of our leaders to these goals,
along with the urgent need to address the effects of our
rapidly increasing global population, makes this a
timely moment to review progress in implementing the
Habitat Agenda.
The core Habitat principles of sustainable
development, good urban governance and adequate
shelter for all currently underpin New Zealand
Government policy. New Zealanders are for the most
part well housed. We are a nation of home owners: over
70 per cent of all of New Zealand’s permanent
dwellings were owner-occupied in 1996. Problems of
inadequate or overcrowded housing are infrequent and
difficult to measure. Tenants and homeowners are
protected by, and answerable to, a robust legislative
framework. This establishes basic rights for tenants,

New Zealand is a country in which 85 per cent of
the population lives in urban areas and towns. At the
same time, we are heavily dependent on our rural
economy for our ongoing prosperity. Given that
complex and co-dependent relationship between our
city-dwelling majority and our agrarian economic
backbone, the Government is particularly concerned to
preserve and enrich the linkages between our urban and
rural settlements. In that respect, we are very pleased to
endorse the call made at this special session by the
Secretary-General for the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda to be undertaken in a manner that is
cognizant of the needs of rural communities.
New Zealand’s recognition of the importance of
its country settlements has led the Government, as part
of its broader sustainable development approach, to
review its policies in various key areas of relevance to
habitat. Policy reviews are taking place in the areas of
sustainable growth, transport, measurement of social
development,
environmental
policy,
waste
management, energy efficiency and local government.
Our review of local government legislation will seek to
give local governments more clearly defined purpose
and greater flexibility in terms of their activities, and to
make them more accessible and more responsive to
their local communities. Greater decentralization and
encouragement of enhanced civic engagement are in
fact key elements of current government policy in a
number of areas, most recently provision of health
services. Government officials are also currently giving
thought to ways to ensure greater integration and
coordination of efforts across the New Zealand
Government, and among the Government, the private
sector and civil society, in order to promote a
sustainable development approach.
The Habitat Agenda is also of relevance to our
wider region. At present, urban communities in the

9

A/S-25/PV.6

Pacific region are not large in either relative or
absolute global terms. However, with urban
populations projected to grow by as much as 3.2 per
cent annually over the next 30 years, that situation may
change rapidly. Already, many of our development
partners are beginning to experience problems
associated with rapid urbanization, including growing
pollution and income inequality, as well as increasing
problems with access to adequate sanitation and clean
water. Issues related to use and ownership of land also
continue to pose challenges. We hope that the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) will
continue to consider the unique human settlements
development challenges faced by many Pacific island
countries, particularly in terms of their limited natural
resources, their ecologies and their vulnerability to
natural disasters.
For the Commission on Human Settlements to
remain an effective and relevant organization, and for
the Habitat Agenda to achieve its goals, both must have
a strategic focus. The issue of human settlements
development is potentially as broad as the experience
of human development itself. Few topics on the
development agenda do not potentially have salience
for Habitat. However, it is only in a few areas, notably
its strategic points of entry, that Habitat can claim
comparative advantage over other agencies. To be a
truly effective and credible advocate, it must
concentrate on core areas of expertise, and must
coordinate with other agencies to ensure that human
settlements issues are mainstreamed into others’
activities. The recent establishment of a Habitat task
management system is a valuable step in this regard;
we applaud efforts to maintain such strategic focus to
date, and urge the Executive Director to continue to
intensify them in the future.
As we approach next year’s World Summit for
Sustainable Development, increasing attention will be
paid to all aspects of sustainable development,
including human settlements. It will be important for
Habitat to play a constructive role in preparations for
that event, and for the results of this special session to
feed into it effectively.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Husein Zivalj, Chairman of the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Zivalj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is my
privilege and honour, on behalf of Bosnia and

10

Herzegovina, to address the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth special session. I am also pleased that a
significant number of States Members of the United
Nations are represented here at high level, which
clearly demonstrates the willingness of world leaders
to address the challenges in the area of human
settlements throughout the world. The Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is also aware of the
importance of this special session for the world as a
whole. But on this occasion I would like to underline
several points that are significant to us.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a place that has to
deal with a large number of issues related to human
settlements. For instance, during the 1992-1995 war,
more than 2 million people were forced out of their
homes; very often, entire towns and villages were
forcefully emptied of almost all their inhabitants. Most
of the housing units were burned or otherwise
completely destroyed. As members will recall, a
number of cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
the capital, Sarajevo, were under siege for more than
three years, and were exposed to continuous and
indiscriminate shelling, with urban areas and
infrastructure as deliberate targets. Apart from that
physical destruction, the unique Bosnian social fabric
of a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-religious
society was also affected in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
So, when the war ended in November 1995,
Bosnia and Herzegovina was faced with human
settlements that were in a disastrous state. In addition
to that, some 3 million mines, planted indiscriminately
and unmarked throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina,
still pose a very serious threat, especially to children.
However, with the generous assistance of the
international community, for which we are profoundly
grateful, about a million refugees and internally
displaced persons returned to their pre-war homes
between 1995 and 2001. Regrettably, although pursuant
to annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement each and
every internally displaced person or refugee has the
right to return to his or her home of origin, around
1.135 million internally displaced persons and refugees
are still waiting to exercise that right.
Apart from security issues, other main obstacles
to return include a lack of housing units, destroyed
infrastructure, a lack of job opportunities due to the
destruction of industrial facilities, a lack of schools and
universities and poor communication networks. Those
are challenges that Bosnia and Herzegovina, for

A/S-25/PV.6

various reasons, cannot meet all by itself. However we
offer our unreserved commitment and readiness to take
on our full share of the responsibility in cooperating
with the international community and in working with
it towards our common goal: the restoration of the
multi-ethnic,
multicultural
and
multi-religious
character of the human settlements that once adorned
Bosnia and Herzegovina, contributing in that way to
the richness of world heritage and committing
ourselves to working with other nations towards
achieving a prosperous and bright future.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Ousmane Moutari, Chairman of the delegation of
the Niger.
Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the delegation
of my country, the Niger, at this special session of the
General Assembly devoted to the review and appraisal
of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and to
inform the Assembly about its implementation in my
country during the five years since the Istanbul
Conference.
The national report prepared by the Niger
recounts the current situation relating to habitat and
human settlements in my country. Without going into
all of the details contained in the report, I would like to
tell the Assembly about some of the main activities that
have been or are being carried out.
The most significant measure that my country has
taken concerns the national habitat policy. Adopted in
1998, or two years after Istanbul, following an
intensive process involving the public and private
sectors, the national habitat policy of the Niger was
built on the following six strategic pillars: first, general
provisions; secondly, legislative and regulatory
measures; thirdly, institutional measures; fourthly,
habitat financing; fifthly, operational measures; and
lastly, technology.
The first strategic pillar provides for the
elaboration of a national housing plan. This plan is
contained in the programme for the construction of
20,000 homes in the communes of the Niger, and we
are currently seeking financing for this programme.
With regard to the second pillar, several
legislative and regulatory measures have in fact been
adopted, and activities are under way in that direction.

As regards institutional measures, the third
strategic pillar, the restructuring of financial
institutions is currently under way, and this has already
made it possible to establish a Habitat Bank and an
account for the mobilization of resources to support
Habitat.
As for the other three pillars, their
implementation is being impeded by the extreme
weakness of the State’s capacities, so the financial and
technical support of the international community is
more necessary than ever before. This is why my
country is requesting the assistance of its development
partners to ensure the total success of its habitat policy,
in particular that of the International Development
Association (IDA), which at present is supporting us in
the area of planning human settlements through, inter
alia, a project for the rehabilitation of urban
infrastructures.
Five years ago, in the context of the medium-term
action plan 1996-2000, contained in the Niger’s
national report for Habitat II, the production and land
management aspect of the plan was devoted to spatial
planning for the Niger’s cities. The objective of this
first programme is to design a simple urban planning
tool and to test it in some of the Niger’s cities. We are
very happy already with the results of this important
programme, which we have been able to carry out
thanks to the invaluable assistance of the IDA.
The second programme, concerning the
strengthening of legislation and regulations governing
urbanization and construction, is in the process of
being carried out, like most of the programmes in our
plan of action. Again, this is an ongoing process, and a
number of texts have been adopted and are being
implemented.
All of the programmes under the first heading —
production and land management — and the second —
production of suitable housing — contain various
elements that links them to the Global Campaign for
Secure Tenure, launched by the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements. Moreover, the Niger has taken
into account the question of secure tenure through a
vast project to distribute land parcels to some 20,000
civil servants, which should benefit about 120,000
individuals.
In the Niger, the question of financing for Habitat
is of utmost concern, taking into account the huge
needs in terms of housing — some 40,000 units per

11

A/S-25/PV.6

year — and the weakness of our responses due to our
very limited resources. This is why my delegation
believes that it is essential to create, in the context of
the United Nations system, a fund to finance the
Habitat Agenda.
Indeed, we must not forget that the Millennium
Summit decided to accomplish by the year 2020 the
goal of improving appreciably the lives of at least
100,000 inhabitants of shanty towns, in accordance
with the Cities without Slums initiative. To do this, the
question of financing requires special attention from
the international community.
In the Niger, even though strictly speaking we do
not have shanty towns, we do have unplanned
settlements that include slums, generally in old
neighbourhoods or villages that have been overtaken
by urbanizaton. The Niger has attacked the problem
through the restructuring of old neighbourhoods — for
example, the Gamkallé neighbourhood in the capital,
Niamey — and a study has been completed in this
respect. The problem of financing operations in the
field has not yet been resolved, and a request in this
connection will be addressed to organizations of the
United Nations system.
With regard to rural settlements, a project called
“Special programme 2001”, initiated by Mr. Tandja
Mamadou, President of the Republic, is being carried
out. The goal of the project is to equip the Niger’s
villages with 1,000 health centres, 1,000 wells and 100
dams per year in order to improve the living conditions
of rural populations and enable them to increase
production.
The debt burden of the least developed countries,
such as that of the Niger, constitutes a major handicap
in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda. This debt
should be cancelled, and the resources devoted to it
should be redirected towards a better implementation
of the Habitat Agenda, which is an essential factor for
reducing poverty.
Finally, I would like to appeal for the
strengthening of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements. In addition to its traditional role, we
believe that the Centre should be placed at the
vanguard of combating poverty. It should be given
appropriate resources so that it can help the developing
countries implement effectively the Habitat Agenda.

12

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Monsignor Francis Chullikatt, Chairman of
the observer delegation of the Holy See.
Monsignor Chullikatt (The Holy See): Five
years ago this month, the United Nations met in
Istanbul for the second United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements. The Holy See recognized the
importance of that meeting, especially regarding the
realization of the right to adequate shelter for all
persons, all families, along with a better understanding
of the inseparable connection between sustainable
development and human settlements development.
With the current meeting, we bring to a close the fiveyear review cycle of those United Nations Conferences
and summits that have had such a profound effect on
our understanding of sustainable human development,
not only as regards the work of this Organization, but
also the world community at large.
What have we learned? And what will be the
legacy that this and all of those meetings will leave to
the United Nations?
To answer those questions, we must turn to the
very first principle of the Rio Conference on
Environment and Development, the principle that has
guided our work for so many years and which states
emphatically that human beings are at the centre of our
concerns for sustainable development. In fact, the
fundamental global community is the human family
itself.
We are reminded that human beings — every
woman, man and child, living today and who will be
born tomorrow, who constitute the family — are and
must always be considered the subject of our work.
Indeed, it is in the central interest and well-being of the
family, through the establishment of adequate shelter
for all, that we have gathered to discuss the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda. Again, it is
towards the family that our attention is focused — to
families living in the largest cities and to those in the
most remote hamlet or village, in every place that
people call home.
The Holy See looks forward to the adoption of
the declaration on cities and other human settlements in
the new millennium during this special session of the
General Assembly. By this declaration, representatives
will reaffirm their commitment to recognize the
important role of the family as the basic unit of society,
to eradicate poverty, to safeguard the environment, to

A/S-25/PV.6

respect human dignity and to promote and protect
human rights.
However, the success of this special session
cannot overshadow the fact that so many people remain
homeless, or that — as victims of armed conflict,
natural disaster or economic turmoil — they have been
forced from their homes, their livelihoods and in many
cases separated from their families. So many people
live in absolute poverty and without access to basic
social services such as clean water, safe sanitation,
education, health care and adequate nutrition — things
that are necessary for life and the realization of human
potential.
This special session must spark a renewal of the
world’s commitment to a solidarity that recognizes the
benefits that come from a realization of the common
good and a concern for the dignity of each member of
the human family.
The United Nations has come a long way since
Vancouver. And regarding so many issues, including
human settlements development, there is still much to
accomplish. Let us hope that a good and promising
beginning will come as a result of the work of this
special session.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ulrich
Bohner, Deputy Head of the Secretariat of the Congress
of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe of the
Council of Europe.
Mr. Bohner (Council of Europe): I am
particularly honoured to speak on behalf of Walter
Schwimmer, Secretary General of the Council of
Europe, at this special session of the General
Assembly. I should like to take this opportunity to
present a short overview of the main achievements of
the Council of Europe in the field of local democracy
over the past 50 years.
The major achievement of the Council of Europe
for drawing up a set of common principles of local
self-government all over Europe was the adoption in
1985 of the European Charter of Local SelfGovernment, an international convention which has
been signed and ratified respectively by 37 and 34
countries out of the total of 43 member States of the
Council of Europe.
Since 1994 local and regional authorities in
Europe have been represented in the Council of Europe
by the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of

Europe, which took over from the previous Standing
Conference. Today this entity gathers some 600
delegates from the 43 member States and is the
broadest official forum in Europe for discussion of the
issues of local and regional democracy.
In recent years, signing and ratification of the
Charter of Local Self-Government has become one of
the major conditions of accession for the countries that
wish to join the Council of Europe. The main purpose
of this convention is, first of all, to provide member
States with a common basis of shared values in the
field of local democracy which every national
Government and local authority can refer to in building
or reforming their institutions. By signing and ratifying
the European Charter, national Governments recognize
the vital contribution of local self-government to
democracy,
democratic
stability,
effective
administration close to the citizens and the
decentralization of power aimed at rationalizing the
decision-making process, as well as to giving citizens
the opportunity to participate in public life.
In order to allow local authorities, as per article 3,
to manage “a substantial share of public affairs”, the
European Charter provides for a number of principles
which must be respected by the member States of the
Council of Europe. The Charter also defines what may
be called the structural conditions of self-government:
the existence of councils elected by direct suffrage,
executive organs responsible to those councils, the
direct participation of citizens in public affairs and, of
course, the application of the principle of subsidiarity
in the division of powers and responsibilities between
different tiers of government.
Mr. Lelong (Haiti), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The latter principle is laid down in article 4.3 of
the Charter:
“Public responsibilities shall generally be
exercised, in preference, by those authorities
which are closest to the citizen.”
The great merit of this principle lies in the fact
that it enables elected bodies at the local level to
discharge their responsibilities in close proximity to the
people they serve, whose needs they know perfectly
well, and that it gives them full freedom of decision,
provided they respect decisions applying to the country
as a whole. Local populations will be respected,

13

A/S-25/PV.6

because the population controls democratically elected
local authorities.
These provisions of the Charter have the merit of
being adaptable to very different situations. The
Charter should be seen as a means of encouraging
States to develop their legislation in order eventually to
guarantee their citizens the right to participate in the
management of public affairs.
In the early 1990s, after the fall of communist
governments in Central and Eastern European
countries, the European Charter of Local SelfGovernment has been the legal instrument which has
inspired eastern European Governments in their reform
of local administration and supplied them with an
institutional framework for such reforms. Joining the
Charter has now become one of the key conditions of
accession to the Council of Europe.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe instructed the Congress to prepare, on a regular
basis, country-by-country reports on the situation of
local and regional democracy in all Member States and
ensure that the principles of the European Charter are
implemented. So far, 30 country reports on local and
regional democracy have been prepared and adopted by
the Congress.
Over the past years, the Congress has followed
with great interest the work of the United Nations
Commission for Human Settlements relating to the
preparation of a draft world charter on local selfgovernment. Unfortunately, the Congress ascertained
that the draft has encountered a number of difficulties
and that progress is not as fast as would have been
hoped.
However, the Congress expressed the view that it
was important to continue to support — in conformity
with the objectives of the Council of Europe — the
ongoing worldwide dialogue on the principle of
subsidiarity and good governance at the local level.
Our work on urban questions takes very much of
its flavour both from the inspiration of the forces
behind our work on local democracy, the European
Charter of Local Self-Government; and from the
overall vocation of a Council of Europe wedded to the
principles of democracy and human rights. As Walter
Schwimmer, Secretary General of the Council of
Europe, pointed out at the last Congress session,
“There is no democracy without local democracy”.

14

One of the key instruments of the Council of
Europe in the field of good governance is the European
Urban Charter. The Charter is the result of many years
of work on urban questions at the Council of Europe —
work which concentrated on some of the aspects I have
already mentioned. Inspired by one of our campaigns,
the European Campaign for Urban Renaissance, and
characterized by comparative reports, conferences,
seminars, exchange of best practices and policy
proposals, the Charter is both a distillation of this work
and a guide by local authorities for local authorities on
good urban practice and on good governance.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm the
coincidence of the objectives of both of the Habitat
Agenda and our own work on the challenges of town
and country planning in Europe. We naturally,
therefore, support the Habitat Agenda. Equally, we
support the work of the United Nations Commission on
Human Settlements and its work on preparing a draft
world charter of local self-government. In this context,
last week in Strasbourg, on the occasion of the plenary
session of our Chamber of Local Authorities, we spoke
at length to delegations from local authorities from
China and from the United States of America. We hope
that their influence will be brought to bear on their
respective national authorities in order to dilute their
opposition to the Charter. In our own geopolitical zone,
we have received commitments from member countries
of the Council of Europe to support the Charter.
We are, in general, supportive of the
strengthening of the local government dimension in the
work of the United Nations, in a way similar to the one
we enjoy in the Council of Europe with our Congress
of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe and the
European Union with its Committee of Regions, and
also through the World Association of Cities and Local
Authorities.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to Dame Veronica Sutherland, Deputy
Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs of
the Commonwealth Secretariat.
Dame Veronica Sutherland (Commonwealth
Secretariat): My statement is made on behalf of the
member countries of the Commonwealth Consultative
Group on Human Settlements.
The Commonwealth reaffirms its commitment to
the Habitat Agenda and continues to work actively

A/S-25/PV.6

towards implementation of its broad objectives in
member States.
To facilitate this process and deepen its
involvement, Commonwealth Governments agreed to
the establishment of a Commonwealth Consultative
Group on Human Settlements (CCGHS) to help
develop a consensus Commonwealth approach for
implementation of the Habitat Agenda. The
Commonwealth secretariat is partnered in this effort by
the Commonwealth Human Ecology Council, the
Commonwealth Foundation and the Commonwealth
Local Government Forum.
The CCGHS has developed a Commonwealth
Input to Istanbul + 5 outlining a consensus approach to
assist member Governments to implement the Habitat
Agenda. The full text of this Input has been circulated
in a separate document.
The CCGHS has adopted a new Commonwealth
goal, which is the focus of all its activities and
programmes. That goal is “Demonstrated progress
towards adequate shelter for all with secure tenure and
access to essential services in every community by
2015”.
To achieve this goal, the CCGHS has defined six
major objectives: providing basic services to
households,
neighbourhoods
and
villages;
incorporating the provision of shelter into national
poverty-alleviation
programmes;
espousing
a
Commonwealth position on corruption; removing
systematic discrimination against women, especially in
respect of title to property and inheritance rights;
promoting security of tenure and good governance; and
promoting the attainment of the new Commonwealth
goal.
In the light of these objectives, the CCGHS has
identified five broad areas for action, as follows.
The first area is the development of partnerships.
Good governance requires the closest working
relationships between Governments, civil society and
the private sector. Such partnerships are seen as crucial
to success. Failure to develop these partnerships could
condemn well-conceived programmes to failure.
Secondly is the identification of new and
innovative resources, and the more effective use of
existing funds. An important function of the CCGHS
will be identification of relevant sources of financial
project support. At the request of national

Governments, the CCGHS will provide guidance and
information in developing project proposals for
submission to the relevant agencies.
The third area is promoting the sharing of ideas,
experience and lessons learned. The success or failure
of individual projects provides a rich source of
experience, and can considerably shorten the learning
curve. An important part of the CCGHS’s activity will
be to facilitate the free exchange of ideas, knowledge,
experience, best practices and failures.
South-South networking will be given prominent
attention. The exchange of experts between developing
countries for hands-on assistance and training has great
potential and will be a particular focus of the CCGHS
as a fruitful method of knowledge networking.
The fourth area relates to capacity-building and
country reports. The UNCHS advocates that each
country produce a country report on the conditions, key
issues, programmes initiated and results achieved since
1996, in order to assist future action and address future
challenges. The CCGHS initiative will respond to
requests for assistance in preparing such reports.
The fifth area is promoting good governance and
security of tenure. The CCGHS will actively support
the UNCHS global campaigns on good governance,
which is essential to establishing norms of local
governance and secure tenure, which is key to finance
for shelter development and land administration.
Over the next few years, the CCGHS Work Plan
will focus on the areas previously outlined for priority
action and seek to measure achievement against the
newly adopted Commonwealth goal up to 2006.
Assessments will embrace a range of topics,
including shelter units constructed, improved security
of tenure, increased access to essential services,
improvements in governance, progress in enhancing
women’s rights to tenure and inheritance, improved
credit facilities and credit availability to the poor,
increased knowledge and experience exchange between
countries, improved partnership relations in number
and quality and enhanced support for capacitybuilding.
The goal of adequate shelter for all by 2015 is
one of the most challenging social problems facing the
present generation. Given the resilience and cohesion
of the Commonwealth, and the previous success of

15

A/S-25/PV.6

action taken in unison, we believe that this goal is
achievable.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to Mr. Dion Swinkels, representative of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Mr. Swinkels (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC) approaches this special session of the General
Assembly with a number of profound concerns. In our
view, although there has been much good work done by
Governments, international organizations and nongovernmental organizations since Istanbul, there are
also areas of activity that continue to fall behind.
The Istanbul Declaration and the Habitat Agenda,
which was adopted at the same time, carried the
promise of real energy aimed at redressing what was
identified by heads of Government as the continuing
deterioration of conditions of shelter and human
settlements. A detailed agenda of commitments and
undertakings followed, but now, we must ask ourselves
whether much has changed.
The perspective of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies is enriched by
the observations, experiences and reports of over 180
member and observer National Societies, participating
with us and the International Committee of the Red
Cross in the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement.
We have been assisted in this work by the
recognition the 1996 Habitat Agenda gave to disaster
prevention, mitigation and preparedness. Paragraph
176 (l) of the Agenda specifically invited Governments
at all levels to,
“Recognize, support and facilitate the role
of the International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies and their member national
societies in disaster prevention, preparedness,
mitigation and response at the local, national and
international levels”.
I will not dwell on what has happened since the
adoption of this paragraph, except to observe that the
response has been patchy. While our Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies are well recognized for their
role in disaster preparedness and response, and in other
fields directly related to disaster itself, there has been

16

less understanding of the part disaster preparedness
must play in the setting of housing and construction
standards.
The International Federation, through the very
nature of its work, finds itself working wherever the
world experiences disaster. We have accumulated a
great deal of experience of the good and the bad in our
82 years of work in this field.
It was against this background that a chapter
appeared in the 2000 World Disaster Report on
international disaster response law, following the
announcement of the President of the International
Federation, Ms. Astrid Heiberg, in her speech to the
General Assembly, in New York on 27 November
2000, that the Federation was launching this initiative
and analysing the present state of international law in
the field of disaster preparedness and response. That
chapter, which was written by an expert from the
American Red Cross, drew a strong and favourable
response from the international community.
The positive response was noted by the
International Federation’s Governing Board at its
meeting in November 2000, and a group of experts was
convened to discuss the issues.
The outcome of the meeting was an affirmation
that the study of international disaster response law
needs to be strengthened, and, further, that the
International Federation should use its position as an
international organization to bring this work to the
attention of States as well as to the civil society
groupings with which it has such valuable contacts.
This venue, the special session of the General
Assembly on human settlements, is a most appropriate
one for informing States of the work now under way on
international disaster response law. At the outset, we
should state that it is the intention of the International
Federation to integrate States into the study phases now
about to begin. We are also most grateful for the
support we have received from several parts of the
United Nations system, especially the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
The printed version of my intervention today will
contain more information, but let me briefly summarize
it. The international disaster response law study is
about the need for a clear understanding of the legal
framework within which disaster assistance is provided
and used. This framework needs to take account of

A/S-25/PV.6

national law as well as international law, both hard and
soft, and of all practice at all levels. The scope of legal
study has to be left open deliberately.
The experts who met in Geneva in February 2001
saw several issues as deserving of careful work. These
include the need for laws and regulations to waive
import-export and transit restrictions and duties for
relief goods; waive overflight and landing restrictions
and
duties;
grant
landing
rights;
facilitate
telecommunications in emergency situations; waive
visa and other immigration restrictions; and provide for
medical and other professional assistance directly
benefiting disaster victims.
The time frame for this work has been designed
around the value which would accrue to the exercise if
it could be considered by States parties to the Geneva
Conventions and their national societies at the
International Conference of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent due to be held in Geneva in 2003. For this
reason, the study phase should conclude with the
publication of the collated legal and customary texts in
mid-2002, allowing 12 months for further consultations
and other work at regional and international levels.
We will also ensure that the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) in Nairobi is
kept fully informed of this work as it proceeds. We
would like Habitat and its network to be prime
contributors to the exercise on international disaster
response law. We also hope that the lessons we have to
learn from the 2001 World Disaster Report, building on
the chapter on the international disaster response law in
the 2000 World Disaster Report, will galvanize States
and civil society alike for the work that lies ahead.
The International Federation’s regional and
country delegations throughout the world, in
cooperation with the national Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies, will also be working actively as
advocates for better responses to issues like housing
and construction standards. With this in mind, we
commit ourselves to continuing the work entrusted to
us at Istanbul. Our mission in this respect is to mobilize
the power of humanity for disaster prevention,
preparedness, mitigation and response at local, national
and international levels.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Ileana Echegoyen,
Secretary of Housing of Puerto Rico.

Mrs. Echegoyen (Puerto Rico) (spoke in
Spanish): I appreciate this opportunity to share with the
Assembly today the challenges and the opportunities
faced by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in the
twenty-first century in the areas of housing, sustainable
development and infrastructure. I wish to stress that
although we have been absent from this forum in years
past, we reaffirm our commitment to the Habitat
Agenda.
The traditional centres of our cities have been
losing population over the past 40 years due to
suburbanization, thereby diffusing our development,
despite the territorial limits of our island. This has
significantly affected our natural resources and has
raised housing construction costs because of the need
to develop new infrastructure.
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is committed
to the Istanbul Declaration on sustainable development
and to the need to minimize development’s impact on
our natural resources and ecosystems. We fully agree
that cities are centres of civilization that generate
economic, social, cultural and spiritual development.
Puerto Rico has incentive programmes for the private
sector to acquire and demolish abandoned structures,
consolidate homes and plots of land in the urban
centres of our cities and thus to revitalize them. The
alliance with the private sector and local Governments
is of vital importance in attaining the goal of saving
our urban centres.
We also support the Istanbul Declaration with
respect to human development and its vision of justice,
which sets as one of its challenges that of expanding
the supply of housing to include the neediest and the
poorest, such as single mothers and the homeless. Our
Government has focused its efforts on addressing the
needs of the poorest communities through a programme
for special communities, directed towards training
community leaders so that, in improving infrastructure
and housing, they can assume control of common
spaces and create safe areas. This programme also
coordinates residents and provides job-training so that,
through self-employment or the development of
microenterprises, they can contribute to the economies
of their community and the country. In short, our
housing programmes are directed not solely towards
housing development, but also towards social
development and improving the quality of life in our
communities.

17

A/S-25/PV.6

Our Government has decided to promote the
construction and/or rehabilitation of 100,000 housing
units over the next four years. Half of these units will
be for low-income families or individuals who, without
our assistance, would be unable to acquire housing.
Among the programmes to promote secure and
accessible housing, we have developed, together with
the private banking sector, a subsidy for mortgage
interest that significantly reduces monthly payments.
Another programme helps buyers with direct assistance
of up to 21 per cent of the purchase price. In order to
lower the costs of development of social value, we
have reduced the taxes on and costs to the private
sector. In addition, we have significantly reduced the
income tax for developers of social housing projects.
These housing development efforts and
community improvements, together with ambitious
public transportation projects, will revitalize our cities
and significantly increase their capacity for orderly
growth, thereby avoiding the suburban sprawl that
threatens our resources. For Puerto Rico, vibrant, safe
and economically strong cities, with the broad
participation of all sectors, are the key to preserving
our rural areas, agricultural land and green
infrastructure.
Once again, I am grateful for the opportunity to
share some of the strategies and activities that Puerto
Rico is carrying out in order to meet the challenges of
housing, sustainable development and infrastructure.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Carlyle Corbin,
Minister of State for External Affairs of the United
States Virgin Islands.
Mr. Corbin (United States Virgin Islands): It is
my honour to represent the Government of the United
States Virgin Islands at this twenty-fifth special session
of the General Assembly. My delegation appreciates
the continual support of Member States since 1992 in
facilitating the participation of associate Governments
members of regional economic commissions as
observers to the United Nations world conferences and
General Assembly special sessions, providing an
opportunity for interaction with the international
community on issues of relevance to our development
process.
The convening of this special session coincides
with the beginning of the annual hurricane season in

18

the Atlantic/Caribbean region. This has become
increasingly significant to the sustainability of the
human settlements in small island countries such as our
own, given the often devastating impact that many of
these storms have had and continue to have on our
countries. In this vein, a report of the Latin American
and Caribbean regional Habitat preparatory conference,
held in Chile last October, found that among the
determinants of such natural disasters is their
immediate impact on the quality and quantity of
housing stock. The 1996 Habitat Agenda itself called
for the development of
“appropriate norms and by-laws for land-use,
building and planning standards that are based on
professionally
established
hazard
and
vulnerability assessments”, (A/CONF.165/14,
para. 172 (a))
as well as for the development of disaster-resistant
construction methods.
Consistent with the spirit of the Habitat Agenda,
my Government has adopted legislation greatly
strengthening our construction codes for public and
private dwellings as part of a comprehensive mitigation
programme following the destruction to our human
settlements caused by hurricane Hugo in 1989 and by
hurricanes Luis and Marilyn in 1995. Other Caribbean
and Pacific countries have made similar adjustments.
In 2000, we successfully completed a series of hazardmitigation flood-control projects, as well as major road
reconstruction, and have commenced construction on a
new waste-water facility.
While we are still facing the economic and fiscal
implications of undertaking such massive post-disaster
reconstruction efforts, we are greatly encouraged by
ongoing negotiations aimed at providing the economic
relief necessary for us to regain our economic footing
in the wake of successive major hurricanes. In this
connection, my Government is in support of the
provisions of the draft declaration on cities and other
human settlements in the new millennium, committing
the international community to
“improving prevention, preparedness, mitigation
and response capacities ... in order to reduce the
vulnerability of human settlements to natural and
human-made disasters and to implement effective
post-disaster programmes for the affected human
settlements, aimed ... at meeting immediate
needs, reducing future disaster risks and making

A/S-25/PV.6

rebuilt human settlements accessible for all.”
(A/S-25/2, para. 63)
My Government also endorses the Santiago
Declaration adopted last October, with specific
emphasis on the provision recommending that
international cooperation agencies should consider
increasing their contributions to activities in the field
of human settlements and that the United Nations and
other international bodies should coordinate technical
assistance initiatives at the regional and subregional
levels with a view to supporting these countries in the
implementation of the Latin American and Caribbean
Plan of Action on Human Settlements. We would urge
that the associate Governments members of the
regional commissions be made eligible for such
assistance.
Part 8 of the Habitat Agenda stresses the
importance of the conservation and rehabilitation of the
historical and cultural heritage of societies in a
globalized world. In the implementation of this
mandate, we are pleased to report that we entered into
an agreement with the Kingdom of Denmark in 1999
on the preservation and repatriation of the extensive
archives covering the period when our country was
under Danish jurisdiction, and a second agreement
earlier this year on cooperation between our respective
museums. We express our gratitude to the Kingdom of
Denmark for its support in this endeavour to restore a
major part of our cultural patrimony.
Amid our substantial efforts at post-disaster
recovery, my Government has always made it clear that
the welfare of our people is paramount and that an
adequate supply of housing is of the utmost
importance. In this connection, we have embarked on a
five-year community development programme to meet
the medium- and long-term housing needs of our
people, with the revitalization of existing housing stock
and the construction of new single family units, all
consistent
with
prevailing
hurricane-resistant
standards.
All of these efforts at the national level could be
effectively neutralized, however, because of the
increasing vulnerability of our islands to natural
disasters, in particular hurricanes, which have become
more frequent and intense as a result of climate change
precipitated by excessive greenhouse gas emissions.
We therefore fully support a holistic approach to the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda by integrating

the many important recommendations of Agenda 21
and the Barbados Programme of Action into our
collective thinking. We therefore call on the
international community, in the words of paragraph 23
of the Millennium Declaration, “to adopt in all our
environmental actions a new ethic of conservation and
stewardship”. We urge that every effort be made to
embark on the required reduction in greenhouse
emissions as we approach the tenth anniversary of the
Earth Summit.
The sustainability — indeed, the very viability —
of human settlements, especially in the most vulnerable
small island countries, will be determined in large
measure by the level of implementation of these
international commitments.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 1st plenary
meeting, on 6 June 2001, I now give the floor to
Ms. Sharon Capeling-Alakija, Executive Coordinator
of the United Nations Volunteers.
Ms.
Capeling-Alakija
(United
Nations
Volunteers): We are here today to discuss what has
been achieved since the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II) in 1996. We have been
hearing a lot of bad news, but I have some good news.
The United Nations Volunteers Programme — the
volunteer arm of the United Nations system — has
embraced the urban challenge. Shortly after the
Istanbul meeting, the United Nations Volunteers
launched its Strategy 2000, which identified urban
development as one of three priority areas. Five years
on, in this, the International Year of Volunteers, we are
pleased to be able to talk about concrete results. The
United Nations Volunteers have worked to implement
the Habitat Agenda by mobilizing volunteers, as well
as by promoting and supporting different types of
volunteerism in developing countries and in countries
in transition.
Making cities work for people has become an
even more critical part of our mission in recent years.
Many people imagine that international volunteers
spend their time in remote villages, and, indeed, many
of them do. But many other United Nations Volunteers
are also hard at work in cities and towns, especially
inner cities and shanty towns.
I would like to provide some examples of United
Nations Volunteers in action. In Tema, Ghana, United
Nations Volunteers are helping local authorities to

19

A/S-25/PV.6

improve the municipal tax system. With their valueadded neutrality, trustworthiness and solidarity, the
United Nations Volunteers serve as brokers, striving to
build confidence between taxpayers and local officials
in an effort to make the system work.

volunteering. Volunteers — call them what we may —
can be good neighbours who join in to dig wells, repair
schools, fix roads or rebuild a home that was destroyed
by fire. They help those in need in a spirit of self-help,
trust and reciprocity.

In several Caribbean island States, United
Nations Volunteers specialists work in urban settings to
prevent drug abuse and to treat addicts. Many United
Nations Volunteers work with street children in cities
around the world. In Viet Nam’s Ho Chi Minh City,
which has an estimated 10,000 street children, United
Nations Volunteers, working together with the city’s
child welfare foundation, have set up Street Vision, an
educational programme which gives children the
chance to study drama, circus activities and
photography, as well as to exhibit their work.

Such reciprocal relationships are alive and well
all over the world. In Rwanda, the word for this is
dufatanye; in Kenya, it is harambee; in Bangladesh, it
is kela. Mutual aid is present in other cultures as well:
in the Andes, they speak of minga; in Finland, work for
the common good of communities is called talkoo. On
the other side of the globe, the Maori people of New
Zealand call it whanaungatanga. What all this means is
bringing people together to work like a family in
villages, towns and cities.

In Bulgaria, Guatemala, Nepal, the Palestinian
territories and Uzbekistan, United Nations Volunteers
with urban planning and architectural expertise have
dedicated themselves to revitalizing parts of old cities
by restoring buildings, streets and parks. These are but
a few ways in which United Nations Volunteers are
helping to address the problems of city-dwellers.
Working daily in direct contact with local partners,
United Nations Volunteers have proved themselves
capable performers in long-term development efforts.
The role of a United Nations Volunteer carrying
out these activities complements the initiatives of local
volunteers. United Nations Volunteers are able to tap
the United Nations system to bring fresh and rapid
responses to emerging problems. Additionally, because
of their perceived neutrality, United Nations Volunteers
can sometimes help avoid local political pressures.
Obviously, we are not alone as city-conscious
volunteers. Tens of thousands of volunteers work in
urban areas, either through service organizations or
spontaneously, to build latrines, improve sanitation,
increase access to health care, prevent crime and give
hope to teenage mothers and the unemployed. However
through our contacts with our global partners, we have
come to realize that very often people who help others
do not regard themselves as volunteers. Indeed, many
people, both in the North and the South, might not be
aware of the various forms volunteerism takes in their
home countries. They might not realize that
volunteerism is, in fact, deeply embedded in all
national cultures through traditions of caring and
sharing, even if it is not formally recognized as

20

While volunteerism is fundamental in human
settlements, it is often overlooked as a resource. It is
important to discuss ways to expand the role of
volunteerism in urban development. Cities are shaped
by the sum of the innumerable daily decisions,
attitudes and behaviours of individuals and groups.
Many of the maladies that currently plague urban areas
could be eased or even eliminated if such decisions,
attitudes and behaviours carried a greater degree of
solidarity. Volunteerism can be instrumental in helping
strengthen the norms of solidarity and reciprocity,
which are so essential for stable communities. In short,
volunteerism can build a foundation for the
construction of caring cities.
All of us who are concerned about conditions in
today’s increasingly cramped urban areas would be
well advised to pause and recognize volunteerism for
what it is: the “V” in “development”. We can
acknowledge efforts like city-to-city projects as a form
of volunteerism — one that allows ordinary people to
become diplomats, advisers and learners. We know that
when individuals who leave home to volunteer in other
countries or cities eventually return, they bring with
them new insights and skills. They strengthen their
own communities not only by applying new
competencies, but also by infusing their societies with
the spirit of volunteerism.
In closing, I hope that the Assembly will permit
me to use a marketing ploy. I would like to invite
representatives to pick up a copy of a brand new
publication that the United Nations Volunteers
programme is releasing at this special session. It is
called, appropriately, Caring Cities, and it is available

A/S-25/PV.6

at the side of the General Assembly Hall. They will
find in it a wide range of examples of what individual
volunteers can accomplish. This paper gives the full
story of what United Nations Volunteers have achieved
to improve conditions in cities since Istanbul. We
believe this story — the story of voluntary action,
especially in this International Year of Volunteers — is
well worth telling.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Ms. Litha Musyimi-Ogana, President
of the African Centre for Empowerment, Gender and
Advocacy.
Ms. Musyimi-Ogana (African Centre for
Empowerment, Gender and Advocacy): I would like to
congratulate the President of the General Assembly and
the other members of the Bureau for successfully
steering this special session on Istanbul + 5 in an
excellent manner. It will be five years this week since
we participated in the Second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held at
Istanbul, Turkey. With 100 million people in the world,
most of them women, living with no shelter at all, with
almost 70 million children living in the streets and with
many millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons, we still have a long way to go.
We are gathered here this week not only to take
stock of the progress we have made since Istanbul and
to evaluate how far we have gone in achieving the
goals and objectives we set for ourselves at Istanbul,
but also to share our experiences, best practices,
achievements, lessons learned, problems encountered
and gaps identified and to reflect on the obstacles that
have faced us on the road from Istanbul. Five years
into the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, we are
now better positioned to map out ways in which we can
accelerate the implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
Confronted with new challenges and problems in
Africa, such as increasing poverty, the HIV pandemic,
the debt burden, globalization and poor rural
infrastructure, among other issues, the attainment of
the goals and objectives of the Habitat II conference
will require renewed commitment. Furthermore,
existing and new man-made disasters continue to make
the goal of attaining adequate shelter a dream; this has
serious negative effects on women and children. This
review therefore affords us the opportunity in the
twenty-first century to recommit ourselves to achieving
the goals of the Habitat II conference.

I represent the African Centre for Empowerment,
Gender and Advocacy, an organization which has been
in the forefront of advocating gender parity in decisionmaking structures, which include parliaments and local
authorities. The Centre has also been involved in
monitoring the implementation of various United
Nations instruments, such as the Habitat Agenda. It has
identified five steps that can lead to the successful and
systematic domestication and implementation of a
United Nations instrument at the national level. We
would like to share them with the Assembly. We
believe that these steps can contribute to the
accelerated implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
The first is the formulation of new national
policies or the review of old ones, accompanied by
comprehensive national plans of action to implement
those policies. We have found that national plans which
prioritized their issues and that had clear goals, smart
objectives, time-bound targets and financial resources
were the most successful.
The second is participation of civil society and
communities, in a gender-balanced manner, in United
Nations processes, from the preparatory phase to the
implementation phase.
The third is upgrading the focal point or the
implementing machinery, both physically and
technically, or creating a new framework where no
such focal point exists.
The fourth is gender mainstreaming geared
towards reducing gender disparity in existing structures
and creating new gender-balanced institutions and
processes.
Finally, we have found it necessary that specific
budgetary allocations be made for the implementation
of the priority issues of a particular instrument and
their sustainability in a hostile macro-economic
environment.
The United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) is now in a better position to
guide Member States to build on some of the
innovative strategies and best practices that have
emerged from this review process in order to further
push forward the Habitat Agenda. These include: localto-local dialogue; decentralization of power to local
levels where more women can participate; replicating
best practices; adopting affirmative action measures;
capacity building of communities and community-

21

A/S-25/PV.6

based organizations; engendering governance and
national budgets; advocacy interventions directed to
multi-stakeholders; and campaigns such as the good
governance, secure tenure and 50/50 by 2005
campaigns.
Resolution 55/194 made it possible for Habitat
partners to participate in this process. I therefore
cannot conclude my statement without thanking the
President and the Assembly’s membership for having
adopted that resolution and encouraging them to
continue enlarging the space for the participation of
civil society at the United Nations. Dubbed the partners
conference, Habitat II broke new ground in fostering
new partnership among the United Nations family,
Governments, local authorities, civil society and the
private sector. Through that partnership, Habitat has
been able to enjoy support from many of its partners,
particularly those from civil society. We trust that this
partnership will be further nurtured and sustained. I
now take this opportunity to assure the Assembly of
my organization’s support for and commitment to the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Ms. Ana Falu, Vice-President of the
Habitat International Coalition.
Ms. Falu (Habitat International Coalition) (spoke
in Spanish): Through me, the Habitat International
Coalition wishes to speak on behalf of the social
organizations that have been building cities,
neighbourhoods and housing along with the capacity to
resist the model that continues to asphyxiate the
world’s poor: the organizations of Africa, Asia, Latin
America, North America and Europe. The first United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements, held at
Vancouver in 1976, set the theme of shelter and cities
for the world. The international community agreed by
consensus to revive the social production of shelter and
identified the actors who would implement it. Those
were years of controversy, years of dreams and of the
building of a utopia of change.
Twenty years later, at the second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held at
Istanbul, it was a time for sharing experiences and
merging all that had been done, in all its complexity
and unfulfilled promises. Through their struggle, nongovernmental organizations and the breadth of social
sectors that compose them — all the varied organized
social groups, academia, local governments, labour

22

unions and popular movements — attained
recognition that is today being challenged.

a

Now, at this special session to follow up on the
commitments made by Governments, we are
experiencing a major setback, reflected not only in the
content and the weakened language of the central
document before the Assembly, but also in the
questioning of matters that had been discussed at
length and on which consensus had been reached
among all nations. This sets a dangerous precedent for
the international community by excluding the voice of
organized civil society and local government. It is
we — those actors — who create cities and towns. This
makes it hard for us to endorse the outcome of this
session.
How can we describe these times? This is a world
in which globalization, economic adjustment, the
privatization of services and State withdrawal from
social responsibility are having a greater effect on the
critical condition of the poorest people, in a scenario
dominated by market considerations, which have been
given pride of place in the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda. These times seem to be marked by the
cynicism of certain Governments — Governments
whose own constitutions enshrine basic human rights;
they speak of them before the General Assembly but
make no progress in properly defending them. I mean
the right to shelter, the right to access to cities, the
right to secure tenure and the right to property and
inheritance, which especially affects the world’s
women. Not to defend those basic rights in the
international ambit is a major contradiction.
Nevertheless, social organizations, families and
women in particular continue struggling to provide a
response to things that should be social responsibilities
assumed by the public policy of States.
However, there is good news. Some local
governments have developed an active policy in this
area.
We are facing critical situations. Let me give just
a few examples. It should be emphasized that in
today’s world, there are 1.6 billion people living in
precarious housing conditions, and it should be stressed
that 70 per cent of these people are women. Millions of
children live in the streets, and 1.7 billion people do
not have drinking water.

A/S-25/PV.6

That is not all. There are also forced evictions
throughout the world, even though international
recommendations from the United Nations recognize
that such actions are violations of human rights.
Furthermore, tens of millions of people live in
occupied territories; many others are displaced from
their towns and cities for reasons of war, foreign
occupation or simple speculation with respect to their
land and their settlements, where their individual rights
are not respected. All these situations involve human
suffering, and they affect women and children in
particular.
Given the deterioration of the urban and habitat
situation, we have some proposals, and I will mention
just a few. There is an urgent need to provide budgets
that consider housing a necessity and a basic right on
an equal footing with health and education. We need
transparent subsidy policies. The subsidy could become
a regulatory instrument to address the unequal
distribution of wealth that is concentrated in just a few
hands. In the resources allotted by the developed
countries, a substantial part should be directed to that
end. We call for monitoring systems agreed by
consensus in international bodies. The United Nations
Development Programme has a role to play in each
country in this regard. This process should be more
concrete, and we would like to express our willingness
to participate actively in it.
At the same time, it is necessary to recognize that
we will not have true governance without recognizing
the role that should be played by local governments in
their relationship with the social actors.
An urgent priority is to leave rhetoric behind and
to start working together towards a sustainable future
for environmentally sound urban areas, for the rights of
the city. We need to understand that urban poverty must
be included at the very core of the sustainability
design. We need to give new meaning to solidarity in
the international community.
The attitude of irresponsibility vis-à-vis social
deterioration is the same attitude we see with respect to
natural resources. Social inequality, racial, sexual and
ethnic discrimination, the deterioration of the
environment, the worsening of the quality of life of
millions — all of these are symptoms of the same
model. This is surely not a time to celebrate. It is a
time when we call upon the Assembly to reflect very
deeply on the retrogression facing us. This reflection

must involve all actors involved in habitat, housing,
neighbourhoods and cities.
This approach is being built throughout the world
with the efforts of millions of men and women who
continue to believe in the need to maintain dreams and
idealism, to build new realities.
We shall continue in our struggle to bring about
change, to create a more equitable and habitable world,
to promote democratic, responsible governments and
the protection the rights of individuals; and we shall
continue to advocate the need to develop active
citizenship, particularly for women, who have been
underrepresented politically but who are active in daily
social practices.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Mr. Andrew Kailembo, SecretaryGeneral of the African Regional Organization of the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
Mr. Kailembo (African Regional Organization of
the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions):
The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
(ICFTU) has for many years contributed to the
formulation and implementation of policies to improve
human settlements in the context of sustainable
development worldwide.
The ICFTU, together with the International
Federation of Building and Wood Workers, strongly
believes that effective implementation of the decisions
of Habitat II is the key to bringing about a change.
During the five years since Habitat II, many more have
become homeless as a result of civil war, drought,
famine and unsustainable development strategies
adopted by many Governments in order to reduce
poverty and unemployment.
The ICFTU is the world’s largest international
union, representing 155 million members in 148
countries represented by 221 affiliates. Its longstanding commitment is to secure social and economic
justice for the poor and disadvantaged. Because of its
composition, the ICFTU takes a global view of the
eradication of poverty, promotion of employment and
reduction of human suffering, and it campaigns for a
global economic and social order to create a better
habitat for all.
During Habitat II, the ICFTU reminded
Governments to create and stimulate economic
conditions so as to enable working people to afford

23

A/S-25/PV.6

adequate housing. Access to adequate housing as a
basic human right is enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
In the context of review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, the ICFTU and
the international trade union movement believe that
basic human freedoms and minimum rights to shelter,
food and jobs are inseparable and pledge their support
to measures that further these aims and, hence, to the
success of this special session.
Rapid population growth poses one of the greatest
challenges to the peoples of this planet. The
implications of this for consumption, production,
markets, education, services, the environment,
investment and peace are thus fundamental to all of us.
The world’s population is urbanizing much faster than
it is growing, in large measure because of shrinking
economic opportunities and the lack of amenities
available in rural areas.
Rising urbanization also brings us to the plight of
rising exploitation of unorganized labour, child labour
and forced and bonded labour. Trade unions demand
protection of workers’ basic human rights and an end
to their exploitation. The bulk of these labourers in
cities are workers who have migrated from rural areas
for a better life.

infrastructure,
including
housing
and
land
development, can provide low-cost quality housing.
Housing banks, including scheduled banks, should be
encouraged to provide low-interest loans. Suitable
housing technology, adapted to locally available and
environmentally friendly options with a touch of
innovativeness should be developed and popularized.
Housing cooperatives should be encouraged. Trade
unions and other non-governmental organizations
should be brought in to work in partnership with
Governments, local authorities and the private sector
on
comprehensive
shelter,
infrastructure
and
rehabilitation programmes.
Women’s empowerment must be strongly
encouraged. The structures and institutions that
perpetuate gender discrimination and social inequality
must be reformed, and women must be enabled to gain
access to, and control of, both material and information
resources. Measures are required, especially in
developing countries, to increase women’s ability to
earn an adequate income so as to achieve economic
self-reliance.
In addition to increasing development assistance,
the industrialized world must open its markets to goods
and services from developing countries.
This special session is an opportunity to ask for a
definite commitment from countries to improve human
settlements. The international trade union community
hopes that the commitment to human rights espoused
by many countries will include the right to human
security, which implies the rights to work, food and
nutrition, education, health and shelter for all. It is now
time to show how committed national Governments
and multilateral organizations are to addressing the
urgent need for sustainable human settlements.

The construction industry has enormous potential
to become a major stimulus for economic growth and
employment, but it requires a proper infrastructure for
the adequate protection of workers’ rights, especially
for union organization. The ICFTU urges all
Governments to respect the fundamental International
Labour Organization (ILO) labour standards and the
core ILO Conventions on Freedom of Association and
on the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining.
Trade unions demand that the ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work be
respected and guaranteed.

The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Ms. Sheila Patel, President of the
Society for the Promotion of Area Resource Centres,
Asia Women and Shelter Network.

Governments should set up an urban poverty
eradication fund to deal with growing urbanization,
unemployment and homelessness, particularly among
young workers. Community empowerment, sustainable
support systems, skills-upgrading and employment
generation must be addressed. Rural development
programmes should become part of national planning
in order to mitigate the pressures of urbanization.
Carefully targeted public and private investment in

Ms. Patel (Society for the Promotion of Area
Resource Centres, Asia Women and Shelter Network):
I welcome this opportunity and honour to be able to
address the General Assembly today. I do so on behalf
of a range of different organizations: primarily, for the
Society for the Promotion of Area Resource Centres,
Mahila Milan and the National Slum Dwellers
Federation, which are the three organizations working
in India, in 40 cities, with a membership of

24

A/S-25/PV.6

approximately 400,000 households. I also come here
on behalf of Shack Dwellers International (SDI), a
network of non-governmental organizations and
community-based organizations working in 12
countries in Asia and Africa. Representatives from
South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Thailand and India
who are present here for the events of this week. We
are all here to examine and understand for ourselves
how our Governments represent our interests in this
Assembly. Some of us — those from Namibia and
South Africa — are part of their Government
delegations. This reflects the changing ways of this
new millennium, in which partnerships of people’s
organizations and Governments have begun to
represent interests in our countries.
Our cities already house many of our countries’
very poor people, and we know this number will
dramatically increase in the next few decades. Five
years ago in Istanbul there was a strong commitment
on the part of the international community and national
Governments to help cities straddle the dual challenge
of ensuring the development of cities — engines of our
economic growth — with a commitment to equity and
social justice for all. However, evidence from many
cities around the world today suggests that most cities
are still unable grapple with the increased numbers of
their citizens who are housed in slums and in informal
settlements. We must find a way out of this crisis.
Rather than waiting for Governments to do
something for the poor, communities that are part of
the SDI network and Federation members from all
these countries seek to find solutions for themselves,
hoping that their Governments will come to work in
partnership with them. They have begun to find ways
of housing themselves, of creating infrastructure that
works for them. We know that for the poor these are
the two most important safety nets for survival in cities
today. As more and more poor people migrate into
cities — and many of these people will be very poor —
the responses of evictions, demolitions, denying
communities the right to live in cities will become
increasingly dysfunctional and retrograde. We hope
that during this week we will see these approaches
reduced dramatically and, in fact, stopped. What SDI
member communities seek to do is to find solutions
that work for cities and communities and to explore
ways by which successes in some cities can be
transferred rapidly to other cities.

Shack Dwellers International is a new and
emerging organization typical of the changing world in
which we live. Even very poor people today know the
need for global connectivity. This organization, which
is only five years old, has the potential to demonstrate
many innovative practices in which both national and
local governments and development agencies come to
work in partnerships to make things work for cities in
the future.
Knowledge is power in this millennium, and
Federation members have begun to look at ways by
which the information that they have gathered on
behalf of their communities can become the basis for
their dialogue with their Governments. Our message is
that we want our Governments to remember that most
of the housing stock in the world today is designed,
constructed and financed by the poor themselves.
Refining it incrementally, improving it and creating
incentives to encourage communities to do better what
they do already is the message for the future. Creating
restrictions and barriers and making what they do
illegal is dysfunctional.
Habitat is a people’s agenda. Can national
Governments and those committed to assisting in
development support communities so as to achieve
habitats that work for the poor? Or will all of us
continue to see Governments drive the development
agenda of Habitat and make communities the objects of
development? We hope not.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Ms. Lara Bianco, Vice-President of
the Women and Shelter Network, Latin American and
Caribbean Region.
Ms. Bianco (Women and Shelter Network, Latin
American and Caribbean Region) (spoke in Spanish):
During the peace negotiations, Colombian women
present at the public hearings held in San Vicente del
Caguán in June last year said that what they wanted
was to live, to dream and to die of old age. I will use
that simple but powerful sentence to describe briefly
the conclusions reached a few weeks ago in Bogotá by
Latin American women from the Habitat International
Coalition, the Women’s Network for Peace and the
Popular Education Network, which I am representing
today.
What does it mean for women to live? Women do
not just want to survive poverty, exclusion and conflict.
Women are poor because we still do not have access to

25

A/S-25/PV.6

services. We do not have access to, control over, or
security with respect to the resources we need to live in
conditions of dignity.
For every man whose life is spent in poverty,
there are five women in the same condition. Seventy
per cent of the 1.6 million people who live in
deplorable living conditions are women, and it is
estimated that women hold only 1 per cent of all
property in the world.
Women are excluded from congresses and central
and local governments. We are affected by conflicts
and violence throughout our lives. We are
unconditionally responsible for the well-being of the
family — children, the elderly, the injured and victims
of war — without any conditions or even a pat on the
back, because “it is nothing”.
In the year 2000, women held only 14 per cent of
ministerial positions; only 14 per cent of the
representatives of the lower chambers were women;
only 15 per cent of representatives in the Senate and 7
per cent of mayors and local officials were women. In
addition, women constitute between 60 and 70 per cent
of the displaced population throughout the world.
It is for this reason that we have decided to be
social actors ourselves. We are diverse agents of social
change, reweaving the social fabric. We represent the
most significant form of resistance to armed conflict,
social violence and to the neo-liberal model and
economic policies that assume that marginalization and
hunger do not affect actual people, but exist only in
models that allow solutions to be postponed.
What do women dream of? We have a long way
to go, but we women and men of today can make sure
that our girls and boys can enjoy the rights that the
Habitat Agenda calls for: the right of women to have
rights; to have access to, control over and security of
housing, land and property; equal participation in
decision-making at all levels; and the right to live
without violence. For this reason, we urge
Governments to become aware of the setbacks and the
fact that the principles set out in the Habitat Agenda
have not been put into practice — principles that are
indispensable to ensure the quality of life that we want
and demand.
We dream of sustainable cities that are equitable
for women — cities whose houses offer the real
possibility of a high quality of life. We want to own

26

houses, or at least to be certain that we could not be
evicted by conflict, the government or a husband —
whether or not this is recognized by the law — or by
our in-laws. We dream of cities in which we have the
right to walk freely, to have rights, to express opinions
and to participate in the decisions that are the most
important for us and for our communities and for future
generations. We dream of cities that have been
designed for us, in which we can work on an equal
footing with men, where we can be sure that in our
absence our girls and boys will be cared for properly,
because the Government has devoted resources to
provide quality care and education for the youngest
generation.
The President returned to the Chair.
We women want to die of old age, because there
will not be any more conflicts or weapons to kill us and
because the money that governments will have saved
on military expenditures will be used for education,
health and housing programmes.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Yasemin
Uyar, Vice-President of Youth for Habitat.
Ms. Uyar (Youth for Habitat): My name is
Yasemin Uyar. I am from Turkey, and I represent Youth
for Habitat International, which is a non-governmental,
non-profit, open-ended international youth network.
Established in 1995 with the participation of over 200
youth organizations from diverse backgrounds, the
network has been working on raising awareness about
the Habitat Agenda and Agenda 21, together with
promoting youth perspectives in their implementation.
Youth and children constitute more than half of
the world’s population. Living in mostly urban areas,
they represent one of the largest groups that is
adversely affected by unsustainable urban development
patterns. Nevertheless, it should be remembered that
youth, with their energy, creativity, idealism and
passion, have the potential to help overcome the
problems we face today and will face tomorrow.
Despite the fact that youth are accepted as key
partners for implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
youth participation in decision-making processes has
not been effective enough. We call upon all
Governments and other partners to intensify their
efforts to enhance the role of youth in decision-making
processes. Cooperation between youth, civil society
organizations and governments at all levels should be

A/S-25/PV.6

further developed through the establishment and
support of youth councils or parliaments.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda items 8, 9 and 10.

In order to ensure the broad participation of
youth, governance should be made attractive to young
people. We, as young people, are aware that there is
still a substantial lack of understanding among youth
about Habitat Agenda and Agenda 21. We realize that
in order to develop and maintain a liveable
environment for current and future generations, it is
important to raise awareness among youth about this
critical issue of sustainable development. There is also
a need to develop a dialogue between youth and
governments, so as to raise awareness among
governmental bodies and institutions on youth issues.
We believe that this would allow our governments to
realistically address the concerns and problems of
young people and to create an environment in which
the true potential of young people could be seen and
appreciated.

I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

We are deeply concerned that the Declaration on
cities and other human settlements in the new
millennium does not refer in a substantial way to the
concepts of sustainability and intergenerational justice.
It fails to acknowledge the rights and interests of
today’s youth and of future generations. We have the
impression that the Istanbul spirit of accepting youth as
a key partner for achieving the Habitat goals is
weakening.
On the occasion of this special session, we as
young people would like to remind our Governments of
the promises they made during the Habitat II
Conference and to call upon them to fulfil their
commitments to the youth-related articles of the
Habitat Agenda. We want to bring to the attention of
Governments the fact that principle 21 of the Rio
Declaration and paragraph 120 of the Habitat Agenda
emphasize the importance of enabling youth to play an
active and creative role in building sustainable human
settlements. It is important that the role of young
people in creating sustainable livelihoods is fully
acknowledged, and that mechanisms to utilize their full
potential are established.
As young people, we recognize our role in
creating sustainable human settlements and commit
ourselves to fulfilling our responsibilities. We ask our
fellow Governments, as our mentors and our partners,
to join in our efforts to achieve this goal.

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I want to speak in
exercise of my right of reply in connection with the
statement made by the representative of Armenia in the
closing moments of the 4th plenary meeting yesterday.
First of all, I am obliged to thank him for his
highlighting the conflict in and around the Nagorny
Karabakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan and for
his referring to the huge amount of damage and
destruction in the territories that belong to my country.
Obviously, everybody knows that this was the result
not of a natural disaster, but of a military invasion of
the sovereign Azerbaijani State. In this context, I fully
endorse his words that the international community is
well aware of who is the real aggressor.
Moreover, the matter of the occupied Azerbaijani
territories was addressed in Security Council
resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884
(1993), which unequivocally reconfirmed the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country and
demanded the immediate, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of occupying forces from all the occupied
territories.
As for the consistence of this problem with the
mandate of this special session, it is regrettable that the
Armenian representative is a bit misled in his
understanding of the matter. It goes without saying that
the Habitat Agenda would be unobtainable without
peace being restored in each and every region of the
world. Azerbaijan stands for just and lasting peace in
the region, but not by neglecting its highest national
interests. Therefore, the truth should not be ignored.
In his statement at the opening of the Key West
proximity talks between Armenia and Azerbaijan,
under the auspices of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group cochairmanship, in Florida on 3 April this year, the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Mr. Heydar
Aliyev, said:
“Having occupied Nagorny Karabakh, the
Armenian armed forces expanded military
operations beyond the Nagorny Karabakh region
and occupied, in addition, seven major
administrative districts of Azerbaijan.

27

A/S-25/PV.6

“In this way, by 1993 20 per cent of the
territory of Azerbaijan had been seized and is still
under occupation by the Armenian armed forces.
Everything has been destroyed, pillaged and
obliterated in this territory. More than 900 large
and small towns, approximately 600 schools, 250
medical institutions, and all museums and
historical and cultural monuments have been
destroyed.
“During the conflict, 30,000 Azerbaijani
citizens perished; more than 200,000 were
wounded and became invalids; and thousands
were captured, seized as hostages and are
missing. About 1 million Azerbaijanis, which
represents every eighth citizen of the country,
have lost their land, and this is the ninth year in
which they have been living in tents under
intolerably difficult conditions. A new generation
has grown up in these tents.” (A/56/62, p. 3)
Addressing the immediate subject of our
discussion at this special session — cities and
settlements — I would like to familiarize the members
of this body with the destiny of one of the occupied
cities of Azerbaijan: the city of Agdam.
On 27 May 2001, the New York Times newspaper
cited Ambassador Carey Cavanaugh, American coChairman of the OSCE Minsk Group dealing with the
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Speaking on
the current status of that occupied city, he gave a clearcut but killing description: “It was turned into the
largest Home Depot on the planet.” This is a diplomatic
wrapping of the fact that this Azerbaijani city has been
completely looted and pillaged to the last window
frame, to the last building stone, to the last door hinge
and nail by Armenians.
Mr. Kocharian (Armenia): We are obliged to
speak for the second time in exercise of our right of
reply and once again to reiterate our position on the
issue raised by the Azerbaijani delegation.
As has been expressed by high-ranking officials
of my country on different occasions, Armenia stands
for a comprehensive settlement of the Nagorny
Karabakh conflict within the framework of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group, with the participation of all interested
parties. As to the United Nations resolutions mentioned
here, I would like just to clarify the fact that they make
no mention of Armenia.

28

We regret that the Azerbaijani delegation has
once again demonstrated an absence of political will,
reinforcing distrust and animosity towards Armenia,
and callously misinterprets its own role and
responsibility for the final solution of the Nagorny
Karabakh issue. Unfortunately, the falsification of real
facts has become the very usual style and behaviour for
Azerbaijan in various forums.
As was mentioned in the statement made by the
head of our delegation at the special session on human
settlements, as a consequence of the ongoing blockade
imposed by Azerbaijan, the numerous problems of
people deported from that country have not been
solved. Hundreds of thousands of our compatriots left
their property, houses and savings in Azerbaijan and
have not received any compensation. Armenians left
more than 92,000 houses and flats in Azerbaijan. The
majority of our compatriots did not get any
compensation from the Azerbaijani Government. In its
turn, the Armenian Government demonstrated good
will and allocated in compensation $110 million to
those Azerbaijanis who left Armenia.
As was mentioned yesterday, as a result of the
aggression of Azerbaijan, thousands of houses, medical
and educational centres, roads and water pipes were
ruined and damaged. The Government of Armenia has
recently approved projects on housing for people who
suffered in the inter-ethnic conflict from 1988 to 1992
and on the post-conflict rehabilitation of border
territories of the Republic of Armenia. The main goals
of the projects are resettlement and rehabilitation for
thousands of displaced persons who were forcibly
moved from their land following the occupation by
Azerbaijan of the Artsvashen region and for the more
than 300,000 refugees who became victims of the interethnic conflict.
The right to adequate housing is stipulated in the
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. My
Government continues to pay serious attention to the
subject and we are here to find solutions to the problem
of providing adequate housing and to strengthen
international cooperation in human settlements and
sustainable development-related issues. In this context,
we would like strongly to recommend to our
Azerbaijani colleagues that they concentrate more on
the agenda of this important session and make their
positive contribution to our work.

A/S-25/PV.6

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Once again, the
Armenian representative has made an attempt to
mislead the General Assembly. Let me offer just one
example. Before me is the text of Security Council
resolution 822 (1993), which reads in part as follows:
“The Security Council,
“...
“Expressing its serious concern at the
deterioration of the relations between the
Republic of Armenia and the Republic of
Azerbaijan”. (Third preambular paragraph)
That is a clear example of a reference to Armenia as
part of the conflict in a United Nations, specifically a
Security Council document. Moreover, in General
Assembly resolution 49/13 of 1994, a similar
formulation was used.
The President: The General Assembly will now
hear an oral presentation by the Chairman of the
Thematic Committee, His Excellency Mr. Slaheddine
Belaid of Tunisia, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Belaid (Tunisia), Chairman of the Thematic
Committee (spoke in French): It has been an honour
and a privilege for me to serve as Chairman of the
Thematic Committee at this special session on the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda. Establishing
that Committee was a major innovation in the work of
the General Assembly, and I think I can say that the
Committee did its work to perfection and fully
achieved its goal: to provide a selective, inductive
history of human settlements and the implementation
of the Habitat Agenda since the second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held at
Istanbul.
The Committee heard excellent presentations that
provided concrete examples of how the Habitat Agenda
was being implemented in 16 countries from all
regions. Our discussions were on a very high level, and
were very lively. During our first meeting, on housing
and basic services, we were able to see how, by means
of substantial public investment complementing
community participation, South Africa’s housing policy
was implementing the constitutional right to adequate
shelter. We considered Egypt’s large-scale social
housing programmes and the development strategies
devised by some Egyptian cities such as Luxor and
Ismailia. Those strategies recognize the key role of
community partners and of the private sector. We

studied the integrated programme for improvements in
poor areas of Medellín, Colombia, and the programme
to rebuild housing in Dakar, Senegal.
On the question of access to basic services, we
heard about the determined work of Indian nongovernmental organizations in providing adequate
health services in poor areas of Bombay, Bangalore and
Pune.
We saw that the primary goal of the Habitat
Agenda, adequate shelter for all, was more than a mere
slogan. Both through improvements in existing
neighbourhoods and through the construction of new
housing units, that goal is now being pursued in many
countries.
At our second meeting, we saw how cities as
different as Dar-es-Salaam, Stockholm, Chengdu and
Katowice had since 1996 been engaged in determined
efforts to improve the urban environment. We noted
impressive success and effective implementation of the
fundamental principles of the Habitat Agenda through
integrated participatory management of the local
environment.
In Dar-es-Salaam, the authorities are working
with residents to ensure the sustainability of the city,
by tangibly improving the population’s living
conditions. The lessons learned are now being shared
with other cities throughout the country.
For its part, Stockholm is aiming to increase the
density of its urban fabric and to improve its public
transportation network in order to ensure that
development is in harmony with the environment.
In China, Chengdu has completely renewed its
environment through its project for the rivers Fu and
Nan. To contribute to the worldwide attempt to reduce
harmful emissions and to promote the exchange of
experiences in that area, Chengdu organized a day
without motor vehicles during a preparatory meeting
for Istanbul + 5, which focused on best practices.
Poland’s city of Katowice has made concerted
and intercommunal efforts to reduce air and water
pollution, of which it had been a victim during and
after the exploitation of the region’s lead and zinc
mines.
Our third meeting was devoted to a subject that
has taken on greater importance in recent years: urban
governance. We saw that countries in both the South

29

A/S-25/PV.6

and the North were trying to improve urban
governance. Very interesting lessons could already be
drawn from the experiences of both those groups of
countries. In Santo André and Brasilia, Brazil, the local
authorities
have
undertaken
ambitious
social
integration programmes, involving the inhabitants
themselves even in budgetary decision-making.
In Lyon, France, local communities have
undertaken a strategic approach entitled Millennium
Three; this has provided that urban area with a plan for
comprehensive
sustainable
development.
That
approach is based on promoting public debate among
all elements of civil society, and on consideration of
the future role of the urban regions and of the
institutional structures that will be needed to ensure
more harmonious urban development.
Nigeria is a federal country made up of 36 states
and 774 local governments; since 1999, it has been
reviewing its legislation to encourage participation,
eradicate corruption and promote good governance.
Last April, the Government launched a national
campaign on good urban governance, with the support
of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements.
The dynamism of the city of Barcelona, Spain’s
second largest city, stems from vigorous partnerships
between the public and private sectors and from a
systematic decentralization of responsibilities and
resources. That decentralization employs the principle
of subsidiarity, which should be at the centre of any
decentralization policy.
All these experiences illustrate that the Istanbul
commitments on urban governance have not remained
a dead letter. Even if we do not yet have a single and
common definition of good governance, it does not
mean that one does not exist in practice.
Our last gathering dealt with the multi-sectoral
theme of the eradication of poverty, and specifically
with its urban and housing dimensions. We also had an
opportunity to study cases from three different
continents.
The example of Thailand clarified for us the
importance of financial incentives and of partnerships
between Governments and community organizations.
Thailand’s Community Development Fund grants loans
to enable less advantaged people to break the vicious
cycle of poverty.

30

In Peru, the municipality of Villa El Salvador has
developed a long-term development plan that closely
involves non-governmental organizations representing
the inhabitants of poor districts and other poor people.
The municipality has also taken a participatory
approach to its budget.
For its part, Morocco initiated a pilot project in
1998 to reduce urban poverty in the cities of
Casablanca, Marrakesh and Tangier. This project
involves numerous partners from the local, national
and international levels. Morocco will also be
organizing next October an international forum on
urban poverty that will draw lessons from international
experience in this field, both from the North and the
South.
I have attempted briefly to summarize the work
of the Thematic Committee, the first of its kind in the
history of United Nations special sessions. I have
certainly not given a full account of the full range of
the debates it held, of the quality of films and videos
shown to it or of the dynamic character of the
presenters who came before it. I ask that the ministers,
mayors, leaders of non-governmental organizations and
facilitators who contributed to our Committee excuse
the brevity of my summary. Those persons did a
fantastic job from which all of us benefited. They also
illustrated once again that the United Nations is the
best forum for an exchange of experiences and good
practices. I thank them all for their excellent collective
effort. I also wish to thank all those who spoke in the
Committee for making it a success and for facilitating
the tasks of the Bureau thanks to their seriousness and
professionalism.
In closing, I wish to congratulate the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements for bringing
together a very well-balanced Thematic Committee in
such a short time and in such a masterful way. That
balance was evident in the issues taken up, in the
countries included and in those making presentations.
I would like to conclude by expressing the wish
that the work of our Committee will lead to the
formulation of a synthesis that not only will preserve
this excellent work but that will, above all, provide
relevant documents to all the Habitat partners from
which they will be able to benefit in the drafting and
implementation of their national agendas. I am certain
that the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
will find the necessary resources to make that possible,

A/S-25/PV.6

thereby usefully completing the wonderful series of
publications and reports we have received this week.
The President: In view of the fact that the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole has not yet completed its
work, I shall now suspend this meeting, which will
resume after the conclusion of the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole. The time for the resumption
of the plenary meeting will be announced later; I hope
it can be announced in the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole.
The meeting was suspended at 6.20 p.m. and was
resumed at 6.40 a.m. on Saturday, 9 June 2001.
Agenda items 8, 9, 10 (continued) and agenda item 11
Review and appraisal of progress made in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda
Further actions and initiatives for overcoming
obstacles to the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda
Declaration on cities and other human settlements in
the new millennium
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole
of the Twenty-Fifth Special Session (A/S-25/7)
Adoption of the final document
The President: I request the Rapporteur of the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Fifth
Special Session, Mr. Alireza Esmaeilzadeh of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, to introduce the report of the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
Mr. Esmaeilzadeh (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole of the Twenty-Fifth Special Session: I have
the honour to present the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Fifth Special
Session, which is contained in the following
documents: A/S-25/AC.1/L.1 and addenda 1 to 5, and
A/S-25/AC.1/L.2.
As the Assembly will recall, the Ad Hoc
Committee was responsible for finalizing a document
for consideration by this special session entitled
“Declaration on cities and other human settlements in
the new millennium”. The Ad Hoc Committee devoted
two meetings to a general discussion of the three

agenda items allocated to the Ad Hoc Committee and
devoted a third meeting and a number of informal
consultations and exchanges of views on the document.
I should like to take this opportunity to conclude
the report by adding information that is not included in
the printed documents before the Assembly.
As concerns document A/S-25/AC.1/L.1, the
word “three” is to be inserted into the first blank space
in paragraph 2, and “8 and 9” inserted into the second
blank space, before the word “June”. In paragraph 14,
“9” is to be inserted into the blank space before “June”.
The following paragraph should be added after
paragraph 14:
“At its third meeting, on 8 June, the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole considered its draft
report (A/S-25/AC.1/L.1 and addenda 1), and one
draft resolution submitted by the Chairman in
document A/S-25/AC.1/L.2. Statements were
made by the representatives of: ...”.
Turning to document A/S-25/AC.1/L.1/Add.1, in
paragraph 1, insert “3rd” in the first blank space and
“9” in the second blank space.
Turning to document A/S-25/AC.1/L.1/Add.2, in
paragraph 1, insert “3rd” in the first blank space and
“9” in the second blank space.
In
document
A/S-25/AC.1/L.1/Add.3,
in
paragraph 1, insert “3rd” in the first blank space and
“9” in the second blank space.
In document A/S-25/AC.1/L.1/Add.4, the subtitle
“Introduction” should be deleted in addenda 3 and 4.
A new document, A/S-25/AC.1/L.1/Add.5,
contains the chapeau for the draft declaration, which
includes paragraph 1 of the draft declaration as
contained in document A/S-25/2. Therefore, in the
declaration, the former paragraph 2 will become
paragraph 1, and the following paragraphs will be
renumbered accordingly.
Three new paragraphs were presented and
adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee: paragraph 53 bis,
53 ter and 53 quater.
In document A/S-25/AC.1/L.1, the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft report to which is
annexed the draft declaration on cities and other human
settlements in the new millennium, as orally revised.

31

A/S-25/PV.6

The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
Assembly will not discuss the report.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Fifth
Special Session have been made clear in the
Committee. May I remind delegations that, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
The Assembly will now proceed to take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Fifth
Special Session in document A/S-25/AC.1/L.2.
The draft resolution is entitled “Declaration on
cities and other human settlements in the new
millennium”. The text of the annex to the draft
resolution is contained, for the time being, in document
A/S-25/2, as amended by documents A/S-25/AC.1/L.1.
The draft resolution was recommended by the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Fifth
Special Session for adoption.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-25/2).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of position.
Mr. Jacob (Israel): It is in a spirit of cooperation
and goodwill, and because of our commitment to the
success of the Habitat Conference, that Israel has
decided to join the consensus on the Declaration on
cities and other human settlements in the new
millennium.
My delegation welcomes the inclusion in the text
of a paragraph regarding international terrorism. As
witnessed just a week ago in my own country, in the
city of Tel-Aviv, terrorism in populated areas —
indeed, anywhere — is an issue of international
concern. The international community should indeed
take concerted action against this heinous crime.

32

I should like, however, to place on record our
reservations with regard to paragraphs 53 bis, 53 ter
and 53 quater.
In conclusion, we would like to express to you,
Mr. President, our appreciation for your wise and able
leadership.
Mr. Southwick (United States of America): I
take the floor to give an explanation of position.
The United States is pleased to join the consensus
on the Declaration on cities and other human
settlements in the new millennium. We worked hard to
achieve consensus, because we believe that the mission
of Habitat is very important. While pleased with the
substantive outcome of this conference document,
including the reference to terrorism, we regret very
much that, once again, a United Nations conference on
an important thematic matter has been politicized,
robbing the conference of its focus and unjustifiably
consuming an enormous amount of time. We hope that,
working together, we can somehow in future find a
better way to do business.
In closing, let me express my sincere thanks to
you, Mr. President, for your steadfast, imaginative and
dedicated efforts to achieve consensus. Let no one be
in doubt that the success of this session is due to your
efforts.
Mr. Gamaleidin (Egypt): My delegation would
like to express its deep appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for all of the efforts you have made to get us
to this successful conclusion and for your personal
involvement in achieving this result. We would like
simply to place on record that the reservation expressed
by the delegation of Egypt in Istanbul regarding the
paragraph on the various forms of family is still valid
with respect to the current Declaration.
Mr. Al-Badi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on having
concluded this special session on the implementation of
the outcome of Habitat II.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
should like to reiterate the reservations that it
expressed at the Istanbul Conference, at which a text
was presented to the Chairman. We reserve our position
on the items that contradict the precepts of Islam and
the laws of Saudi Arabia.

A/S-25/PV.6

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I call on the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the efforts you
personally have made in connection with the adoption
of this important Declaration on cities and other human
settlements in the new millennium, which has now
been adopted by consensus. Naturally, I should like
also to extend our great appreciation to the Chairman
of the Preparatory Committee for the efforts that he
made.
We are pleased with what has been done to date.
We welcome the fact that the General Assembly has
been successful in dealing with these issues, and we are
gratified that all of this has been achieved by
consensus, thanks to the intensive efforts made by
several Member States.
In this connection, we must extend our sincerest
thanks to the Group of 77 and China and its Chairman
for the significant amount of work done and for their
tireless efforts.
Let me also thank you, Mr. President, and all of
those who have made a contribution to our attaining
this significant achievement, which will now guide our
activities in the coming years.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Mirafzal (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
taking the floor to thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Bureau, as well as the bureau of the
Committee of the Whole, whose members have done a
very good job in leading the process to this moment.
I should like in particular, on behalf of the Group
of 77, to thank you, Sir, for your personal efforts in
bringing this session to a successful conclusion. It was

a collective effort, but certainly it was your prominent
role that brought us to that successful conclusion. Once
again, I thank you on behalf of the Group of 77 and
wish you a very good and healthy life.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda items 8, 9, 10
and 11.
Closing statement by the President
The President: Let me reiterate my sincere
thanks to all for their hard work in the five-year review
of the Habitat Agenda. I am particularly delighted and
pleased by the constructive and cooperative spirit that
has prevailed throughout the special session and during
the very difficult negotiations on the Declaration
document.
I should also like to express my thanks to the able
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, Ambassador
Garcia Duran, who had to leave before the conclusion
of our discussion. My thanks are also due to the
bureaus of the Committee of the Whole and of the
Thematic Committee.
We had a difficult task, but we did well. At this
late hour, I shall refrain from making a long speech and
I wish all members a nice weekend.
We have now come to the end of the twenty-fifth
special session of the General Assembly. May I invite
representatives to stand and observe one minute of
silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the session
The President: I declare closed the twenty-fifth
special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 7.10 a.m.

33
