54

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1798 (LV) of 24 July 1973,
Reaffirming that Zambia's decision to divert its trade
from the southern route is in compliance with the
relevant decisions of the Security Council and designed to enhance its capacity to implement fully the
mandatory sanctions against the illegal regime of
Southern Rhodesia,
Recognizing the urgent need for increased international assistance to supplement Zambia's national effort
to overcome the special economic problems arising
from the closure of its southern border,
1. Commends all those Member States which have
responded positively to the appeals contained in Security Council resolution 329 ( 1973) and in Economic
and Social Council resolution 1798 (LV);
2. Renews the appeal for more and greater contributions by the world community to enable Zambia
to maintain its normal flow of traffic;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the measures
taken and specific proposals made by the SecretaryGeneral designed to achieve ,the objective envisaged in
Security Council resolution 329 ( 1973) ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the appropriate organizations within the United
Nations system, to maintain his efforts to generate
maximum assistance.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3174 (XXVIII). Special measures in favour of
the least developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 62 ( III) of 19 May 1972 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, uo in which the Conference recommended, inter
alia, that developed countries should give urgent consideration to ,the modalities for increasing flows of
multilateral and bilateral assistance to the least developed countries and, for this purpose, spelt out certain measures for the implementation of which the
Conference called for the study of ways and means
for establishing institutional arrangements, including a
study on the principle of establishing a special voluntary fund for the least developed countries,
Recalling Trade and Development Board decision
100 (XIII) of 8 September 1973,67
Noting the resolution adopted by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries at Algiers on 9 September 1973,68
in which ,the Conference recommended that in international economic action top priority should be given
to the urgent implementation of the programmes of
special measures in favour of the least developed countries adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its third session and by
other specialized international institutions,
66 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
6 7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1 ), part
three, annex I.
68A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 81.

--------

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1710 (LIil) of 28 July 1972, in which the Council,
inter alia, called upon developed countries and multilateral institutions and agencies to respond favourably
to the needs of the least developed countries in the
different fields of trade and development,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 3036
(XXVII) of 19 December 1972, in which the Assembly recognized that the relevant provisions of resolution 62 (III) of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and those of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade 69 must be applied in practice as
soon as possible,
Also recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1753 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the Council recomm_ended, {nter alia, that the General Assembly
s~ould review at its twenty-eighth session the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the
s~ecial measur~s in favour of the least developed coun!nes _and consider ways and means of further employmg s1zable sums of the resources of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund, as well as other sources
and arrangements, for assisting the least developed
countries in overcoming their basic handicaps,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution _1754 (1:-,IV) of 16 May 1973, in which the
Council recogmzed that the organizations of the United
Nations system should take further concerted measures
including the adaptation of their operational rules'.
the terms and conditions under which assistance is
provid~d, a~d . their institutional arrangement<;, for
accordmg pnonty and co-ordinated attention to the
partic~lar problems and needs of the least developed
countnes,
Noting with appreciation the concern of and reporting by different United Nations bodies, particularly
the Tr~de and Development Board and the Governing
Council <;>f ,the United Nations Development Programme, m response to General Assembly resolution
~~~6 (XXVII) under which they were requested to
1mtrate and accelerate the implementation of their
respective action programmes in favour of the least
developed countries in the areas within their competence,
Taking ~ote_ _of the note by the Secretary-GeneraF 0
o? the des1rab1hty and feasibility of establishing a special fu!'ld for the least developed among the deve,Joping
~ou!ltn~ and the note by the Secretary-GeneraF 1 on
mst1tut1onal arrangements for the implementation of
special measures in favour of the least developed among
the ~eveloping c<?untries, including the need for the
creation of a special fund for these countries,
. 1. Call~ upon the developed countries to give the
highest pnonty to the urgent implementation of the
special_ measures. in fa_vour of the least developed
countries as envisaged m resolution 62 (III) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and to evolve innovative measures in different
fiel~s of assistance to the least developed countries with
a view to. enhancing their capacity to derive equitable
and effective benefits from the policy measures of the
International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade;
69 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
1o E/5269.

11 E/5416.

55

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

2. Urges the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system and the bilateral and multilateral sources of development financing to expedite
action on Economic and Social Council resolutions
1753 (LIV) and 1754 (LIV), and to introduce the
necessary ways and means for increasing their capacity
to participate more effectively in the implementation of
the measures for assisting the least developed countries as spelt out in resolution 62 (Ill) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Requests all developed countries to respond
favourably to the trend for reactivating and reorienting
the United Nations Capital Development Fund by contributing to it and enforcing its operational activities
through the annual pledging conferences;
4. Decides to consider further at its twenty-ninth
session the question of the creation of a special development fund for the least developed countries in order to
complement the services accorded them by existing
financial institutions and, for this purpose, requests
the Secretary-General to prepare for submission to the
General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-sixth session, a summary of the
studies already made, together with any additional information, on the need for creating a special fund for
the least developed countries and the institutional
arrangements for that purpose;
5. Further decides that a comprehensive evaluation
of the implementation of the special measures in
favour of the least developed countries. together with
a decision on the principles and possible mode of operation of a special development fund for the least
developed countries, should be undertaken by the
General Assembly, at its twenty-ninth session. and that,
on the basis of the reports and studies requested by the
Economic and Social Council from the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system, a review
of the special measures in favour of the least developed
countries should be conducted with the purpose of enhancing the capacity of the organizations in the United
Nations system to carry out all the provisions of resolution 62 (III) of the United Nations Omference on
Trade and Development and of adapting policy guidelines, operational rules, ,terms and conditions. and institutional frameworks suitable to the conditions and
problems of the least developed countries.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3175 (XXVIII). Permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international law and the provisions of the international conventions and regulations, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, 72 concerning the obligations and responsibilities of the occupying Power,
Recalling its previous resolutions on permanent
sovereignty over natural resources, including resolution
1803 (XVII) of 18 December 1962 in which it declared the right of peoples and nations to permanent
sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources,
"T2 Convention. relative to the Pcotection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75,
No. 973).

Recalling the pertinent provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 73
Recalling also its resolution 3005 (XXVII) of 15
December 1972, in which it affirmed the principle of
the sovereignty of the population of the occupied territories over their national wealth and resources and
called upon all States, international organizations and
specialized agencies not to recognize or co-operate with,
or assist in any manner in, any mea,ures undertaken by
the occupying Power to exploit the resources of the
occupied territories or to effect any changes in the
demographic composition or geographic character or
institutional structure of those territories,
1. Affirms the right of the Arab States and peoples
whose territories are under foreign occupation to permanent sovereignty over aU their natural resources;
2. Reaffirms that all measures undertaken hy Israel
to exploit ,the human and natural resources of the occupied Arab territories are illegal and calls upon brae!
to halt such measures forthwith;
3. Affirms the right of the Arab States and peoples
whose territories are under Israeli occupation to -the
restitution of and full compensation for the exploitation and looting of, and damages to, the natural resources, as well as the exploitation and manipulation
of the human resources, of the occupied territories;
4. Declares that the above principles apply to all
States, territories and peoples under foreign occupation,
colonial rule or apartheid.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973

3176 ( XXVIII). First bit>1mial ovt•r-all rl'vil'w and
appraisal of prol,!re>1s in the implenwntation
of the International Development Stratt>~y
for the Sel'ond United Nution,1 Dcvelopnwnt
Deca(le

The General Assembly,
Having undertaken, in accordance with para!!raph
83 of its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
an examination of the economic and social develnpments since the launching of the Second United Nations
Development Decade,
Adopts the following text of the first biennial over-all
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade:
Revif'w and a11prnisal of proi:ress in tilt' irnpll'mt'ntation of
the International Development Strateg~•
CONTENfS

l. INTRODUCTION

11. GFNERAL EVALUA110N
A. Attainment of !-'(oals and objectives
B. Efforts of developing countries
C. Performance by devel0pe,l countries
D. Overview

III. FURTHER ACTION
A. Measures by developing countries
B. Measures by developed countries
C. Measures by the internati0nal community

73 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

1-1 l
1'.' .,(,
12-17
18-2.1

2-l-:;,_!
31-_,6
3~-69
~8-4Y

W-66
67-69
