S/PV.7585

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7585th meeting

Wednesday, 16 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43146 (E)
*1543146*

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this important
meeting: Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Nick
Grono, Chief Executive Officer of the Freedom Fund;
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Fedotov,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Vienna.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I now
give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome the
Security Council’s focus on the practice of human
trafficking in situations of conflict and displacement.
Let us first be clear on what we are discussing
today: human trafficking is slavery in the modern
age. Slavery is not just a past abomination; millions of
people are living as slaves, or in slave-like conditions,
even as we speak today, in this year of 2015, here at the
United Nations, with the Charter of the United Nations
in front of us, here at the horseshoe table.
Most of the victims of trafficking are vulnerable
women and children, deceived or abducted into a life
of suffering, exploitation, torture or servitude. This
ruthless practice has become a global industry, and
it must be stopped. I am heartened that in September
Member States committed, as part of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), to Goals 5, 8 and 16, to take action on
human trafficking.
There are more people displaced today than at
any time since the Second World War. Millions more
are caught up in conflict and unable to flee. These
human beings are exposed to a wide range of human

2/26

16/12/2015

rights violations, not the least of which is trafficking.
They are sold and trafficked for sexual enslavement,
prostitution, illegal adoption, slave labour, purposes of
criminality or recruitment as child soldiers.
The Council has heard reports on almost 20
countries engulfed in conflict, or trying to recover from
conflict, where these practices are widespread. The
victims are mainly women and girls, but also boys and
men. Thousands of men and boys have been forcibly
conscripted by the Lord’s Resistance Army and other
armed groups. The plight of women and girls held by
groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram is, tragically,
well known. The abduction of hundreds of schoolgirls
from Chibok by Boko Haram captured global attention,
and the memory of that incident still lingers in our
minds.
Thousands of Yazidi women in Iraq have been
abducted and enslaved by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. As the Secretary-General stated in his
remarks to the Security Council on 13 October 2015,
“the systematic acts carried out by Daesh against
the Yazidi community, which include killings,
torture, rape and sexual slavery, may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We must ensure accountability.” (S/PV.7533, p. 3)
I very much appreciate the presence here today of
Nadia Murad Basee Taha, of the Yazidi community, as
a witness to the cruel and grim realities.
Trafficking in persons is a crime and a violation
of human rights and must be treated as such. The
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, provides a framework for action. With
169 States parties, the Protocol is close to universal
adherence. I urge all countries to ratify and fully
implement it.
Resolution 2195 (2014) recognizes the linkage
between organized crime, including trafficking in
persons, and terrorism; I am sure that Mr. Fedotov will
touch on this. I urge all States to become parties to
international treaties against trafficking in persons, the
smuggling of migrants and corruption and slavery, as
well as treaties that protect human rights, especially the
rights of women and children. We also have the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, which includes provisions on addressing

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

this problem in conflict settings. I already mentioned,
of course, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
where this subject is also brought up.
But we need to do more. We should more robustly
implement the Plan of Action and the international
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, particularly internationaln conflict settings
and post-conflict reconstruction work, a subject on
the Security Council’s agenda. We should also support
the important work of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons. Ending human
trafficking also means committing to resolve the
conflicts in which human trafficking thrives.
Horrifying tales have emerged of how women
and children are treated in captivity. But even when
captivity ends, the suffering continues. Last month,
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, my
friend and colleague Adama Dieng, met with several
Yazidi victims of trafficking at the Khanke camp for
internally displaced persons, near Dohuk, in northern
Iraq. He asked me to convey his impressions briefly.
He spoke to two girls who had managed to leave Daesh
and reunite with their families. They were indeed free
from Daesh, but, and he stated this very clearly, they
were nor free not from fear and unbearable memories.
Indeed, the scars of such violence last a lifetime.
Victims fortunate enough to be freed need assistance
to regain their rights and dignity and to reintegrate
into society. They must be given a chance to take back
their lives and build new futures. The United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, is there to
work on their behalf. I encourage all, Member States
and others, to contribute to the Fund. It is also crucially
important to fight impunity by bringing traffickers to
account and to justice.
In closing, human trafficking is often described
as unthinkable and unspeakable. But it is our shared,
serious and sincere responsibility to think deeply and
speak clearly about the abuses to which innumerable
and nameless victims are subjected. Human traffickers
have no place in the world that we are striving to build.
Let us make sure that they have no space and no way
to operate.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.

S/PV.7585

Mr. Fedotov: The fact that criminals exploit
situations of conflict and that transnational organized
crime erodes the rule of law and can fuel insecurity is
well known. The fact that the growing sophistication of
the links between transnational criminal networks and
terrorists in many regions of the world poses a grave
threat to peace and security has been recognized many
times over by the Council.
Now this important and timely debate can help
draw attention to, and promote action on, a particularly
appalling aspect of the crime-terrorism-conflict nexus
that has, unfortunately, received too little attention,
namely, that the most vulnerable — women, children
and men caught in the crossfire of conflict; often
impoverished and displaced; many on the move to
escape desperate circumstances — are falling victim to
the traffic in human beings.
Syria was primarily a country of destination
for trafficking before 2011. However, according to
information collected for the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Global Report
on Trafficking in Persons, since that time at least
10 countries in Europe, Asia and the Middle East have
detected Syrian victims.
Trafficking victims from Iraq have been more
frequently detected in many parts of the world since
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) started
its insurgency in the north of the country. Trafficking
victims from the Horn of Africa, including Somali
citizens, are increasingly detected in Europe. While
many are trafficked to other destinations, there are
scores of victims bought, sold and exploited by groups
like ISIL and Boko Haram in the territories where they
operate.
Taking action in such a fluid environment clearly
presents great challenges. This debate is a timely
reminder to the international community that we
in fact already possess strong frameworks that can
enable joint responses against trafficking in persons.
First and foremost among these is the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its landmark Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. Adopted by the General Assembly in 2000
and entering into force in 2003, the Protocol was the
first international instrument calling for all acts of
human trafficking to be criminalized.

15-431463/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Protocol also laid the foundation for further
groundbreaking steps, including the General
Assembly’s adoption in 2010 of a Global Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly
resolution 64/293), which also mandated the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to
conduct research on trafficking, and established the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims
of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. The Convention and Protocol provide a legal
and practical framework under which countries can
cooperate to address a crime that commonly involves
multiple jurisdictions.
The good news is that most countries in the world
are States parties to the Convention and the trafficking
Protocol, and in recent years most of them have
enacted relevant laws. The bad news is that not many
countries fully use these laws — their own laws. Fortyone per cent reported no convictions at all or fewer
than 10 convictions per year for the charge of human
trafficking. Clearly, this impunity must end. I hope
that this debate will further encourage States parties
to fulfil their commitments and obligations under the
Convention and Protocol. More can and should be
done to foster cooperation among States affected by
trafficking, whether they are countries of origin, transit
or destination.
UNODC, as the guardian of the Convention and its
Protocols, is assisting countries in these efforts. Over
the past two years, UNODC has delivered assistance to
more than 60 countries, through its global programme
against human trafficking, to enable Governments to
effectively implement the provisions of the Protocol.
Dedicated programmes have also been set up in key
regions affected by conflict.
In response to migrant smuggling through the
Mediterranean — which to a large degree is the result of
conflicts in Syria and Libya — UNODC has developed a
plan to support Member States, encompassing research
and analysis, national capacity-building, regional and
interregional cooperation and enhanced protection for
victims. By strengthening criminal justice capacities, as
well as the regulatory frameworks for banks and other
financial institutions, we also help to disrupt the illicit
financial flows, corruption and money-laundering that
enable criminal activities.
The interests of the victims remain at the heart of
UNODC’s efforts. Next year, we seek to bring together

4/26

16/12/2015

practitioners from countries hosting large refugee
populations to share experiences in addressing the
vulnerability of refugees to trafficking and preventing
victimization. Within the United Nations system,
UNODC seeks a strong, coordinated and consistent
response through its active participation in the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons (ICAT). Established by the General
Assembly, ICAT brings together 16 United Nations
and other partners engaged in the fight against human
trafficking. By harmonizing our approaches and taking
advantage of each agency’s added value, we can help
to ensure that there are no gaps in the United Nations
system’s response. As the incoming chair of ICAT, I
will invite UNODC’s counterparts to follow-up the
discussion in this meeting of the Security Council.
With the Convention and Protocol, we have a
strong, agreed legal basis for international cooperation
and concerted action against trafficking in persons,
including in situations of conflict. Through ICAT,
we have the structures in place to coordinate United
Nations action to provide comprehensive assistance to
Member States. We need to make the best use of these
tools. UNODC stands ready to support Member States.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grono.
Mr. Grono: I thank the Security Council for taking
up the issue of human trafficking in conflict today. The
reality is that armed conflict leaves civilians highly
vulnerable to extreme forms of exploitation, such as
forced labour, slavery and slavery-like practices. We are
seeing that most starkly right now with the enslavement
of Yazidi women and girls by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS). The massive displacement of
civilian populations that usually accompanies conflict
also facilitates the movement of people into these
highly exploitative situations. This movement for the
purpose of exploitation is the very definition of human
trafficking provided by the Palermo Protocol.
The connection between conflict and human
trafficking is not new and often involves violations of
other international norms against slavery, forced labour,
torture and enforced disappearance. The historical
context to all of this was set out in a report entitled
Unshackling Development, authored by Dr. James
Cockayne and issued by the Freedom Fund and United
Nations University, which pointed out that for almost a
century the League of Nations and the United Nations

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

system have addressed human trafficking, forced
labour and traditional forms of slavery all together.
In the Second World War, there was widespread
enslavement, forced labour and sexual slavery, and
these crimes were prosecuted and condemned by the
Nuremburg Military Tribunals and the Tokyo Tribunal.
More recently, Security Council-backed tribunals have
found that human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
labour have all also played a role in conflicts in the
Balkans, West Africa and Cambodia. The important
work of these tribunals has helped to make it clear that
there will be no impunity for slavery crimes.
But unfortunately, the connection between
conflict, slavery and human trafficking only seems to
be growing. This is most obviously the case with ISIS.
In most conflicts slavery is relatively hidden because
it is utterly taboo, but ISIS is directly challenging that
taboo. Over 3,000 Yazidi women and girls are thought
to be currently enslaved by ISIS, which is advocating
for the revival of slavery through official policy and
media outlets, organizing slave markets and contract
registries, and even issuing official how-to manuals.
ISIS has institutionalized slavery and sexual violence
in order to increase recruitment, by promising male
fighters access to women and girls, to populate a
new caliphate through forced pregnancy, to terrorize
communities into compliance, to displace populations
from strategic areas, and to generate revenue through
trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms. We shall be
hearing shortly from Nadia Murad Basse Taha on the
unconscionable reality of enslavement under ISIS.
We are also seeing enslavement in conflicts in
Africa. In Nigeria, the militant group Boko Haram has
a clear policy of enslavement, child recruitment, sexual
slavery and forced marriage. It has abducted over 2,000
people. Its leader, Abubakar Shekau, has proclaimed
that the hundreds of women and girls it has kidnapped
will be forced into marriage with his fighters, or “be
sold in the market”.
More broadly, conflicts in Iraq, Syria, Libya and
the Sahel are displacing huge numbers of people and
leaving them vulnerable to human trafficking and
enslavement. Individuals displaced from these conflicts
are also being exploited elsewhere, including in forced
marriage, in domestic work, on construction sites and
in commercial sexual exploitation, both in the Middle
East and North Africa, and further afield. Increasingly
closed borders and a growing unwillingness on the part

S/PV.7585

of wealthier States to accept refugees also exacerbate
these problems, as does the failure of officials in States
with a high incidence of trafficking to enforce the laws
already in place.
Conflict is the source of that displacement and
vulnerability. It is the engine that drives the growth of
human trafficking networks. The same is true in SouthEast Asia, particularly in relation to the displacement
from Myanmar, which is driving Rohingya into forced
labour, including in the supply chains that provide
seafood to Western supermarkets. Even if individuals
set out on what they believe is voluntary migration,
they may discover along the way or upon arrival that
they are subject to illegal exploitation, and are thus the
victims of human trafficking.
And sometimes human trafficking does not even
involve crossing international borders. Many of the
conflicts with which the Council is wrestling in Africa
are also driven by industrial-scale exploitation of
conflict resources, fuelled by forced labour. In that
respect, it is worth noting that the Council has taken
important steps to encourage corporate due diligence
to prevent conflict resources from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea and Somalia from
entering global supply chains.
In other cases, the human trafficking involved
is the movement of children into forced labour for
armed groups, as we have seen so gruesomely with the
Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda and neighbouring
countries.
Finally, it is also clear that, in at least one other
situation already on the agenda of the Security Council,
that of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, there
are questions not about non-State armed groups, but
State involvement in human trafficking. In his recent
report to the General Assembly, the Special Rapporteur
on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea claimed that up to 50,000 North Koreans had
been sent to work abroad in conditions that amounted
to forced labour and human trafficking, in order to
circumvent United Nations sanctions and earn billions
in foreign currency for the country.
There are several things the Security Council can
do to address some of the most egregious abuses.
First, the Council should send a strong deterrent
signal to armed groups by calling this widespread and
systematic organized policy of human trafficking what

15-431465/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

it legally is: a crime against humanity. That would
signal that those responsible are subject to prosecution
not just at the International Criminal Court, but by any
State with jurisdiction.
Secondly, the Security Council should make clear
that it wants all parts of the United Nations system to
work more effectively together to help countries tackle
modern slavery in conflict zones. At present, United
Nations efforts are fragmented and poorly coordinated,
and the peace operations and peacebuilding actors
of the United Nations are hardly involved at all. The
Security Council should call on the Secretary-General
to appoint a time-bound Special Envoy for the next
three years to develop system-wide guidance to help
United Nations actors figure out how to work better
together and establish a strong global partnership with
the private sector and civil society.
Thirdly, the Security Council should tackle the
drivers of the problem by asking the Special Envoy to
develop effective supply-chain measures to ensure that
legitimate businesses do not unwittingly encourage
human trafficking from conflict zones. Such measures
could draw on lessons learned from the corporate
due diligence guidelines on conflict minerals, as well
as recent legislation and regulation in some Member
States on supply-chain transparency.
Let me conclude by again thanking the Security
Council for taking up this critically important issue
on which the United Nations has such an important
leadership role to play. It is only with such leadership
that slavery will truly become a relic of history.
The President: I thank Mr. Grono for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Taha. In advance of
her statement, exceptionally, I want to thank her for
her courage and for making the trip here to share her
experience with the Council, which I know will not be
easy.
Ms. Taha (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank
the delegation of the United States for having convened
this meeting and for having invited me to speak to the
Council.
It is with great sadness, gratitude and hope that I
address the Security Council. As a Yazidi survivor, I
am a descendant of one of the world’s oldest religions,
which is today threatened with extinction. I am here to
talk about the practices against us by what is called the
Islamic State/Daesh — trafficking in persons, sexual

6/26

16/12/2015

enslavement of women, recruitment of children in war,
displacement and the genocide of our society. I am here
to tell the Council my story, of what happened to my
society, which has lost hope for life and is now moving
into unknown territory. I am also here to tell the Council
about the more than 3,400 women and children who
have been abducted. I am here to tell the Council about
this global terrorist organization, the Islamic State,
which is trying to destroy our culture and take away
our freedom. I am here to talk about the nightmare that,
just overnight, turned the life of an entire community
upside-down.
Prior to 3 August 2014, I was living with my family,
my brothers and sisters in the pretty, quiet village of
Kocho. But then the Islamic State attacked our region,
and we found ourselves facing a true genocide. A large
number of those forces of evil had come from different
States with weapons, equipment and uniforms. Their
aim was to eliminate all Yazidi existence under the
pretext that — according to them — we were infidels.
The Islamic State did not just come to kill us, women
and girls, but to take us as war booty and merchandise
to be sold in markets for a bit of money, or even for
free. Those crimes were not committed without design,
they were part of a premeditated policy. The Islamic
State came with the sole aim of destroying the Yazidi
identity through force, rape, recruitment of children
and destruction of all of our temples, which they took
control of. All of this can be interpreted only as an act
of genocide against our identity, in particular against
Yazidi women. Rape was used to destroy women and
girls and to ensure that they could never again lead a
normal life.
On 15 August, elements from the Islamic State
summoned us to the village school. They separated the
men from the women and children. I saw them from the
second floor of the school as they took away the men
and killed them. Six of my brothers were killed, while
three survived the mass killing. We, the women and
children, were taken by bus from the school to another
area. They humiliated us along the way and touched us
in a shameful way. They took me to Mosul with more
than 150 other Yazidi families. There were thousands
of families in a building there, including children who
were given away as gifts. One of the men came up to
me. He wanted to take me. I looked down at the floor. I
was absolutely terrified. When I looked up, I saw a huge
man. He was like a monster. I cried out that I was too
young and he was huge. He kicked and beat me. A few

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

minutes later, another man came up to me. I was still
looking at the floor. I saw that he was a little smaller. I
begged for him to take me. I was terribly afraid of the
first man. The man who took me asked me to change
my religion. I refused. One day, he came and asked me
for my hand in what they called “marriage”. I said that
I was ill; most women were menstruating because they
were so scared. A few days later, this man forced me
to get dressed and put on my makeup. Then, on that
terrible night, he did it.
He forced me to serve in his military company. He
humiliated me daily. He forced me to wear clothes that
barely covered my body. I was not able to take any more
rape and torture. I decided to flee, but one of the guards
stopped me. That night he beat me. He asked me to take
my clothes off. He put me in a room with guards, who
proceeded to commit their crime until I fainted.
I was finally able to escape three months after my
abduction. I currently live in Germany. Thankfully,
Germany provided me with the necessary medical
attention, for which I thank that country.
But this is not just about my suffering; it is about
collective suffering. Daesh gave us two options:
become a Muslim or die. And even men who agreed to
become Muslims out of fear for their lives were killed,
their women enslaved and their children recruited.
Sixteen mass graves have been discovered so far. One
of them contains the remains of 80 women — including
my mother — whom they did not desire and so decided
to kill. More than 400,000 thousand people have been
displaced, and over 40 per cent of our land is still under
the control of Daesh.
Our liberated areas are uninhabitable because of
the devastation, and Yazidis have no confidence that
they will ever live on their land again. Just last week,
more than 70 Yazidis drowned during their perilous
journey to Europe. Thousands are looking for a way
out, and a great many see migration as their only option.
The Islamic State has made Yazidi women fodder for
human trafficking. To the Council today, I lay out our
demands, and I very much hope that humanity has not
yet come to an end.
First, we demand the liberation of the more than
3,400 women and children still suffering and living
under the mercy of the merciless.
Secondly, we demand that the incidents that took
place, including the murders, collective slavery and

S/PV.7585

human trafficking, be defined as genocide. I am asking
the Council today to find solutions to the issue of
genocide before the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, demand the liberation of all of our areas,
including my own village of Kocho, so that we can bury
our dead. We demand the establishment of international
protection for the Yazidi areas and for the minorities
under threat so that, one day, we can return to our regions
and live in peace. I also request the allocation of an
international budget, under international supervision,
to compensate the victims and rebuild the region.
Fourthly, we ask that members open up their
countries to my community. We are victims and we
have the right to seek a safe country that safeguards
our dignity. Every day, hundreds of people risk their
lives. We entreat you today to consider the resettlement
option for the Yazidis and the other minorities under
threat, especially the victims of human trafficking, as
Germany has done.
Fifthly, and finally, we ask the Council, please, to
put an end to Daesh once and for all. I suffered the pain
they inflicted on me. I saw their evil. All those who
commit the crimes of human trafficking and genocide
must be brought to justice so that women and children
can live in peace — in Iraq, Syria, Nigeria, Somalia
and everywhere else in the world. These crimes against
women and their freedom must be brought to an end
today.
The President: Let me say that I have been in many
Security Council meetings, and people do not clap. But
they are clapping for a remarkable young woman.
Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council recalls the United
Nations
Convention
against
Transnational
Organized Crime, and its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which includes
the first internationally agreed definition of the
crime of trafficking in persons and provides a
framework to effectively prevent and combat
trafficking in persons.

15-431467/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

“The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms reported instances of trafficking in
persons in areas affected by armed conflict. The
Security Council further notes that trafficking in
persons undermines the rule of law and contributes
to other forms of transnational organized crime,
which can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity.
“The Security Council deplores all acts of
trafficking in persons undertaken by the “Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant” (ISIL, also known as
Daesh), including of Yazidis, as well as all ISIL’s
violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights, and deplores also any
such trafficking in persons and violations and
other abuses by the Lord’s Resistance Army and
other terrorist or armed groups, including Boko
Haram, for the purpose of sexual slavery, sexual
exploitation and forced labour that may contribute
to the funding and sustainment of such groups,
and underscores that certain acts associated with
trafficking in persons in the context of armed
conflict may constitute war crimes.
“The Security Council reiterates the critical
importance of all Member States fully implementing
relevant resolutions with respect to ISIL, including
resolutions 2161 (2014), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2249 (2015). The Security
Council further reiterates the critical importance
of all Member States fully implementing relevant
resolutions, including resolution 2195 (2014), which
expresses concern that terrorists benefit from
transnational organized crime in some regions,
including from the trafficking of persons, as well
as resolution 2242 (2015), which expresses concern
that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are
known to be part of the strategic objectives and
ideology of certain terrorist groups.
“The Security Council calls upon Member
States to reinforce their political commitment to
and improve their implementation of applicable
legal obligations to criminalize, prevent and
otherwise combat trafficking in persons, and to
strengthen efforts to detect and disrupt trafficking
in persons, including implementing robust victim
identification mechanisms and providing access
to protection and assistance for identified victims,
particularly in relation to conflict. The Security
Council underscores in this regard the importance
of international law enforcement cooperation,

8/26

16/12/2015

including with respect to investigation and
prosecution of trafficking cases, and in this regard
calls for the continued support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in providing
technical assistance upon request.
“The Security Council calls upon Member
States to consider ratifying or acceding to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. The Security
Council further calls upon States parties to this
Convention and to the Protocol to redouble their
efforts to implement them effectively.
“The Security Council takes note of the
recommendations made by the Working Group
on Trafficking in Persons, established by the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, since its inception, and calls upon States to
strengthen their efforts in building the necessary
political, economic and social conditions to tackle
this crime.
“The Security Council notes the particular
impact that trafficking in persons in situations
of armed conflict has on women and children,
including increasing their vulnerability to sexual
and gender-based violence. The Security Council
expresses its intention to continue to address this
impact, including, as appropriate, in the context
of its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, within its mandate, and in the framework
of its agenda to prevent and address sexual violence
in armed conflict.
“The Security Council expresses solidarity
with and compassion for victims of trafficking,
including victims of trafficking related to armed
conflicts worldwide, and underscores the need for
Member States and the United Nations system to
proactively identify trafficking victims amongst
vulnerable populations, including refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), and address
comprehensively victims’ needs, including
proactive victim identification and, as appropriate,
the provision of or access to medical and psychosocial assistance, in the context of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as ensure that victims of trafficking in persons

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

are treated as victims of crime and, in line with
domestic legislation, not penalized or stigmatized
for their involvement in any unlawful activities in
which they have been compelled to engage.
“The Security Council calls upon Member
States to hold accountable those who engage
in trafficking in persons in situations of armed
conflict, especially their Government employees
and officials, as well as any contractors and
subcontractors, and urges Member States to take
all appropriate steps to mitigate the risk that
their public procurement and supply chains may
contribute to trafficking in persons in situations of
armed conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes existing
efforts to address sexual exploitation and abuse
in the context of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to
identify and take additional steps to prevent and
respond robustly to reports of trafficking in persons
in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
with the objective of ensuring accountability for
exploitation.
“The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all appropriate steps to reduce to
the greatest extent possible the risk that the United
Nations’s procurement and supply chains may
contribute to the trafficking in persons in situations
of armed conflict.
“The Security Council urges relevant United
Nations agencies operating in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations to build their technical
capacity to assess conflict situations for instances
of trafficking in persons, proactively screen for
potential victims of trafficking and facilitate access
to needed services for identified victims.
“The Security Council expresses its intent to
continue to address trafficking in persons with
respect to the situations on its seizure list.
“The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General report back to the Council on
progress made in 12 months to implement better
existing mechanisms countering trafficking in
persons and to carry out steps requested in this
presidential statement.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/25.

S/PV.7585

Although that may sound a little bureaucratic for
our guests here today, that is how we get the United
Nations system to work and get things done. I would
add that it is very important that the Security Council
has spoken on these issues for the first time.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
If my voice sounds shaky, it is because I find it very
difficult to speak in this Chamber after Nadia. The walk
from my office to the Chamber today was a peaceful
one. I am lucky not to live in a conflict situation. I am
lucky not to know first-hand what human trafficking is.
I am lucky not to know what sexual violence in conflict
is.
The closest I have ever been to such situations was
in March when the Secretary-General inaugurated the
Permanent Memorial to Honour the Victims of Slavery
and the Transatlantic Slave Trade at the entrance of
United Nations Headquarters. And I remember that at
that event he said clearly that the monument should lead
us not to forget the past but should above all make us
look to the future — and to take a look at the present
and at human trafficking, which is nothing less than the
modern form of slavery.
I therefore would begin by urging all representatives
and Members of the Organization to look at the Memorial
every time we enter United Nations Headquarters, and
to think of people such as Nadia who have not had the
life the rest of us have had and use all the tools we have
within our reach to fight with greater steadfastness
against human trafficking and sexual violence in
conflict.
I believe the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2015/25) is a good step in the right direction
but it is certainly not enough. And I congratulate the
Permanent Representative of the United States for
having awakened our consciences this afternoon to
the phenomenon of trafficking, which is something
of which we should really be ashamed. It is probably
one of the most deplorable phenomena currently being
experienced by humankind.
I would like to share two preliminary observations
with the Council, before attempting to propose some
additional measures to fight effectively against human
trafficking. My first observation is that sexual violence
strategically exercised by Daesh and other terrorist

15-431469/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

groups can considerably increase the likelihood that
women and girls will be trafficked. I would like to
reiterate the words of the President of the Spanish
Government, who said a few weeks ago that it is more
dangerous to be a woman in armed conflicts than to be
a soldier. That is a very sobering remark.
My second observation is that it is unacceptable for
trafficking in women and children to be a part of the
political economy, or worse, the financial economy, of
terrorist groups. We must fight against this phenomenon
in an absolute and across-the-board manner.
Further, I would refer to two errors that we
simply should not make. The first is believing that the
phenomenon is limited only to Daesh; it is not limited
to Daesh, as the Deputy Secretary-General also said.
Let us keep in mind the 276 girls kidnapped from the
secondary school in Chibok. I think it is important
not to lose sight of that fact. The second is that human
trafficking is not a phenomenon exclusively linked to
terrorism. Rather, it is a phenomenon that is also linked
to the major conflicts we are experiencing today and
the huge number of refugees in the world. Refugees
and displaced persons give rise to making trafficking a
phenomenon that is easier to practice.
Turning now to the United Nations, I believe that,
although the existing legal architecture was inadequate
to help Nadia, and I completely understand that it
was, we need to begin by implementing it much more
effectively, in particular the Palermo Protocol and
other instruments. I can say with pride that my country,
Spain, recently approved a comprehensive plan of
action to fight trafficking in women and children for
the years 2015-2018, in order to ensure that there is no
recurrence of cases such as Nadia’s.
Secondly, in strengthening the role of United
Nations and the Security Council in fighing human
trafficking, we must think about incorporating in the
mandates of sanctions committees such serious and
humbling subjects for humankind as the trafficking in
persons.
I would conclude by discussing the victims.
Council members know that my country has been a
standard-bearing country for defending the victims
of terrorism. We organized an Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council at which, for the first time,
victims of terrorism were able to express themselves.
Today Ambassador Power made it possible for Nadia, a

10/26

16/12/2015

victim of trafficking, to bravely take the floor and tell
her truth in the Security Council.
Finally, if being a victim of terrorism is serious, one
can imagine how much more serious it would be to be
a victim of terrorism and trafficking at the same time.
Accordingly, I would address Nadia personally and
assure her that the delegation of Spain will continue to
fight to keep experiences like hers from ever recurring.
I hope that within a few years we will no longer need
United Nations funds to help people whose lives have
been as difficult as hers has been.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his leadership in pulling that Arria Formula meeting
together, allowing the voices of the victims of terrorism
to be heard. We need to do more of that type of work in
the Security Council.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for organizing today’s meeting
on a subject as important as it is topical — trafficking
in situations of conflict.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson;
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Nick
Grono, Chief Executive Officer of the Freedom Fund,
for their briefings, and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha
for her very moving testimony.
Trafficking in human beings is an extremely
lucrative organized criminal activity that generates
profits estimated at tens of billions of United States
dollars a year. Millions of the people subject to
trafficking, including women and children, are often
sexually abused. There is no question that human
trafficking is the new slavery of the twenty-first
century against which humankind must now engage in
a ruthless struggle.
In some regions of the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa, thousands of men, women and
children are victims of trafficking. Terrorist groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram, the Lord’s Resistance Army and many others
resort to various forms of exploitation, including sexual
exploitation, forced labour or bondage, slavery or
related practices, forced servitude or organ trafficking
and other abominable crimes requiring urgent solutions.
Chad vigorously condemns all such criminal
practices. Recognizing the close ties between terrorism
and transnational organized crime, including human

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking, Chad initiated and ensured the adoption
last December of resolution 2195 (2014), whose relevant
provisions address the issue before the Council today.
To that end, we recall that the resolution, inter alia,
requests Member States to ratify as soon as possible
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000, also known as the Palermo
Convention, and its additional Protocols. In that regard,
Chad urges Member States to further pool their efforts
to prevent and eliminate human trafficking, in line
with the Additional Protocols of the Convention. The
firm commitment of Member States and effective
coordination of their actions are absolutely crucial to
identifying and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
those heinous crimes, wherever they may be.
The smuggling of migrants towards Europe is
spiriting many thousands of young Africans across the
Mediterranean Sea each year. This is a serious crime
that Africa and the rest of the world must diligently
oppose. However, despite efforts aimed at dismantling
the illegal migration networks, including the use of
coercive methods authorized by resolution 2240 (2015),
the phenomenon does not seem to have abated. In that
regard, Chad reiterates that the States of origin, transit
and destination must firmly tackle the root causes of
that evil. It is essential for the international community
to place greater emphasis on the links between peace,
security and economic development by financing
programmes aimed at creating jobs for young people
and women, particularly in the migrants’ countries of
origin.
Finding a lasting solution to the issue of human
trafficking will require the Council’s deep involvement
in resolving the conflicts currently under way
worldwide, particularly in Syria, Iraq, Libya and other
African countries. To that end, the Council must be
united in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in efforts to ban the supply of
weapons and munitions to armed groups, regardless of
their character or objectives. By the same token, the
Council should work to end the destabilization of weak
States, on the basis of any available pretext, in order to
preserve peace and security throughout the world.
In conclusion, Chad underscores the importance of
the universal implementation of the Palermo Convention
and its two additional Protocols. The Convention is
the fruit of a long consideration process and covers all
aspects of human trafficking, which has grown at an
alarming, unprecedented rate due to the evolution of

S/PV.7585

terrorism. The response to such crimes also calls for
renewed commitment and determination on the part of
all States Members of the United Nations.
Mr. Baublys: (Lithuania): It is no news that
armed conflict, the absence of the rule of law, rampant
corruption, the abuse of ethnic and religious minorities
and systematic gross violations of human rights all
contribute to human displacement. Smuggling and
trafficking networks feed on the human tragedies
in Libya, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Human trafficking and smuggling is a multi-billion
dollar business, in which the nexus linking criminals,
traffickers and terrorists is well established. Increasing
numbers of women and girls are turned into slaves and
suffer sexual abuse and rape. Some are turned into
suicide bombers — girls as young as eight and ten years
old, as has been the case with some of Boko Haram’s
victims.
The Lords’ Resistance Army is known to have
abducted some 30,000 children — boys and girls alike.
We cannot forget the thousands of women and children
who remain captive in areas under Daesh control. We
cannot forget the Yazidi women and girls who were
abducted, sold at public auctions into sexual slavery and
forcibly impregnated. Nor can we forget the hundreds
of Yazidi boys who were abducted and marched out to
the front under the Daesh banner wearing suicide belts,
or as human shields. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham has targeted migrants and refugees in Libya.
Frankly, it is morally unacceptable for the Council
to stand back and allow that evil alliance of traffickers,
terrorists and armed groups to profit from human
suffering. The least we can do is draw attention to
the plight of the victims by adding our strong voice
of condemnation. We can also rise to the challenge of
solving conflicts that generate internal displacement,
irregular migration and refugee flows, be it in the
Middle East, the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin or the
Horn of Africa. States have legal obligations to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons and to detect and
disrupt trafficking networks. We all need to do more,
work more with Interpol and other agencies, and boost
international law enforcement cooperation.
As the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) just said,
UNODC can provide technical assistance to Member
States. It can do more to help implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized

15-4314611/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

Crime and its Protocols. Better coordination within
the United Nations system, as some briefers have
said, would help to proactively identify victims of
trafficking. We need to look into what United Nations
peacekeeping operations can do. The training of frontline officials — including law enforcement officers,
judicial officials, border officers and social workers at
the local level — needs to be improved. Governments,
community and religious leaders and civil society
should work together to ensure that victims are not
stigmatized. Victims must have access to assistance,
medical assistance, protection and support in order to
prevent their retrafficking.
Accountability for such crimes is the biggest
challenge. We encourage Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations system
to cooperate with the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to explore ways to hold accountable
the perpetrators of violent crimes committed by
extremist groups and terrorists. We also need to step up
prevention by improving coordination regarding early
warning and analysis of potential conflicts. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s new comprehensive
strategy on preventing violent extremism.
A month ago, at the European Union-African Union
Summit in Valletta, the leaders of the two continents
pledged to scale up joint efforts in preventing and
fighting migrant smuggling and eradicating human
trafficking. They committed to beating back organized
criminal networks, better managing borders and
better coordinating and implementing agreements.
The European Union and its States members are at
the forefront of that fight in promoting global higher
standards for addressing human trafficking, including
through regional dialogue processes — such as the
Khartoum and Rabat processes — with the countries
along the East and West African migratory routes.
The elimination of the trafficking of girls and
women for all forms of exploitation stands as the
priority for all European Union (EU) countries. The
European Union has built a comprehensive legal and
policy framework, guided by an anti-trafficking
directive and an EU strategy. Actions are coordinated
by an EU anti-trafficking coordinator. This is a good
practice that could be shared with all interested regions
and institutions.
In fact, a regional organization can play an
absolutely critical role, as the Organization for Security

12/26

16/12/2015

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) does across Europe.
The OSCE has become a major platform for cooperation
and coordination in combating human trafficking. The
high-level Alliance against Trafficking in Persons
each year brings together top policymakers from
OSCE participating States, the OSCE Mediterranean
Partners for Cooperation, United Nations international
and
regional
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and trade representatives.
In
conclusion,
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted today, calls for genuine
action by all Member States, the United Nations system,
regional organizations, civil society, religious leaders.
It is time to make it happen.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly thank our briefers, whose
presentations and disturbing testimonies embody the
Council’s profound interest in addressing the issue
of human trafficking in situations of conflict. The
poignant testimony of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
who herself was a victim of atrocities committed by
Daesh, was particularly gripping and will remain fresh
in our memories.
The actions committed by Daesh in the Middle
East or by Boko Haram in Africa dramatically illustrate
the ongoing links between international peace and
security and human trafficking. Worldwide, trafficking
in human beings is, along with the traffic in drugs and
counterfeit goods, one of the most profitable forms
of trafficking. Its so-called turnover is estimated at
$32 billion dollars annually — if figures make any
sense — and it is one of the most widespread kinds of
trafficking. Forced labour, sexual servitude, kidnapping
for purposes of forced prostitution, rape — the list of
atrocities committed by terrorist groups, in particular
in situations of armed conflict, is unfortunately very
long. While the international community has invested
heavily in the issue since the turn of the century, more
efforts are crucial to defeat this scourge. I therefore
commend the initiative of the United States presidency
of the Council and to thank its delegation for giving us
the opportunity to exchange views on this issue.
For these terrorist groups, whose main victims
are usually women and children, trafficking in
human beings is not simply a means of spreading
terror among civilian populations; it is also used as a
source of financing. In Syria, women suffer the worst
atrocities. Rape, forced marriage and prostitution are

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

everyday occurrences in regions controlled by Daesh.
In Iraq, Daesh has established a veritable market
where women from minority groups, such as Yazidis
and Christians, are sold to serve as sex slaves. The
international commission of inquiry on human rights in
Iraq describes a system that transcends borders, where
we find Yazidi women, and even girls, with price tags
on their foreheads, for sale in the markets of Raqqa,
in Syria. In Nigeria, Boko Haram tortures, rapes and
holds prisoner hundreds of women and children.
Those acts are not only intolerable from a moral
point of view; they may also constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity and even genocide in the
case of certain communities. These crimes must not
go unpunished. The terrorist groups that commit such
atrocities are pushing the boundaries of what it means
to be human. Faced with this, we are called to act — and
to act in the sense of protection. The need to protect
civilians is obvious, but so is the need to protect the law
and its principles.
On numerous occasions, the Council has debated
subjects closely linked with the phenomenon of human
trafficking — on the occasion of the adoption of
resolution 2195 (2014), for example, on links between
terrorism and organized crime, or more recently of
resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace and
security. But our words must now be translated into
action. Prevention, the protection of victims and the
fight against impunity must be our priorities.
Combating human trafficking is a key priority for
France. The three pillars that I have described guide
the national action plan that France adopted in 2014
in order to curb this scourge. At the international
level, we have at our disposal pertinent international
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, known as the
Palermo Convention, and its Protocols, including that
specifically dedicated to the fight against trafficking
in persons. But we need to strengthen them and ensure
their full implementation by the entire international
community. It is to that end that France argues especially
for the establishment of a review mechanism to verify
and facilitate the implementation of these instruments.
We also contribute to the Global Programme against
Trafficking in Persons of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, whose remarkable work I commend.
Finally, as it did at the International Conference
on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in

S/PV.7585

the Middle East, held in Paris on 8 September, France
will continue to mobilize the international community
each time it has opportunity to do so. When we learn of
crimes as horrific as the ones we have heard testimony
about today, we have a collective responsibility to
act to end them and to prosecute their perpetrators.
The Council can be assured that France will be fully
mobilized to that end.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we thank the briefers for their
informative statements and assessments of the threat
of human trafficking in situations of conflict. It is
important for us to focus our attention at this meeting on
the crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist groups, and on their consequences.
Against the backdrop of an unprecedented
upsurge in terrorist activity in the Middle East and
North Africa, we are particularly dismayed by the
ongoing atrocities committed by the insurgents of
ISIS against representatives of religious, national and
ethno-confessional minorities: Christians, Kurds,
Yazidis and others. In recent months, thousands of
Yazidis have been seized by terrorists and became live
merchandise. Women and children are sold into slavery,
forced into marriage or subject to sexual violence.
Fleeing oppression and the atrocities of terrorists, many
Yazidis and other minorities have been forced to leave
their homes, and many have died.
We strongly condemn the criminal practices
perpetrated by terrorists. We call on States to step up
their efforts to combat this activity, to streamline the
exchange of relevant information, and to cooperate
in identifying channels for the financing of terrorist
activities. It is well known that individuals and
organizations involved in providing financial support
for terrorists, including through human trafficking, are
subject to Security Council sanctions.
The crimes of ISIS are part of a global problem. Such
crimes are also committed by Boko Haram, the Lord’s
Resistance Army and other terrorist organizations and
groups. They occur in situations of armed conflict
in various parts of the world. International human
trafficking is managed by well-organized criminal
groups. Every year, hundreds of thousands of people,
having been lured by deceit, sold or forced or subjected
to other violence, fall into the grip of sexual or economic
exploitation and become merchandise that generates
multimillion dollar profits.

15-4314613/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

Harsh measures are needed against the criminal
groups that organize or intermediate illicit transactions
with live merchandise. Solely by adopting a
comprehensive approach — and not merely, for example,
a more strict migration policy — can we achieve an
effective outcome in combating human trafficking. We
advocate strengthening the role of the United Nations
and its Office on Drugs and Crime in pooling the efforts
of the international and national bodies involved in the
work on eradicating modern slavery. We welcome the
work in this area. Given the division of labour within
the United Nations, the Security Council can make an
important contribution in combating human trafficking
perpetrated by terrorists and in the course of armed
conflict. That is particularly relevant when the scale
and urgency of the situation threaten the international
peace and security.
We believe that an important guide for our
work in this area remains the Global Plan of Action
againstTrafficking in Persons, adopted in General
Assembly resolution 64/293. We are convinced that its
implementation would help raise awareness of this issue
around the world and mark a significant improvement in
the cooperation of all stakeholders. Human trafficking
in persons, including its most horrific forms in regions
under terrorist control, can be eliminated only through
the coordinated efforts of all States and specialized
international organizations and by making full use of
the existing international legal framework.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of this
open meeting. I wish to thank all the briefers for their
statements.
In areas of armed conflict, women and children are
always vulnerable and subject to all kinds of violence,
harm and isolation. The international community is
urgently called on to provide them with assistance.
Recently, terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, are carrying
out criminal activities, such as human trafficking in
the Middle East and Africa, further jeopardizing the
rights and interests of women and children, and leading
to the deterioration of their living environment. The
international community should closely coordinate and
carry out joint efforts to step up the protection of women
and children in conflicts. I should like to highlight the
following points.

14/26

16/12/2015

First, the sovereignty of the countries involved
should be respected and their role should be leveraged.
The countries involved have the primary responsibility
to protect women and children in their countries
and to combat human trafficking. The international
community should, on the basis of respecting the
sovereignty of countries involved, provide constructive
support and assist the countries involved in stepping up
their capacity-building in counter-terrorism and border
control so as to maintain stability and tranquillity in the
country and the region.
Secondly, an integrated approach should be taken
to addressing both the symptoms and the root causes.
The international community should strengthen
its cooperation in effectively combating criminal
activities, such as human trafficking, and in providing
comprehensive security guarantees and humanitarian
assistance to women and children in conflict areas. It
should also vigorously advance political processes and
promote national reconciliation and resolve differences
through dialogue and consultation so as to eradicate
the root causes of armed conflicts and create a stable
external environment for the protection of women and
children.
Thirdly, priority should be given to further counterterrorism efforts. Terrorism is a grave security threat
to the international community. Human trafficking has
become a source of financing for terrorist organizations.
The international community should fully implement
the Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions, strengthen
coordination and cooperation to form synergy in
combating terrorism, fully cut off the financing
channels of terrorist organizations and stop the crossborder movements of terrorists, and resolutely combat
any terrorist and criminal activities that challenge the
foundation of human civilization.
Fourthly, we should strengthen cooperation to
create synergy among various mechanisms. The
United Nations, the Security Council, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UN-Women
should leverage their strengths and enhance their
coordination, based on their respective mandates, so as
to form international synergy in combatting criminal
activities, including human trafficking, and provide
comprehensive protection for the rights of women and
children in conflicts.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We want to thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

this seminal briefing and for the concept note that you
provided to guide our deliberations. We want to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for setting the
tone for our debate this afternoon. Our appreciation also
goes to Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, and Mr. Grono for
sharing their perspectives on an issue of grave concern
and considerable contemporary significance.
The testimony of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha is
heartrending, to say the least. It is better imagined than
experienced. We appreciate her courage.
In an increasingly evil international environment,
conflict situations expose civilians to very grave risks.
Human trafficking and sexual exploitation are some of
those risks. Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, operating with
total disregard for international humanitarian law, have
brazenly introduced a new dimension to trafficking in
persons and the sexual exploitation of women and girls
in conflict situations. Those groups have committed
outrageous horrifying acts of depravity that constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The Nigerian State assures the international
community of its unwavering determination to contain,
degrade and defeat Boko Haram with the support of our
contiguous neighbours: Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Benin. Indeed, the military establishment has rescued
a significant number of women and girls held hostage
by Boko Haram and will not rest on its laurels. We are
assured that all hostages will ultimately be rescued.
In very broad terms, eradicating human trafficking
and other forms of modern day slavery is beyond the
capacity of any single State. It requires concerted
international action by a broad range of stakeholders,
including nation States, international organizations,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and
community leaders. We appreciate the efforts of
humanitarian actors that are undertaking advocacy
campaigns to publicize the risks of trafficking, the
tactics employed to coerce and traffick victims, and
what victims could do to protect themselves.
In addition to taking preventive measures, States
must engage in the protection of victims. The Palermo
Protocol specifically requires States to protect the
human rights of victims and to provide measures for the
physical, psychological and social recovery of victims
of trafficking. Laws and procedures that protect
victims will encourage them to come forward, as Nadia

S/PV.7585

has done today, and testify against traffickers and their
organizations.
Protection is also an integral part of the process of
rehabilitation and the reintegration of the victims. In
this connection, there is a need to support the laudable
work of various stakeholders, including national and
international non-governmental organizations, striving
to provide rehabilitation for victims of trafficking.
The fight against human trafficking is a national
priority for Nigeria. The National Agency for the
Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons, which was
established in 2003 — I think Nigeria was one of the
first States in the world to establish an organization
of that nature — is the principal institution charged
with the responsibility of leading this fight. Since its
inception, the Agency has provided an effective and
comprehensive legal and institutional framework for
the prohibition, prevention, detection, persecution
and punishment of crimes of human trafficking. The
Agency, with the active collaboration of international
partners, has made very significant contributions to the
fight against human trafficking.
Some of the achievements of the Agency include
securing convictions against human traffickers and
facilitating the rescue and reintegration of trafficked
persons. In recognition of the new trends in human
trafficking and the need to further strengthen the
institutional framework. The Trafficking in Persons
Prohibition, Enforcement and Administration Act 2015
was enacted by the legislature. That underscores the
unwavering commitment of the Nigerian Government
to the fight against human trafficking.
We believe the Security Council, for its part, should
play a more central role in the global fight against
human trafficking. One way to achieve this would be
for the Council to specify the trafficking in persons in
the context of conflicts as a stand-alone thematic issue
on its agenda. I believe you mentioned this, Madam
President, at lunch this afternoon. The Council should
also strengthen and enhance its engagement with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Organization for Migration and other
relevant actors with experience in counter-trafficking
activities. Regular briefings by those agencies would
permit the Council to stay abreast of developments in
conflict zones as they concern trafficking in persons.
The Council should also consider expanding
the protection of civilians mandate of peacekeeping

15-4314615/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

missions to include a counter-trafficking dimension.
That could be particularly helpful in conflict
situations where displaced persons are at great risk of
being trafficked. That would, of course, involve the
specialized training of peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel to work with victims and potential victims
of trafficking. In post-conflict situations, initiatives
aimed at the rehabilitation of victims should be
integrated into United Nations-led transitional justice
and accountability processes.
The link between human trafficking and
international peace and security is evident from what
I have heard today, and what needs to be done to
combat human trafficking is clear. States must meet
their obligations under the Palermo Protocol. The
Security Council must demonstrate greater leadership.
Indeed, all hands must be on deck. On our part, we
remain committed to collaborating with all actors at
the national, regional and international levels in our
common fight against trafficking in human persons.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Normally at these
meetings, it is traditional to thank the briefers for their
statements, and I do so very strongly. I particularly
want to thank Nadia Taha for her testimony before the
Council today. I believe that it is hard to overestimate
the extent of the impact when somebody who has
suffered what she has suffered has the bravery to share
her experiences with us today. It may seem strange to
us sitting in a Chamber like this, which is so formal, to
hear something brought so directly before us.
Her bravery inspires us to take the kind of action
that Ms. Taha has been calling for and the discussion that
has taken place around this table today. Specifically,
with regard to Daesh, she said that we need to get rid
of it completely. Of course, my Government agrees
with that, and I believe that everybody and every
Government represented around this table agrees. The
brutality and the inhumanity of Daesh truly disgust us.
We heard today one story — Ms. Taha’s story — of
such inhumanity, and it is extraordinary for us to hear
it in such a direct manner, sitting in this Chamber, but
what is even more shocking is that hers is not the only
story. There are countless more stories of abduction,
rape, forced marriage, forced conversion and slavery.
Sadly, Daesh is not alone in its practice of human
trafficking. It is prevalent throughout the world, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Afghanistan
and from Burma to Somalia. The International Labour

16/26

16/12/2015

Organization estimates that 21 million people are
the victims of trafficking, forced labour and modern
slavery. Others studies put the number at 35 million.
That figure represents half the number of the population
of my country. It simply cannot continue.
I therefore welcome the leadership shown by
Ambassador Power in bringing this issue to the Council’s
attention, and I think that there are three ways in which
we should be looking at tackling that scourge. First, the
international community needs to show leadership to
give that issue the priority that it deserves, which is
what is happening here today. Secondly, we need to do
more to support at-risk groups, particularly minority
groups that are vulnerable to trafficking. Thirdly, the
Council needs to do all it can to end the instability and
insecurity that allow trafficking to thrive.
Through the Sustainable Development Goals, as
the Deputy Secretary-General has just reminded us,
the international community made an unambiguous
pledge to take immediate and effective measures to
eradicate forced labour and end modern slavery and
human trafficking. We now need to turn that goal into
a reality. To do that, every member of the international
community needs to show political leadership in
making this issue a priority. That is my first point. That
will require confronting hard truths. In my country,
the United Kingdom, there are up to 13,000 people
in modern slavery. That is the United Kingdom. The
issue is not confined to groups such as Daesh or Boko
Haram, but in recognizing our own problems, we can all
show the leadership needed to take action. Earlier this
year, the United Kingdom Parliament passed a modern
slavery act. It gives our law enforcement authority
improved tools to tackle that scourge. It ensures that
perpetrators can receive a maximum sentence of life
imprisonment and, crucially, it enhances the support
and protection provided to the victims of slavery.
Legislation is only part of the answer. We also need
to look to international organizations, businesses and
civil society for leadership. The United Kingdom is
working with the European Union, the Commonwealth,
the Santa Marta Group and the United Nations to
establish a global consensus on this issue. That means
greater coordination of effort, but also requires ensuring
that those organizations are in no way connected to
the practices associated with trafficking. That means
United Nations peacekeepers strictly complying with
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse; international financial institutions completing

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7585

thorough due diligence in granting project funding
to avoid inadvertently supporting forced labour; and
corporations holding themselves accountable through
transparency in their supply chain.

for their briefings. And I pay tribute to Nadia in the
same spirit as others have today. Her testimony is
very confronting because of its reality, but it is also
confronting to us in our reality in the Council.

With regard to my second point — support for at-risk
groups — we have heard today of the disproportionate
impact that trafficking has on certain groups, whether
women and girls or members of minority communities;
whether Christian, Muslim, Mandaean, Yazidi or any
other faith. It is therefore incumbent on all Governments
to ensure that minority groups are protected, and it is
incumbent on all Council members to assist them in
their efforts.

When I came to this place 35 years ago, we spent
a lot of time elaborating and increasing the intricate
array of documents to protect human rights. Thirty-five
years later, we are dealing with the reality that slavery
is alive, well and living in our world. We have made
some progress in normative instruments, and we have
gone backwards in our practices. That is the horrible
reality that we are facing today. We therefore thank the
United States for bringing the Council’s attention to
this issue. We thank Nadia for her bravery in having
shared with us, in harrowing detail, the horrors that
have been visited upon her, her family and her people.
We are reminded that similar treatment has been meted
out by Boko Haram and to the women caught up in the
conflicts in South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and elsewhere.

The United Kingdom is supporting the Government
of Iraq’s efforts to protect all minorities, promote
human rights and reassert the rule of law. Through our
development assistance, we are funding activities to
protect vulnerable civilians, including through legal
assistance and support groups for women. We are also
working around the world to combat violence against
women and girls, which is so often a consequence
of trafficking. The United Kingdom is funding
organizations that offer care to survivors. We are
combating impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence
by supporting cases brought before national courts,
and we are funding programmes that focus on attitude
changes to prevent violence against women and girls.
That includes training 800 Peshmerga forces on how
to respond sensitively to victims of sexual violence in
the fight against Daesh. I hope that all other Council
members will do what they can to support those types
of efforts.
Let me close with my third point. The most effective
way for the Security Council to prevent the gross abuses
of human rights about which we have heard today is by
ensuring stability and security. That means taking back
the territory held by Daesh. It means ensuring that there
is a political solution to the Syrian crisis, and it means
using all of the Council’s conflict-prevention tools to
prevent future instability. Ultimately, as Mr. Grono
has just reminded us, it is about addressing the root
causes of trafficking, supporting normative changes so
that that behaviour is no longer tolerated, governance
is inclusive and the plurality of religions, cultures and
perspectives are not just tolerated but embraced and
celebrated.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Grono

We share the revulsion at the violations perpetrated
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant’s (ISIL)
against thousands of Yazidis, in particular women and
children, and the institution of what is apparently a
programme of mass slavery. As Nadia has reminded
us, some women and girls are simply given away
as gifts. What is particularly concerning about this
issue is that it can be self-perpetuating. Trafficking
exacerbates conflict and conflict exacerbates
trafficking. Trafficking, as we have heard, comes in
many forms and has many purposes. It is also prevalent
in the Western world. It often has a gender dimension,
disproportionately affecting women as well as children.
Trafficked victims are used as combatants and sex
slaves, forced into marriage, or used as forced labour
on land and at sea. People become chattel and a source
of revenue that funds conflict or terrorism.
We recognize the difficulty of dealing effectively
with this phenomenon, particularly in the context
of conflicts that are themselves intractable and
deeply resistant to international intervention. This is
particularly so in areas where the rule of the State is
ineffective, as is the case in the worst instances we
have heard today. However, it is a phenomenon that
we must address, including through more effective
conflict prevention. Investigation and accountability
are paramount. Acts associated with trafficking,
including those committed by ISIL, may constitute
crimes under the Rome Statute of the International

15-4314617/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

Criminal Court. Such acts can amount to crimes against
humanity, genocide or war crimes. Investigation and
accountability measures should be taken at both the
domestic and international levels, and there should
be an increased readiness to work together when
trafficking crosses borders. Member States must also
ensure that appropriate services are in place to address
both physical and psychological trauma experienced by
victims and their families.
Like others, we urge States to join the Palermo
Protocol, which sets out a comprehensive framework
to prevent and address trafficking in persons. We also
encourage support for political-level initiatives like
the recently established International Parliamentary
Coalition for Victims of Sexual Slavery. New Zealand
Member of Parliament Melissa Lee is one of the five
founding members of that initiative. Such initiatives
send a powerful message to perpetrators and victims
that there is political attention on and condemnation of
such acts.
We wish to acknowledge the value of civil
society actors, who play a vital role in disseminating
information to populations about their human rights
and who engage with Governments on the ground. As
others have said, we need to ensure that the United
Nations itself does not fuel trafficking in persons. Our
presence should provide an assurance of protection,
and our ability to do that is vital to the success of our
operations. We support the continued implementation
of the Human Rights Up Front initiative, the United
Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, and the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance approach to sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Finally, we believe that there is scope to explore
how the Council can better address this issue in the
context of improved situational awareness and the
protection of civilians. The Council should continue to
monitor this issue, acknowledge it as an increasingly
important dimension of conflict, and be ready to take
action to prevent it when it is possible to do so.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): First, we would like to thank
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
Our special gratitude goes to Nadia Taha. We praise
Nadia for her courage and strength in sharing with us
a painful experience. Nadia’s testimony and plea raise
the fundamental issue of the victims of trafficking and
enslavement, and how to repair the immense injustice
to which they were subjected.

18/26

16/12/2015

We thank the United States presidency for
organizing this debate, an initiative that expresses
the need to strengthen collective awareness of the
gravity of this phenomenon, which arises from conflict
situations — although not exclusively, it should
be stressed — and to step up efforts, both legal and
operational, to counter trafficking in persons, their
exploitation and enslavement.
It is well known that, as a result of ongoing conflicts
in Africa and the Middle East, but also of situations not
derived from conflicts, modern slavery has attained a
new and disturbing dimension. Thousands of people
have been enslaved by terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram,
and Al-Shabaab in central Africa and elsewhere, while
millions of displaced persons and refugees are easy
prey to human traffickers. A situation has emerged in
which States are totally unable to protect their citizens
from egregious violations of their basic human rights;
they are trafficked, sold like cattle and enslaved in a
life of misery and horror.
The idealistic responsibility to protect agenda has
become irrelevant in the face of crimes committed
against vulnerable people caught in the middle of
horrendous conflicts. The estimated number of people
living in slavery worldwide is staggering, making
a mockery of the general and universal prohibition
against that repugnant form of human exploitation. The
situation calls for strengthened global efforts against
human trafficking and slavery, which, when taking
into account the organic connection between the two,
parallels the fight against terrorism.
It is well documented that ISIL promotes slavery
in the regions under its control in Syria and in Iraq.
Its actions against the Yazidis, Christians and
other minorities are consummate examples of the
most backward obscurantism and surely meet the
requirements to be deemed crimes against humanity
and even genocide. Boko Haram has been pursuing
despicable actions, including kidnapping women and
girls for enslavement and sexual exploitation, forcibly
recruiting children as soldiers and feeding sexual
exploitation markets. Like ISIL’s, the actions of Boko
Haram may qualify as crimes against humanity, and
call for an energetic response from national authorities
to uphold their responsibility to protect their citizens.
Sexual violence against women, girls, boys and men is
a common war tactic used by all terrorist organizations.
By inflicting unbearable humiliation and destroying

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

their sense of humanity, terrorists seek to obtain total
compliance from their victims and to make them
accomplices to their heinous crimes.
The central issue in combating such trends is
a solid common framework of measures to counter
trafficking in persons. The most outstanding tool is
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, which provide a legal and operational
framework for international cooperation. The recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) contains provisions
for a commitment on the part of United Nations Member
States to ending modern slavery and human trafficking.
The Security Council recently authorized European
countries to use force to disrupt human trafficking
and migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean. Such
instances demonstrate the international community’s
commitment to ending to this modern-day scourge,
which is not an outdated abomination but a shameful
stain on the contemporary human conscience.
The Security Council must, as it is doing today
through this debate and the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, continue to send a
strong message by qualifying human trafficking
and ensuing enslavement as war crimes and crimes
against humanity and, in so doing, enlarging the
jurisdiction covering this type of crime. Additionally,
the entire United Nations system should be mobilized
and coordinate efforts to tackle modern slavery in
conflict situations. The approach adopted so far in
dealing with conflict situations has been to emphasize
immediate, life-saving humanitarian assistance over
efforts to counter trafficking in persons. However,
with the escalation of this phenomenon increasingly
affecting the lives of vulnerable children, women and
men, it has become imperative to consider this issue
a matter related to international peace and security, in
particular — as the Security Council points out in the
presidential statement adopted today — since trafficking
in persons undermines the rule of law and contributes
to other forms of transnational organized crime, which
can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity.
In conclusion, the international community must
step up its collective efforts to combat and destroy
the terrorist groups, strengthen the international legal
framework related to the fight against human trafficking,
stress the critical importance of States implementing

S/PV.7585

the relevant Security Council resolutions, and develop
international cooperation to eradicate poverty and
promote economic opportunities as a means to prevent
and eradicate the expansion of this heinous practice.
While important efforts are being pursued to
break up terrorist organizations such as ISIL or Boko
Haram, it is critical that we unite our efforts to protect
vulnerable populations from trafficking, enslavement
and exploitation — the greatest civilizational step
backwards that the contemporary world is experiencing
in terms of respect for human rights and the dignity of
the human being.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the delegation of the United States
of America for this initiative and for having convened
this very important meeting. I also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC); and Mr. Nick Grono,
Chief Executive Officer of the Freedom Fund, for
their briefings. We would also like to thank Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha for participating in this debate.
We thank her for her courage in speaking about her
personal tragedy and the tragedy being experienced by
the Yazidi community at the hands of the despicable
criminals of Daesh — which is neither an “Islamic
State” or any other kind of State: it is merely a band
of criminals, which the international community must
overcome.
Undeniably, combating trafficking in persons has
always been something that has enjoyed the attention
of the international community because trafficking
undermines the dignity of human beings and their
fundamental rights and freedoms. Recently, however,
terrorist groups have been carrying out the worst forms of
modern slavery — as we heard today, for example. Such
terrorist groups are commiting crimes systematically
and on a large scale against various ethnic groups and
religions. That means that the international community
must show leadership and deal effectively with this
issue. Moreover, we must take into consideration the
fact that such acts fuel inter-communal and inter-ethnic
conflict and serve to reinforce stereotypes and fuel the
cycle of violence.
Terrorist groups such as the criminals of Daesh,
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army are
deliberately abducting women and children, who are
then forced to serve as human shields and suicide

15-4314619/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

bombers or forced into sexual slavery or forced labour.
Such acts committed during armed conflict fall under
the international definition of trafficking in persons, as
established by the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. Furthermore, when
carried out in war zones, they can constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, which are punishable
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Large-scale trafficking in persons by terrorist
groups is of major importance, and the Security Council
must therefore rise to the challenge, especially given
the fact that such acts are usually committed in areas
that are not under State control. Jordan supports today’s
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, the first of its
kind, which should enable us to meet the challenge
posed by trafficking in persons by terrorist groups.
Jordan believes that there is a need to step up our
efforts to combat trafficking in persons, in particular
trafficking committed by terrorist groups. That requires
efforts at both the regional and international levels.
On the national level, States should expand
national awareness-raising campaigns concerning the
victims of trafficking and mass displacement during
armed conflict, including through education and social
media. All segments of society need to be informed
about the legal repercussions of such acts. It is also
very important for States to adopt pertinent legislation
and undertake the necessary legal and administrative
reforms in order to ensure that the perpetrators of such
crimes are brought to justice, including by transferring
them to countries with jurisdiction or to specialized
international criminal tribunals. Similarly, States
should provide medical and psychological assistance
and establish programmes to reintegrate people into
their societies, in particular in the case of persons who
become refugees as a result of armed conflict.
At the international level, there is a need for
cooperation to boost the capacity of States that require
technical, material and logistical support, in particular
fragile States that are unable to protect the victims of
trafficking. That must be done through cooperation
with the United Nations system and its specialized
agencies, including, among others, UNODC, UNICEF
and the International Labour Organization. All bodies
need to work in this area. We should also strengthen the
role played by peacekeepers, who must be provided with
the necessary resources to assist victims of trafficking
by terrorist groups. Specialized advisers should also be
appointed.

20/26

16/12/2015

In the context of combating impunity, we believe
it is be very important that the Secretary-General
submit a report that includes proposals to implement
strategies and mechanisms to meet the challenges
posed by trafficking in persons committed by terrorist
groups, who do not respect the rules of international
law or human rights. That will enable us to implement
action plans to combat trafficking in persons, including
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Along the same lines, we should
support the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, which should be given the necessary
legal and other assistance, along with the appropriate
United Nations agencies and bodies.
Trafficking in persons is a crime under Jordanian
law. In addition, the Kingdom of Jordan has ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. Jordanian officials are seriously
addressing the fight against trafficking in persons,
with a view to providing assistance and health care
to victims in order that they can rebuild their lives. In
cooperation with non-governmental organizations and
United Nations specialized agencies, Jordan has set up
a health-care centre for Syrian refugees. In addition,
in collaboration with UNICEF, we have established an
educational centre for children, where they are also
provided psychological and social services.
In conclusion, Jordan will continue to make further
efforts to combat the crime of trafficking in persons
committed by terrorist groups. We are prepared
to cooperate with all national and international
organizations to combat this scourge and to address its
root causes in order to prevent it.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join previous speakers in
expressing our appreciation to you, Madam President,
and to the United States delegation for convening this
meeting, which my delegation supports. The initiative
is timely and appropriate in seeking to shine a light on
the heinous practice of human trafficking, increasingly
perpetrated by violent extremist groups such as Daesh,
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, among
others.
The fact that such deplorable acts occur increasingly
frequently in conflict situations constitutes a clear and
present threat to international peace and security. As
such, it merits closer scrutiny and concerted action not
only by the Security Council but by the United Nations

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

system and, more generally, by the international
community. In that connection, I would like to thank
today’s briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, Mr. Yury Fedotov and Mr. Nick Grono for
their invaluable insights and perspectives, which have
greatly enriched our discussions. I have also listened
intently to Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha’s presentation
and am humbled by her grace, courage and perseverance
in the face of such adversity. My delegation and I were
deeply moved by her account of her experiences and
suffering, which I am sure holds true for all the victims.
We greatly appreciate her presence here today.
Malaysia would like to emphasize its complete
condemnation of every act of intolerance, intimidation
or violence in situations of armed conflict perpetrated
by terrorists and violent extremist groups, particularly
acts of human trafficking in which victims are
subjected to slavery, torture and even murder. We
unequivocally reject any connection that such groups as
Daesh and Boko Haram seek to establish between such
heinous practices and the precepts of Islam, which is a
religion founded on peace and the dignity of the human
person, whether woman, man or child. On that note,
Malaysia is pleased to join the Council’s consensus
in welcoming the adoption of today’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25. We believe the presidential
statement represents a concrete first step on the part of
the Council in recognizing the international peace and
security dimension of human trafficking, while at the
same time underscoring the need to take coordinated,
sustained and decisive action against its perpetrators.
It also sits well with the Council’s ongoing efforts to
better coordinate the implementation of its own policies
and positions in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism. While we emphasize the centrality and
importance of respect for and adherence to the precepts
of international human rights and humanitarian law in
that regard, another equally key component is improved
integration and coordination of efforts undertaken
within the framework of international criminal law,
specifically the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocols.
In responding to the call in the concept note for
concrete, action-oriented discussion, I would like to
share the following three proposals.
With a view to addressing the scourge of human
trafficking in a comprehensive and holistic manner, we

S/PV.7585

stress the importance of putting in place reintegration
activities and programmes, especially for women and
children who have been freed, not only to protect
them from re-victimization and stigmatization,
but also to enable them to believe that there is hope
after victimhood. While mindful of the context of
conflict in which the kind of human trafficking we are
discussing today occurs, we would like to stress how
important it is that States subscribe to and implement
instruments such as the Palermo Protocols, which
include provisions on measures aimed at achieving the
physical, psychological and social recovery of victims
of human trafficking.
Improving coordination with existing initiatives,
for example, means introducing the outcomes and
visions outlined in the presidential statement into the
work of the Council’s Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, which, based on resolution
2225 (2015), is also paying greater attention to the
issue of the abduction and kidnapping of children in
conflict situations. Further linkages could be made
with the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1999 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
other relevant sanctions committees.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that trafficking in
persons poses a real threat to many countries, not just
those in conflict situations. Indeed, due to its location
and relative political and economic stability, Malaysia
has had to contend with the issue for quite some time
now. It is a multifaceted problem that requires extensive
coordination and cooperation from all sides, including
Governments, multilateral partners, civil society and
other relevant interlocutors. Given the complexity and
cross-cutting nature of human trafficking and related
issues, political will at the national, regional and
international levels is a major factor in determining
whether tangible and sustained results and improvement
can be achieved. In that regard, the Council is well placed
to continue making strong, unified pronouncements
backed up by equally effective policy decisions and
measures that unequivocally demand accountability
and deny impunity for perpetrators.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United States for convening this
meeting. We are also grateful for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Nick Grono, Director of the

15-4314621/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

Freedom Fund, as well as for the invaluable testimony
of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha. We commend the
representatives of civil society who are with us today
and thank them for their contribution to this meeting.
The presidential statement we adopted today
(S/PRST/2015/25) sends a united message from the
Council on the need to address human trafficking in
conflict situations. We appreciate the text’s emphasis
on the complementarity that should exist within the
United Nations system.
Millions of people worldwide are victims of
trafficking, and in one way or another every State is
affected by this scourge. Reporting, exposing and
prosecuting this crime is complicated in situations
of armed conflict owing to States’ inability to
control their own territory and protect their civilian
population. Currently this activity, from which criminal
organizations have traditionally benefited, has been
aggravated by the emergence of terrorist and armed
groups that profit from trafficking in persons in order
to sustain their illegal activities. Denouncing such
activities is not enough; it requires collective action.
The abduction, exploitation and trafficking of
persons by terrorists and armed groups is being used
not only for economic purposes but, far more seriously,
as a strategy for sowing terror among those who do not
share their ideas and aims. The situation is aggravated
by the incidence of gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation, whose victims are mostly women and
children — a phenomenon experienced by vulnerable
populations in a number of conflict situations that the
Council is considering. The situation of the Yazidi
people is particularly serious, due to the sectarian
persecution they have suffered over the past decade
and that they are enduring today as victims of terrorist
groups. It is urgent that we improve the mechanisms
for protecting such populations, take concrete steps
to prevent abductions, and prosecute the perpetrators
of human trafficking and everyone involved in it.
In that regard, we urge the Council to ensure that
implementation of resolution 2225 (2015) provides
measures for preventing the abduction of children in
situations of conflict.
Improving medical and psychological support to
victims of trafficking is also an urgent matter. We need
cultural efforts that change existing perceptions of
women and girls who have been abducted and abused
so they can reintegrate into their communities and the

22/26

16/12/2015

cycle of exclusion is not perpetuated. The actions taken
should avoid making victims of these people a second
time and should protect their dignity and rights. We
must strengthen capacities to prevent and act in crisis
and post-conflict situations. This type of illicit activity
should be more closely investigated. We believe it is
important to expand reports in the United Nations
system on this subject in order to take appropriate
measures for protecting civilian populations. It is also
vital that the Organization’s peacekeeping operations
be able to expand their work on protecting civilians
in this area. That will require that peacekeepers and
civilian personnel be better trained in order to enable
them to identify such illicit activity and improve the
protection of vulnerable populations and victims.
Unless States provide the impetus for the political,
economic and social transformations needed to combat
the factors that increase the vulnerability of victims,
including, among others, inequality, poverty, lack of
information, and discrimination at all levels, we will not
see the structural changes that will prevent trafficking
and lead to punishment for the perpetrators.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela is grateful for
the presence and briefings of Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC); Mr. Nick Grono, Chief Executive Officer of
the Freedom Fund; and, especially, Ms. Nadia Murad
Basee Taha, whose statement, I dare say, expresses
the silenced voices of thousands of women and girls
who even today are the victims of such despicable and
abominable acts.
Human trafficking is a transborder crime that
spares no country or region of the world. The different
causes and motivations that favour that crime have been
exacerbated in recent years as a result of situations
of armed conflict in various parts of the planet,
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa. The
mass displacements of civilian populations affected
by situations of armed conflict increase people’s
vulnerability to this reprehensible crime, especially
that of women, girls, boys and adolescents. In addition,
it has been observed that human trafficking is being
used by extremist groups and terrorists as part of their
strategy for financing their criminal activities.
According to the 2014 Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons, published by UNODC, according to

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

information compiled in the course of the preparation
of the report, between 2011 and 2013 eight countries
around the world reported human trafficking victims
from Syria, while it was recognized that prior to
2011, when the conflict in that country began, it was
extremely rare to find Syrian victims of that crime.
From that we should be able to conclude
that, unfortunately, the training, outfitting and
encouragement of non-State actors whose actions are
based in violent extremism aimed at dismantling States
for politically motivated reasons serve to promote the
activities of groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front and the Army of
Conquest. As such, they lead to the perpetration of
a range of atrocities, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, especially aimed at those most vulnerable,
such as women and children.
In that regard, we again reiterate our call to all
actors of the international community to fully respect
the provisions of international law and the resolutions
of the Security Council concerning the prohibition
of supplying weapons and financial and logistical
support to such armed groups, in order for there to be
an effective decrease in the capacity of those non-State
actors, and therefore a decline in the likelihood of
human trafficking and the exploitation of populations
at risk.
The grave humanitarian situation of the refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants who are the
product of the tragedy of war, political destabilization,
poverty, terrorism and the generalized violence that is
lashing so many regions of Africa and the Middle East
makes them potential victims of human trafficking.
Another aspect that, in our view, furthers the activities
of criminal groups that profit from human trafficking,
concerns increasingly restrictive and exclusive
immigration policies and the lack of channels for
regulated migration and family reunification, as well
as the lack of regulated access to the labour markets for
asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. As Nadia asked
the international community: please do not close the
doors to migrants fleeing the the wars besetting various
countries in Africa and the Middle East. Migrants
fleeing violence are not the cause of terrorism, as some
politicians think, but rather the result of this despicable
political and military practice.
While we welcome the initiative of convening
this debate in the Security Council, we nonetheless

S/PV.7585

believe that efforts aimed at the effective prevention
and eradication of this crime require broad, democratic
spaces that ensure the full participation of all Member
States, in order to achieve coordination and synergy
across all the relevant United Nations agencies with
expertise in this area, along with the various regional
and subregional mechanisms.
We consider it of particular importance to help
States in situations of conflict and post-conflict to
strengthen their institutional capacities in order to fulfil
their legal commitments and obligations to prevent and
combat human trafficking. In that regard, we recognize
the important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Inter-agency Coordinating Group
against Trafficking Persons in fostering coordination
and cooperation in the global fight to combat human
trafficking, as well as that of other entities in the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations in line with their respective mandates.
Finally, Venezuela reiterates its commitment to meet
its obligations under the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons
and other international legal instruments concerning
this issue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.
Let me join others in thanking our guest
briefers — Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Executive Director Fedotov and Mr. Grono — both for
their briefings and for their efforts in the real world to
combat human trafficking.
Nadia, I cannot imagine how painful it must be
every time you are asked to recount your experience.
No human being should be forced to endure what you
and your family have gone through — ever. Your being
here and speaking so bravely to all of us is a testament
to your resilience and your dignity, and is of course the
most powerful rejection of what the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) stands for.
We have been here now for two hours and 15
minutes. It is worth remembering that, in that time,
women and kids and others are living in circumstances
just like those that Nadia have described. As we sit
here, they are being terrorized. And they are dreaming
of their escape, desperate to get out but trapped by

15-4314623/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

brute force and nothing more. We have been talking
about ISIL in the Security Council since at least early
2014. But Nadia, you have humanized the stakes in
a way that I think has been extremely important for
people to hear. I do not think that anyone who was able
to hear you will ever forget what they heard and what
you have been through. We are truly in awe of your
courage. I also agree with the comment that was just
made that, at a time when refugee admissions and the
flight of individuals is being politicized and refugees
are being caricatured in different ways, your experience
and your testimony is a powerful rebuke to those who
would caricature this whole population, when people
are fleeing for their lives, fleeing terror and conflict
and sexual violence. We should never forget that.
Today we as a Council are meeting for the first time
on the issue of human trafficking in conflict. Historic
as this is, it is a bit baffling that the Council has not
taken on this issue before. We have up to now met on
trafficking in arms, oil, antiquities, natural resources
and wildlife, but this was our first meeting on the
trafficking in human beings. Almost everywhere we see
conflict in the world, as others have said, we see human
trafficking. Human trafficking thrives in conflict, and
conflict is exacerbated by human trafficking.
It is no coincidence that the illicit trade in weapons,
drugs, stolen antiquities and other illegal goods tend to
follow routes similar to those used by human traffickers
and be carried out by the same criminal networks.
These illicit activities sustain armed groups, terrorists
and criminal networks and threaten international peace
and security. In addition, traffickers often force their
own victims to commit crimes, such as participating
in terrorist acts, transporting illegal weapons and
producing illegal drugs, and these crimes themselves,
of course, further undermine our shared security.
We have seen how the Governments, armed groups
and terrorists that treat people as property often show
similar disdain for the rules and norms that ensure
our shared security. Yet, despite persistent efforts to
eradicate trafficking in persons by the United Nations
and other international bodies, Governments and civilsociety groups, this crime persists. The statistics, as
others have noted, are staggering. According to the
International Labour Organization, at least 20 million
people worldwide are victims of forced labour. An
estimated 5.5 million of them are children — 5.5 million
children. Making matters worse, as Mr. Grono
observed, the taboo against slavery is being actively and

24/26

16/12/2015

willfully challenged by ISIL and Boko Haram, which
do not just carry out widespread human trafficking;
they brag about it on social media and in propaganda
materials. ISIL distributes women and girls to fighters
as spoils of war, systematically rapes them and sells
them in markets like cattle. Boys as young as 4 years
old are forced into cub training camps, where they are
reportedly given dolls on which to practice beheadings.
It is barbaric.
ISIL has even gone so far as to issue guidelines
to its followers on how to treat their slaves, providing
a twisted justification for the most depraved acts.
The guidelines state: “It is permissible to buy, sell or
give as a gift female captives and slaves, for they are
merely property which can be disposed of”. And they
tell followers, “It is permissible to have intercourse
with a female slave who has not reached puberty”. In
other words, raping female slaves is authorized; it is
acceptable; it is encouraged. When we try to describe
evil like this, we find ourselves groping for language;
words fail us. We are amazed that Nadia was able to
speak about the unspeakable and find words, and we
thank her for that.
The stories of Boko Haram’s depravity are also
shocking. On 2 October, the group reportedly forced
four girls and a boy to blow themselves up in the
Nigerian city of Maiduguri. Three of them attacked
a mosque during evening prayers. Fifteen people,
including these kids, were killed, and more than 35
were injured. Witnesses estimated that the bombers
were as young as 9 years old.
Martha, age 14, was abducted by Boko Haram along
with her two sisters in September 2014. She was taken
to one of the group’s camps, and she later told a reporter,
“They told me not to walk around outside, and when I
did they would beat me. They told me not to talk, and I
would talk, so they would beat me. They told me not to
sing, I would sing, and they would beat me”. She was
forced to convert to Islam, assigned a new name and
married against her will to a fighter. Martha said she
was forced to carry extra ammunition for Boko Haram
fighters on two of their operations. “They wanted me to
kill people,” she said, “but I could never bring myself
to kill anyone”. She said, “Boko Haram members tried
to force my sister to kill an old man. When she refused,
they shot her instead.” One night, Martha and two of
the girls escaped into the bush. “I am still struggling
with the memories”, she said.

15-43146

16/12/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

For groups such as ISIL and Boko Haram, slavery
has become one of their most versatile weapons of
war, used to instil fear, to inflict suffering, to recruit
followers, reward fighters, convert people of other
faiths, reward combatants and generate revenue, and
they are learning from one another’s worst practices. It
is a grotesque race to the bottom.
So what can we, and by we I mean all States Members
of the United Nations, all civilized communities, what
can we do to root out this scourge? Of course, we must
condemn these file crimes and those who commit them,
and we must continue to document the horrors, so that
one day those responsible can be held accountable. We
must also commit ourselves to ending the conflicts that
provide an ideal climate for human traffickers, and of
course we must commit ourselves to eradicating the
groups that use human trafficking as a weapon of war.
To that end, under President Obama’s leadership,
the United States has organized a coalition of 65
countries to degrade and destroy ISIL and spurred
efforts in the Security Council to curb the flows of
foreign terrorist fighters and the illicit funds that
extremist groups use to fuel their terror. The session
that United States Secretary of the Treasury Jack Lew
will chair tomorrow, when many other Council finance
ministers will join him, will aim to strengthen Member
States’ efforts to cut off ISIL’s financing.
Similarly, we continue to provide security and
counter-terrorism assistance to the Governments of
Chad, Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon and Benin to aid
their fight against Boko Haram. We are also continuing
to partner with African countries to take on the Lord’s
Resistance Army and Joseph Kony, who remains at
large. The Lord’s resistance Army has been decimated
in recent years, but every day it exists and Joseph
Kony is at large is a day in which children, women
and civilian communities everywhere are at risk of
abduction, and the abductees, as all here know, are then
forced themselves into abducting others. In some cases
you have children being asked to abduct and kill other
children. It is monstrous. So that effort, too, is essential.
Beyond these efforts to end conflicts, in which
human trafficking thrives, and to go after the worst
perpetrators, we must also ask what each of our
Governments can do to ensure that we are not ourselves
helping to fuel the crime of human trafficking.
First, we must work to ensure that our own practices,
from procurement to distribution, do not themselves

S/PV.7585

contribute to human trafficking. This means taking steps
to require Government contractors and subcontractors
to prohibit activities known to contribute to trafficking,
such as making it illegal to charge workers recruitment
fees that can lead to debt bondage. By putting in place
such requirements and protections, Governments can
show that they are practicing what they preach when it
comes to cutting modern slavery out of supply chains,
and we can each model best practices for the private
sector.
Secondly, we have to teach people how to actually
see the victims of trafficking. This can be extremely
challenging. Some victims of trafficking go out of their
way to avoid being identified, out of fear for their safety
or that of their loved ones, out of fear of being deported
or otherwise criminalized. And when the victims of
trafficking are seen, they are seen too often as criminals.
People see only the crime that these individuals have
committed and not the force, fraud, coercion and terror
that led them to do so. Learning to see trafficking
victims demands sensitizing people at all levels of
Government and across the spectrum of agencies, and
it demands engaging partners outside of Governments
such as faith-based organizations, business owners,
teachers, health-care providers — those that are most
likely to come into contact with victims.
Consider one of the populations at highest risk of
trafficking: internationally displaced persons, namely,
refugees fleeing conflict areas. As we all know, nearly
60 million people are currently displaced by conflicts,
more than at any other time since the Second World
War. Yet aid workers, peacekeepers and other groups
that come into close contact with these vulnerable
individuals often lack the training to spot the signs
of trafficking, and even those with the training often
have extremely limited resources to assist the victims
who are identified. This is a massive gap, and we must
all work to fill it. I credit Jordan, which has taken in
more than 628,000 Syrian refugees, as we all know,
but Jordan also recently built its first shelter dedicated
exclusively to housing and assisting trafficking victims.
To give another example, in the United States, the
Department of Transportation and Homeland Security
have teamed up to train some 50,000 airline employees
in how to safely identify suspected instances of human
trafficking and alert law-enforcement authorities in
real time.

15-4314625/26

S/PV.7585

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we need to spur more robust and innovative
solutions. Others have rightly highlighted the enormous
disparity between the $150 billion in profits estimated
to be generated annually by forced labour and the
amount spent by countries of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development annually
on anti-trafficking development assistance, which is
less than one tenth of a 1 per cent of the amount the
traffickers are taking in.
But we do not just need more resources; we need
resources to be more victim- and survivor-centred. Time
and again, we have seen that incorporating victims and
survivors into the policymaking process yields better
solutions, and they can offer the kind of perspective
that Nadia offered us here today. To that end, the United
States Government will soon be launching the first-ever
United States advisory council on human trafficking,
made up exclusively of survivors, to help inform and
guide our federal policies and programmes to combat
trafficking and empower victims.
On 6 December 1865, the United States adopted
the Thirteenth Amendment to our Constitution, which
abolished slavery. Before it was adopted, generations of
men, women and children were enslaved in this country
in the most deplorable conditions. People were born,
lived and died in chains. It took fighting a brutal civil
war in which more than 600,000 lost their lives — one
out of every 50 Americans — for this practice to be
abolished. Even after the war ended and the Amendment
was adopted, the practice of forced labour endured in
other forms, as we know, and the legacy of slavery is
still acutely felt in our nation to this day.

26/26

16/12/2015

Speaking on the one hundred and fiftieth
anniversary of the Amendment’s adoption, President
Obama appropriately quoted President Abraham
Lincoln:
“In giving freedom to the slave we ensure freedom
to the free — honourable alike in what we give, and
what we preserve.”
Lincoln was referring to efforts to emancipate slaves
in this country, but his words can just as easily be
applied to the Security Council today. Right now we
find victims of human trafficking in every one of our
countries. We eat food that they harvest. We speak on
telephones built from minerals that they mine. We wear
clothes that they make. The Security Council is built on
the premise that the peace and security of our nations is
bound up in one anothers’. But as Lincoln understood,
so are human rights.
Everyone of us here knows in our core that human
trafficking is wrong. We know that modern slavery
is inhuman. We know that no one should ever have
to endure what Nadia and so many women and girls
and others are enduring right here as we sit and as
we discuss. If we know that, then what Lincoln told
Americans so many years ago also holds true for us
here on this day: our freedom and our dignity are bound
up with the fates of millions of victims of trafficking,
such as Nadia, victims who possess tremendous dignity
and courage. We ensure our freedom by fighting to give
them their freedom.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

15-43146
