United Nations

S/PV.4770

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4770

th meeting
Tuesday, 10 June 2003, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Acuña
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Akram
Mr. Arias
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. King
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-38923 (E)

*0338923*

S/PV.4770

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Greece and Serbia and
Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Šahović
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Vassilakis (Greece) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations.
I give the floor to Mr. Annabi.
Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on
developments in Kosovo since the previous briefing on
2

23 April. I assume that the choice of the date for this
briefing is not entirely fortuitous, since today is, as I
am sure you are aware, Mr. President, the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999).
Today, Kosovo is certainly very different from the way
it was four years ago. Working with our partners in
Kosovo — KFOR, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
United
Nations
agencies,
intergovernmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and, of
course, local leaders and bodies — the United Nations
has put in place a process designed to stabilize and
normalize the situation in Kosovo.
The progress is evident: the reconstruction of
basic infrastructure; the restarting of public services
such as schools, health care and pensions; the provision
of basic documents; an increasingly professional local
police and judiciary; three successful elections; and the
establishment of municipal and central self-government
bodies. At the same time, much remains to be done in
developing provisional democratic self-governing
institutions and ensuring conditions for a peaceful and
normal life for all the inhabitants of Kosovo.
The fact that we still have some way to go was
highlighted in a particularly horrific way recently,
when three Kosovo Serb residents were brutally
murdered in Obilic municipality on 4 June. An 80year-old man, his 78-year-old wife and their 53-yearold son were beaten to death with a blunt instrument,
and their house was then set on fire.
As we informed the Council on 6 June, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has taken a number of concrete steps to find
and bring to justice the perpetrators of that horrible
crime. A nine-member UNMIK special police squad
was established to investigate the crime, working with
special advisers from both the Kosovo Serb and the
Kosovo Albanian communities. A reward for
information leading to the arrest and sentencing of
those responsible for the murders has been offered, and
a 24-hour protected telephone line has been set up to
receive information. UNMIK police and KFOR have
both put in place additional patrols and other
appropriate
security
measures.
UNMIK
and
representatives of Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions —
the Assembly, the Government and the President —
and Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb political
leaders have all condemned the murders and have
called for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.

S/PV.4770

UNMIK and the Kosovo Provisional Institutions
have continued their joint efforts to transfer to the
Provisional
Institutions
the
non-reserved
responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework. The Transfer Council met for the second
time on 28 May and agreed on the transfer of 19 nonreserved competencies to the Provisional Institutions,
with a further 17 to be transferred as soon as the
Provisional Institutions have the capacity to assume
them. Eight competencies were returned to the working
groups for further consideration. Kosovo Serb
representatives did not participate in that most recent
meeting of the Transfer Council.
The Provisional Institutions have continued their
work, with a particular emphasis on legislative
development. Since the Council was last briefed, the
four laws — which had been returned to the Assembly
for revision, since they were not fully compliant with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework — have been promulgated, with two of the
laws revised by the Assembly and two revised under
the authority of the Special Representative. The
Kosovo Assembly also adopted six new laws, with one
of them being deemed to be outside its area of
competence. The Assembly, in a special procedure,
also reviewed and agreed to the provisional criminal
procedure codes, which, as reserved competencies, will
be issued as UNMIK regulations. The Assembly,
however, did instruct an “appropriate body” to draft a
law on elections, although that is, of course, an area
which is outside its area of competence.
On 15 May, the Assembly endorsed a
controversial resolution on the “liberation war of the
people of Kosovo for freedom and independence”.
While this resolution may have brought the Kosovo
Albanian political parties closer to a common view of
their respective roles in the past, it was clearly not
conducive to cross-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation.
The Special Representative, Mr. Michael Steiner,
issued a declaration stating that the text of the
resolution was divisive and against the spirit of
resolution 1244 (1999). In addition, the hosts of three
international meetings decided, after consulting with
the Special Representative, to withdraw the invitations
to attend that they had sent to the Provisional
Institutions.
The Kosovo Serb caucus — Coalition Return —
has participated in all Kosovo Assembly sessions since
April. Coalition Return members did, however, walk

out of a plenary session on 15 May during the
discussion of the resolution on “the liberation war of
the people of Kosovo for freedom and independence”.
They, however, returned for the rest of the session after
the resolution was passed. Coalition Return also left
the 5 June Assembly session in protest of the triple
murder in Obilic municipality and have scheduled a
meeting for 11 June to discuss its continued
participation in the joint structures.
Development in the municipalities has been slow
in the past months. One third of the municipalities are
still not run in accordance with democratic values due
to political boycotts, mainly by Kosovo Albanian
parties, leading to gridlock. The provision of fair-share
financing to minority communities and the use of
official languages in the documents and signs in most
municipalities remain poor. In northern Mitrovica,
UNMIK appointed an eight-member Advisory Board
consisting of six Kosovo Serbs, one Kosovo Albanian
and one Bosniac. However, during the Board’s first
meeting, held on 30 May, the Kosovo Serb
representatives objected to the Board’s composition.
The next meeting of the Board is scheduled for 16
June.
UNMIK reports that the crime statistics for the
first four months of 2003 show that there has been a
reduction in cases of murder, burglary and robbery in
comparison with the same period for 2002. Incidents of
what appears to be inter-ethnic violence are, however, a
cause for concern. The Kosovo Police Service (KPS)
has continued its development; there are now close to
5,500 local police officers, in comparison to just over
4,000 international police officers. An additional police
station is now under KPS management in Stimlje,
bringing the total number of stations under KPS
management to four. UNMIK Police continued to build
relations with their Serbian counterparts. Similarly,
police cooperation with the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia is expanding through regular contacts
and meetings.
Freedom of movement for the Kosovo Serb
community remains difficult. The recent triple murder
in Obilic will be a setback in this regard by
contributing to an increasingly negative perception of
security conditions allowing their free movement.
Increased freedom of movement for Kosovo Serbs has
also been hindered by the decision of the Serbian
Government authorities not to sign an agreement on the
use of Kosovo licence plates in Serbia proper and by

3

S/PV.4770

their public calls for Kosovo Serbs not to register their
cars with UNMIK. On 13 May, however, UNMIK and
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia reached
agreement on the mutual recognition of vehicle
insurance, so that vehicles with Kosovo licence plates
can travel freely in the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia under a single, comprehensive insurance
policy. During the Ohrid Conference on Border
Security and Management, UNMIK and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia also completed an
exchange of letters addressing the practical modalities
associated with the opening of two temporary local
crossing points between Kosovo and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for residents of the
area.
As previously reported, a comprehensive and
coordinated framework to support minority returns is in
place, with local authorities in nearly half of the
municipalities working with representatives of the
displaced community in municipal working groups.
During the first five months of 2003, a total of 437
Kosovo Serbs — 330 Roma/Ashkali/Egyptians, 133
Bosniacs, 31 Gorani and 61 Kosovo Albanians — have
returned to areas where they are a minority. The
murders in Obilic on 4 June are a serious setback for
our efforts to foster multi-ethnicity in Kosovo and
create conditions for the return of Kosovo Serbs and
others to areas where they are a minority. Returns
efforts also face a substantial shortfall in funding, with
only 55 per cent of returns projects funded and a gap of
72 per cent in funding for the United Nations
Development Programme-UNMIK Rapid Response
Returns Facility, which provides assistance to
individual returns.
On the economic side, on 9 May the Special
Representative promulgated a regulation on the
Transformation of the Right of Use to Socially-Owned
Immovable Property. This regulation — commonly
referred to as the Land Use Regulation — converts
land-use rights held by socially-owned enterprises into
99-year leaseholds, which can be freely transferred and
used as guarantee for security credits without affecting
underlying ownership title. The Kosovo Trust Agency
Board announced on 15 May tenders for the first six
enterprises earmarked for the first round of
privatization; 12 more are expected to issue shortly.
The Agency’s operating procedures, adopted last
month, provide the framework for privatization through
tender procedures. Any Government, person or entity

4

who assert that their rights have been adversely
affected by the privatization process may submit an
appeal to the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of
Kosovo, which has the power for final adjudication of
claims, including payment of compensation, from the
proceeds of the privatization to claimants whose rights
the Special Chamber finds have been violated by the
privatization process. UNMIK has informed us that the
Special Chamber will be operational on 16 June, when
its rules of procedure are promulgated. Claims are
already receivable by the Registrar of the Chamber.
Unfortunately, the dialogue between Belgrade and
the Kosovo Provisional Institutions has not started.
Limited, working-level contacts have, however, taken
place between representatives of the Provisional
Institutions and their Serbian counterparts in the fields
of transport and returns. Working-level contacts
between UNMIK and Belgrade have also continued in
a number of fields, although dialogue and constructive
engagement at the political level have remained
difficult. The meeting of the High Ranking Working
Group, which was scheduled to take place on 13 May
at the request of Belgrade, did not take place because
of preconditions set by the Belgrade delegation before
discussion of the topics on the official agenda could
begin. As a result, the protocol on the recognition of
Kosovo licence plates, which I mentioned earlier, was
not signed. Belgrade also continues to support parallel
structures offering services such as the issuance of civil
registration documents and the payment of pensions in
parallel to UNMIK.
As a result of the suspected involvement of
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) in
terrorism and organized crime, particularly since the 12
April bombing of a railway bridge in Zvecan, a travel
ban was imposed on KPC members in order to avoid
the risk that members associated with extremist
organizations might be sent on training missions
abroad. The travel ban has since been lifted on a caseby-case basis. The KPC was asked to disclose the
names of other KPC members who might be associated
with extremist groups. A special UNMIK-KFOR board
has been set up to coordinate action against suspected
extremist infiltration into the KPC.
The KPC did distance itself from the overtures
made by political leaders debating the “war values”
resolution of the Kosovo Assembly. A positive
achievement was the that eight Kosovo Serbs, three
Turks, two Croats and one Ashkali have joined, or are

S/PV.4770

in an advanced stage of recruitment into, the KPC. The
Kosovo Serbs are joining despite calls from Kosovo
Serb leaders for them not to do so. Over 30 per cent of
the positions set aside for minorities have been filled,
although minority community members are not yet
present in the higher ranks of the KPC.
Four years into UNMIK’s mandate, we can say
that there has been significant progress, but we are still
facing challenges such as freedom of movement,
meaningful minority participation, returns, the
institutional development of local bodies and dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. Since the emergency
phase, the focus has been on political and institutional
development. In 2000 and 2001, UNMIK established
the legal framework for Kosovo’s path towards
substantial autonomy and self-government: the Law on
Local Self-Government and the Constitutional
Framework, as well as subsidiary legislation.
Following the establishment of the Provisional
Institutions, the benchmarks set out by the Special
Representative and the policy of “standards before
status” have been, and continue to be, the guiding
principles for the current phase.
Political pressure on UNMIK has significantly
increased, with attempts to challenge its role under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. One the one hand, the Provisional
Institutions, particularly the Kosovo Assembly, have
overstepped their competencies on a number of
occasions. On the other hand, Belgrade continues to
seek co-governance with UNMIK and, in lending
support to parallel structures, supports the boycott of
UNMIK policy and programmes. Unilateral calls from
Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade for
mutually exclusive solutions for Kosovo’s future have
continued, and they have not contributed to
reconciliation and inter-ethnic dialogue. That has
frozen forward movement on a number of key issues.
At the same time, organized criminal groups and
extremist elements are increasing their intrusions into
political life. Outbreaks of violence serve the interests
of extremists on all sides. Such activity is undoubtedly
fuelled by political goals, but also by the current grim
economic conditions: the unemployment rate in
Kosovo is 57 per cent, with worse rates for minorities
and women. Extremists remain on the margins, and
voices of moderation exist in all communities.
However, those voices remain muted.

UNMIK has continued to do its best to ensure
that all developments in Kosovo remain within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. UNMIK has continued to
focus on the implementation of the mandate, in line
with the “standards before status” policy framework.
The Council’s continued and active support for
UNMIK has been, and will continue to be, crucial for
the full implementation of the mandate entrusted to it
by the Council.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank Mr. Hédi Annabi for his briefing.
Last week, the Security Council firmly condemned the
reprehensible murder that was just mentioned by
Mr. Annabi. I would like to return to that today because
that crime is part of a current that runs against the
common efforts that we have been making for exactly
four years, since we adopted resolution 1244 (1999) on
10 June 1999, with a view to a modern, democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We cannot permit any indulgence
towards those attempting to sabotage the efforts by the
international community to promote, in a safe
environment, a multi-ethnic and tolerant society in
Kosovo. Everything must be done to put an end to the
ethnic violence in Kosovo, of which the Serbian
community is the principal victim. The presumed
perpetrators must be quickly apprehended and brought
to justice. We support the measures taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in that
context, and we will closely follow that inquiry.
The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
have a particular responsibility to re-establish a climate
conducive to the realization of the objectives of the
international community for the benefit of the entire
Kosovo population. I wish to state here very clearly
that the Assembly in particular must renounce those
initiatives that are contrary to resolution 1244 (1999)
or the Constitutional Framework. Those initiatives only
divide the Kosovo communities. No progress can be
achieved in Kosovo on the basis of unilateral action
that is contrary to resolution 1244 (1999) or that flouts
the authority of UNMIK and KFOR. We expect the
Institutions of Self-Government to work in good faith
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNMIK in order to implement the norms
sanctioned by the international community. I am
thinking in particular of the guarantee of minority
rights and of the establishment of a direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade on practical issues of

5

S/PV.4770

common interest, for which the cooperation of the
authorities of Serbia and Montenegro is equally
indispensable. Based on that condition, the transfer of
non-reserved competencies will have positive and
lasting effects and it will be in that context that the
question of status can begin to be addressed.
We align ourselves fully with the statement that
will be made shortly by Greece on behalf of the
European Union. The 21 June 2003 Thessaloniki
Summit will be crucial to strengthening the European
perspective of the region and to offering Kosovo the
opportunity to be successfully reintegrated into its
regional environment. It is our hope that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government will take
that opportunity.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
thank Mr. Annabi for his excellent and comprehensive
update. I am glad that he reminded us that this is the
fourth anniversary of resolution 1244 (1999). His
overview shows clearly that a lot has been
accomplished in those four years, but clearly also that a
lot more remains to be done and that there are
problems ahead.
Regarding one of those problems, it pains me to
begin my intervention on Kosovo with, again, a
condemnation of violence, as we had to do in April,
when we condemned the attack by the so-called
Albanian National Army on a railway bridge. Now we
have the violent murders that others have already
referred to in Obilic. The killings appear to have been
motivated by the early success of the Serb return
programme there, and thus are to be particularly
condemned, because this goes to the heart of what the
international community and the Kosovars are trying to
accomplish. We support the measures taken by the
Special Representative to bring the perpetrators to
justice and to encourage close cooperation among all
involved to ensure security in Kosovo.
I also want to note that President Bush signed an
executive order on 28 May, revoking the national
emergency as declared in 1992 and 1998 executive
orders with respect to the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and, with that new order, taking additional
steps with respect to persons who obstruct
implementation of the Dayton Accords, the Ohrid
Framework Agreement or Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). This puts in place additional national

6

measures on our part to combat extremism in the
region.
We cannot, however, allow violence by a small
minority to undermine what has been achieved and
what is still to be achieved. Progress has been made on
a number of fronts — on the transfer of non-reserved
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, or strengthening the presence of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in Mitrovica and on needed
economic reforms. We are pleased to hear that an
expert from the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) has arrived to begin work on
UNMIK’s plan for implementing the benchmarks and,
as we have promised, my Government will provide
funding for an additional expert to assist in that effort.
We continue to believe that the implementation
plan is a critical step in reinforcing the benchmarks
process and that “standards before status” must be
more than just a slogan. More progress must be made
on practical issues, if we are to overcome suspicion and
build the trust and reconciliation that will be required
for resolution 1244 (1999) to be fully implemented.
On the economic front, we believe that the
privatization process must move forward without
further delay. The promulgation of the land use
regulation was the last step needed to allow first
tenders to be offered under UNMIK’s privatization
plan for some 350 socially-owned enterprises.
Privatization is the best hope for generating economic
activity in Kosovo. Regardless of future decisions on
its final status, Kosovo must not be left without
economic means. It is important that property rights be
both clearly established and enforced uniformly for
each owner or claimant. We note the creation of the
Special Chamber for adjudicating owners’ and
creditors’ claims and trust that it will provide a fair and
transparent venue for dispute resolution with Serbian
companies or others. As long as it does not delay the
ongoing privatization process, work should begin
immediately to set up a claims register that accepts
submissions in Serbia in order to protect the rights of
claimants there and provide full information to
potential buyers.
In order for us to be able to target and address
such issues as soon as possible, the United States
strongly urges UNMIK, the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government and the Government of Serbia and

S/PV.4770

Montenegro to foster and persist in creating a
constructive dialogue. We know that this is difficult,
but it is the only way to resolve the issues that remain
before us and the only way to create a stable future. My
Government is looking for ways to promote that
dialogue in a variety of ways and in a variety of
forums. We will continue our efforts in the months
ahead to help build trust and encourage the
relationships needed to make Kosovo work.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
would like to convey to Mr. Hédi Annabi how much we
appreciated his briefing, which was particularly rich in
information regarding developments in Kosovo. His
briefing makes it possible for the members of the
United Nations family present in the Chamber to have
an accurate idea of the progress made over four years
and of the situation prevailing in Kosovo in the
institutional, security and economic areas. I would like
to focus my statement on those three areas, which, it
should be recalled, are the three priority pillars for
Kosovo in 2003.
In that context, and despite the lack of progress in
dealing with certain substantive issues, it is a fact that
the Kosovo Provisional Institutions are functioning. We
believe that the persistence of problems just
underscored by Mr. Annabi results from internal
disputes fuelled by partisan rivalry that encourages
intolerance, hatred and rejection of one’s fellow
citizens. Under those conditions, constructing a multiethnic, multicultural Kosovo demands that the actions
of the Provisional Institutions and of the municipalities
involve the entire population of Kosovo in all its
sociological components.
Their efforts need to be backed by the
international community, and Belgrade has an
important role to play. But what is the use of such
support if the Provisional Institutions — which are
calling for acceleration of the transfer of competencies
described in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework — do not show genuine political will and
an unfailing commitment to meet the many challenges
facing all Kosovans, of whom they are the
representatives: to ensure freedom of movement,
organize real participation in the Provisional
Institutions and the municipal bodies by the entire
active population of the province, and facilitate the
reintegration of minorities and ensure their safety,
security and protection, as well as their access to

education. Those are some of the challenges on the
road to a multi-ethnic and multicultural Kosovo.
The situation of minorities is indeed of concern,
particularly with regard to security. Information
reaching us confirms the precariousness of their
situation. On 4 June the whole world learned with
distress of the murder in Obilic of Mr. and Mrs.
Slobodan Stolic and their son, members of the Serb
minority. We strongly condemn that heinous crime;
everything must be done to find the perpetrators and to
bring them to justice. That is why my delegation
supports the recent measures taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner.
This odious act, which undermines the international
community’s
efforts
to
achieve
peace
and
reconciliation, reminds us that the road towards peace
and the restoration of confidence in Kosovo continues
to be fraught with obstacles of all sorts. We must
remain vigilant and determined in our efforts and
demonstrate firm and steadfast resolve in our struggle
against insecurity. We must likewise be watchful and
resolute in supporting the Provisional Institutions and
in monitoring their activities, as well as in the fight
against poverty and unemployment, which lead to
hatred, violence and intolerance.
The current environment, which is characterized
by insecurity and the absence of a strong legal
framework, can hardly attract private investment. The
elements of a free-market economy that have already
been established in Kosovo therefore deserve to be
supported. Further incentive measures should be taken
to that end, with strict respect for existing legal
provisions, in order to accelerate the privatization
process and to relaunch economic activity and create
jobs.
The Secretary-General has told us — and his
colleagues have reiterated to us — that we must take a
comprehensive approach in order to attain the
objectives sought in Kosovo. That approach should
also respect the cultural specificities of the province
and align Kosovo towards progressive integration into
a Europe of shared values. That is how we believe it
may be possible to arrive at a multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo in which there is peace,
tolerance, security, brotherhood, justice and economic
and social development for all. The main responsibility
for the advent of that Kosovo, to which we all aspire,
is, above all, the responsibility of all the people of
Kosovo themselves, including every ethnic group.

7

S/PV.4770

I cannot conclude my statement without
conveying our heartfelt encouragement to the
Secretary-General and his team and to the men and
women of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, who are working courageously and
doggedly every day to implement the recommendations
of the international community in order to bring about
the birth of a new and modern Kosovo in which peace,
stability and harmony prevail: a Kosovo that is a good
place to live.
Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): Allow me, first of all,
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
of the Council on Kosovo. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing.
Bulgaria, an associated country of the European
Union, fully supports the statement that will be made
later in this debate by the representative of Greece on
behalf of the European Union. I shall therefore limit
myself to a few brief comments in my national
capacity.
We welcome the progress achieved in the peace
process in Kosovo and extend our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Michael Steiner, for his efforts aimed at
normalizing life in the region.
Bulgaria fully shares the view of the Contact
Group on Kosovo expressed in Berlin on 19 May 2003
that considerable practical work still remains to be
done in order to fulfil the benchmarks — especially
those in the area of democratic governance — before
the issue of Kosovo’s status can be addressed. In that
context, we believe that the final word on the status of
Kosovo should be given to the United Nations, in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).
As a country of the South-Eastern European
region, Bulgaria expresses its legitimate concern about
the ongoing unilateral attempts and acts from different
sides directed at implementing solutions not supported
by the international community. In that connection, we
think that destructive action aimed at obtaining
unilateral political benefits should be categorically
condemned.
We emphasize once again our position that the
political structures of all communities in Kosovo
should demonstrate a higher political culture by

8

bringing to an end all attempts to ignore the
recommendations of the Special Representative; such
attempts undermine and delay the process of
normalization. As a factor of stability in the region,
Bulgaria is interested in seeing the process of
normalization continue in a speedy, organized and
peaceful manner. That would have a strong, positive
impact on the overall development of South-Eastern
Europe and on its prosperity.
We are aware of the fact that the process of
transferring competencies from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
accordance with paragraph 11 of resolution 1244
(1999) will not be an easy one. We hope that the
recently established Transfer Council will proceed
cautiously in its work by simultaneously taking into
account the need for the swift achievement of the
benchmarks and the legitimate interests of all
communities and inhabitants of Kosovo. An important
element in that process is the implementation of a
realistic road map for the transfer of powers that more
clearly marks the way towards implementing the
“standards before status” policy on the basis of the
benchmarks.
In our view, local authorities should make real
efforts, monitored by the international community, to
build a functioning administration at all levels in
Kosovo that reflects the multi-ethnic character of the
region and serves all of Kosovo’s inhabitants in a
professional manner.
Bulgaria considers the continuing acts of interethnic violence and the activities of organized crime in
Kosovo as a strong destructive factor. We therefore call
on local political leaders to exert their authority and
influence in order to establish relations based on interethnic tolerance. For that reason, we strongly condemn
the murder of a Serb family in Obilic earlier this month
and hope that those responsible will be brought to
justice.
We support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to combat
organized crime and the trafficking of human beings,
as well as his efforts to revitalize the economy by
attracting investment and to solve the daily practical
problems of the population in Kosovo.
The presence of UNMIK and KFOR plays a key
role in Kosovo’s security as well as in the wider region.
Bulgaria will continue to actively participate in these

S/PV.4770

operations of the international community aimed at
maintaining peace and security.
Finally, we believe that in the forthcoming period
all local political actors should focus their energy on
solving concrete problems and normalizing life in
Kosovo, rather than on making declarations calling for
independence or division, which provoke concern in
the region and in the international community. That
would be appropriate behaviour and would lead to a
timely resolution of the status issue in compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. King (United Kingdom): We are grateful for
today’s briefing.
The United Kingdom fully associates itself with
the statement that will be made later by the
representative of Greece on behalf of the European
Union and its acceding and associated countries.
If I may, I just want to take this opportunity to
take up three points in particular. First, in the context
of the agreed “standards before status” policy, I would
just like to underline that the United Kingdom fully
supports the efforts to make the benchmarks
operational. We are grateful for the comments and
practical suggestions that have been made today
regarding taking that important work forward,
especially those made by the representatives of the
Secretariat and the United States. As others have
already said, we need to maintain our efforts in that
regard.
Secondly, Mr. Annabi raised the question of
tackling parallel structures. I would be grateful for
anything more that he might want to add on where we
stand, in particular on UNMIK’s progress in that regard
in Mitrovica.

My delegation strongly condemns the heinous
crime committed a few days ago, on 4 June, in
Kosovo — in which the perpetrators murdered a family
consisting of an 80-year-old man, his wife and his son
and burned their home, having threatened the elderly
man several times before murdering him — as an event
that threatens security in Kosovo in general. My
delegation supports the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to arrest the perpetrators of that crime and to bring
them to justice.
We also support the gradual transfer of authority
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo. We should like to stress, first of all, the need
to accord high priority to the situation and to prevent
such crimes from occurring later on, because that
would negatively affect the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes and their
active participation in rebuilding the province of
Kosovo. More than ever before, Kosovo sorely needs
participation by all ethnic groups in its economic,
social and political life. In that connection, we must
promote dialogue among the various ethnic groups and
factions in Kosovo in order to end the violence and to
rebuild a safe and secure society in which all ethnic
groups live together in harmony.
Secondly, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina so that the Provisional Institutions will assist
UNMIK in beginning a dialogue with neighbouring
countries on practical issues. We should also like to
stress the importance of ensuring freedom of
movement throughout Kosovo for all ethnic groups in a
way that guarantees their security and safety and brings
stability to all areas of life in Kosovo.

Thirdly, as our Fifth Committee colleagues
recently discussed, UNMIK will see a reduction in staff
numbers in the period ahead. We would welcome
anything more that Mr. Annabi could say about how, in
practice, UNMIK will proceed in shifting its activities
from an executive role to a monitoring advisory role.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General and especially Mr. Steiner and
UNMIK for their efforts to achieve security,
reconciliation and stability in this very important part
of the world. Mr. Steiner and his Mission deserve the
full support of the Security Council in order to ensure
the Mission’s success.

Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important meeting. My
delegation also thanks Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing on the most recent
developments in the situation in Kosovo.

Mr. Lucas (Angola): On behalf of the Angolan
delegation, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open meeting on the situation in
Kosovo. We express our thanks to Mr. Hédi Annabi for
his briefing, which provided an update on the situation
there.

9

S/PV.4770

We commend the work accomplished thus far by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and by the international community
at large in building a democratic State infrastructure
from the ground up in Kosovo — a task of the greatest
complexity, especially in such a deeply traumatized
and divided society. Those accomplishments, and the
commitment of the standing forces to the objectives set
for Kosovo by the international community, are signals
of hope for a better future in the region.
The most encouraging development in the
political process of Kosovo is the current transfer of
responsibilities from UNMIK to Kosovo’s Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. Notwithstanding the
imperfect functioning of those Institutions — and the
assertion by the Special Representative that Kosovo
still has some way to go in establishing representative
and functioning institutions accountable to the Kosovo
population — meaningful progress has been achieved.
We reaffirm our full support for the pursuit of that
process, as outlined in the Constitutional Framework.
It is widely recognized that the existence of a
political landscape with some degree of coherence is a
crucial element for the establishment of solid and
representative institutions, that the interparty struggle
should not undermine the stability of the institutions,
and that the public administration should not be built
along partisan lines. Kosovo’s current political
situation presents realities that run counter to those
basic assertions, and we hope that they are part of the
learning process of democratic stabilization. That lends
more consistency to the “standards before status”
policy as the framework for achieving the goals set for
the transitional period and as an essential element in
the shaping of Kosovo’s future.
At the same time, the other crucial elements of
this institution-building process are strengthening the
rule of law by enhancing the judicial system’s
efficiency, impartiality and overall functioning, and
enhancing law enforcement institutions in order to curb
organized crime and ethnic violence and to bring all
criminals to justice. We encourage UNMIK and the
Special Representative to pursue a consistent policy
against destabilizing forces and criminal elements and
for establishing the rule of law as the social foundation
of Kosovo. In that regard, we are of the view that the
international community should lend its full support to
the Illicit Small Arms Control Project, to be
implemented by the United Nations Development

10

Programme in Kosovo and in Serbia and Montenegro,
aimed at controlling the spread and accumulation of
illicit small arms and light weapons, which are one of
the main sources of crime and violence in Kosovo.
To build a multi-ethnic and democratic society,
freedom of movement must be secured for all the
communities in Kosovo. We are very concerned by the
restrictions on movement still being imposed on
minorities; by the denial of their right to use their own
language and alphabet throughout the territory; and by
the continued violence, harassment and discrimination
faced by minorities, intended to discourage their return
to Kosovo as well as their participation in public life,
according to the assessment made by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative.
We are aware that much remains to be done and
that the leaders of Kosovo bear particular responsibility
for promoting the integration of minorities, which, in
the end, constitutes the core question of the Kosovo
issue. We see encouraging signals in this direction and
meaningful accomplishments in this very important
endeavour. Great difficulties still lie ahead on the road
towards the fulfilment of hopes for a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo, but it is our conviction that with
perseverance and an imaginative approach it will be
possible to make important advances towards the
attainment of that goal.
There are reports on progress made by the
Provisional Institutions and some municipalities in
providing support for the return of minority
communities. There are encouraging developments that
should be supported and encouraged. We commend
UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on their work for the
return of refugees and displaced persons.
A fundamental element for the normalization of
the situation and for ensuring the rights of minorities is
dialogue between the provisional authorities of Kosovo
and the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro. We
encourage such dialogue, and it is our hope that direct
talks on practical issues can soon begin, as a means to
overcome differences and misunderstandings and to
contribute to helping the political process to move in
the right direction. We commend the efforts by the
Special Representative to advance such dialogue.
Before concluding, we would like to express our
condemnation for the recent heinous and brutal
assassination of the Stolic family — a crime directed

S/PV.4770

against efforts to create a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo, as described by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral.

fact that there continue to be serious acts of violence,
threats and cases of intimidation and discrimination
against members of minority groups.

Finally, we pay special tribute to Mr. Michael
Steiner, to UNMIK and to all those who have been
deploying immense efforts in the building of a
democratic and multi-ethnic nation in Kosovo.

The return of displaced persons and refugees is of
fundamental importance, and we must all redouble our
efforts to make that possible.

Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing on the latest developments in Kosovo.
Four years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), laying the basis for a
comprehensive settlement of the Kosovo question.
Accordingly, the Provisional Institutions of Kosovo
should scrupulously fulfil their obligations. Like other
countries, we call on the Provisional Institutions to
continue to take effective action to crack down on
crime, guarantee the rights and interests of ethnic
minorities and promote economic development, as well
as to fully cooperate with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro, with a view to
the early achievement of social stability, economic
development and ethnic harmony.
China, like other countries, condemns all
atrocities and other acts of violence, which undermine
the social stability of Kosovo. The Chinese delegation
appreciates the tireless efforts of UNMIK aimed at the
restoration of stability, the establishment of the rule of
law, economic development and the promotion of
ethnic harmony. We support the “standards before
status” policy of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, and the series of
measures in the benchmark process. We hope that
UNMIK will continue to effectively carry out its
mandate, satisfactorily deal with the decentralization
question and take further measures to ensure that the
Provisional Institutions fulfil their responsibilities.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to Mr. Annabi for his briefing. As Greece,
speaking on behalf of the European Union, will be
making a statement which Spain fully supports, I will
limit myself to a few brief observations.
Events in recent weeks show that there is a long
way to go on the road towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo
based on the principles of justice, tolerance and respect
for human rights. We are concerned in particular by the

Furthermore, the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment have yet to prove that they are capable of
functioning normally and of being genuinely
representative and responsible. They must devote
themselves exclusively to the management and
administration of matters under their competency —
matters that affect all the people of Kosovo.
Spain views with great concern the attitude of the
Kosovo Albanian leaders, who are publicly promoting,
on an ongoing basis, positions that run counter to
resolution 1244 (1999). All of the communities of
Kosovo must participate actively in the provisional and
municipal institutions. Lack of participation in those
institutions will prevent progress on concrete issues of
public administration and will do nothing to improve
Kosovo’s international image. We condemn any
attempt to create mono-ethnic institutions, and we
appeal for the dismantling of the parallel administrative
structures that are still in operation.
Lastly, we emphasize the need to implement the
initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to maintain a dialogue on practical
issues between the Belgrade authorities and the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions, in the framework of resolution
1244 (1999).
Mr. Acuña (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open meeting of the Security Council — the first
on this subject since 23 April. Chile once again
expresses its support for what we believe could prove
to be one of the most important peace-building
enterprises in the history of the United Nations: the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), a mission in which our country
feels honoured to participate. We commend the work
carried out by Mr. Michael Steiner, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and all the staff of UNMIK over the past four years.
We would like to thank Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping

11

S/PV.4770

Operations, for his enlightening description of the
situation in Kosovo and in Serbia and Montenegro.
We would like at the outset to express our great
consternation at the reprehensible murder of a Serbian
family in Obilic on 4 June. We reject, in addition to
that crime, all acts of violence, harassment and
discrimination on ethnic grounds — actions that run
counter to the achievement of a multi-ethnic, modern
and democratic Kosovo.
With regard to the recent decisions taken by
UNMIK, we reaffirm that, in terms of the economy and
of investment, resolution 1244 (1999) constitutes the
cornerstone of the process. Resolution 1244 (1999) is
the guiding principle and must determine decisions on
Kosovo. The decisions adopted in accordance with the
mandate set down by that resolution must be heeded
and respected by the parties.
Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to Mr. Hédi Annabi for the extremely complete
and precise information he has provided us with today
on the situation in Kosovo and the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
Like most members of the Council, Mexico
cannot fail to express its sorrow and distress at the
news of the murder of the Stolic family that occurred in
the town of Obilic, Kosovo, on 4 June. As was rightly
stated by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Michael Steiner, that act was a direct
attack on the efforts to build a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
My delegation is profoundly concerned that this
murder could delay the process of community
reconciliation and coexistence and have a negative
impact on the sustainable return of displaced persons to
that and other towns of Kosovo.
This type of crime must be energetically
repudiated, not only by the UNMIK authorities, but
also and above all by Kosovo’s elected representatives.
In this regard, we take note of the statements made by
the main elected representatives of Kosovo, who
immediately condemned the crime and called for the
perpetrators to be brought to justice. We join those
voices of condemnation and trust that the crime will be
investigated and that those guilty will be punished. We
hope that UNMIK and the Kosovo Force will do their
utmost to provide greater security and protection to the
Serb families and to other minorities in Obilic, who
are, quite naturally, extremely fearful at the moment.

12

My delegation also expresses its concern at this
weekend’s attack in Pristina, in which several persons
were wounded by an explosive device. The incidents of
violence that are occurring with increasing frequency
in various areas of Kosovo — be they acts of political
violence, ethnicity-based attacks or simply cases of
organized crime — undoubtedly threaten the stability
of Kosovo.
Furthermore, we appeal to the elected
representatives of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, in particular the representatives of the
Albanian majority, to avoid in the future promoting any
initiative that runs counter to the spirit of resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework, as well
as to the objective of making Kosovo a multi-ethnic,
pluralistic and tolerant society. The most recent
example of such initiatives is the resolution adopted by
the Kosovo Assembly on 15 May regarding the 19981999 conflict.
At the same time, my delegation considers that
the elected representatives of the ethnic minorities in
the Assembly, in particular the Serb representatives,
would achieve better results and greater benefits for
their electorate if they were to adopt a more
participative attitude, instead of withdrawing from the
legislature when they encounter a difficult situation.
We would also request the Secretariat to provide
us — perhaps at a special meeting convened for that
purpose — with further information on and, above all,
a more detailed analysis of the privatization process in
Kosovo and other related aspects, such as the
legislation on the transformation of the right of use to
socially-owned immovable property. It is vital that this
process of privatization be undertaken transparently,
since it will have a broad, long-term impact.
In conclusion, four years after the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999), Mexico reiterates its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and all the personnel of UNMIK in the work that lies
ahead.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I should like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
briefing and his timely reminder that today is the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999).
However, the situation inside Kosovo today still gives
us cause for concern.

S/PV.4770

As others have done, I should like to condemn the
brutal murders of the Stolic family in Obilic on 4 June.
We hope that no effort will be spared to bring the
perpetrators to justice. We condemn all ethnicallymotivated acts and crimes in Kosovo. The culture of
impunity for such crimes must now come to an end.
Whether these crimes were committed six days ago or
six years ago, those who committed them should not be
allowed to escape justice.
Since I do not wish to cover the same ground as
others have before me, I would like to focus only on
two issues: first, the immediate priorities inside
Kosovo and, secondly, Pakistan’s position on the future
of that territory.
Inside Kosovo, as recent events have amply
illustrated, security and the rule of law remain the two
most vital issues which need to be addressed urgently.
Without security, there can be no freedom of
movement, no protection of minorities, no sustainable
return of refugees and no economic recovery. The rule
of law is central to progress towards justice,
reconciliation and self-governance. These are the two
essential pillars on which the success of the provisional
institutions and the future political stability of Kosovo
will be founded. We hope that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo will give
these two issues the priority they deserve.
At the same time, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on local leaders to work together to
consolidate these institutions by focusing on substance
and practical results instead of holding institutional
developments hostage to political or ethnic differences.
We echo his appeal to local leaders to work together
for a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We urge the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the establishment of the standards that
should facilitate a solution for the political status of
Kosovo.
I would like to affirm that Pakistan regards the
“standards before status” formula as unique, applying
to Kosovo only. We hope in this regard that progress on
the status issue can also begin at an early stage. In this
process, we attach importance to the following.
First, no decision on Kosovo’s future should be
taken without consulting and responding to the wishes
of the people of Kosovo. There can be no exception or
special exemptions to the application of the principle of
self-determination. And, yes, we very much have

Jammu and Kashmir in mind when we affirm this
principle.
Secondly, it is unacceptable to establish any
linkage between a resolution of the future political
status of Kosovo and the goal endorsed by the
international community: to preserve the territorial
integrity of other States in the region.
Thirdly, the resolution of the status issue should
be facilitated by a meaningful political dialogue
between the leaders of Kosovo and the Government of
Serbia. In that regard, we welcome the initiative by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
establish a dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on
practical matters of mutual concern. We support efforts
to move that dialogue forward at the upcoming
European Union Summit in Thessaloniki. We hope that
the parties will soon develop sufficient confidence to
constructively address as well the difficult political
questions relating to the status of Kosovo in the near
future.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I should like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing.
My delegation welcomes the progress that has
been achieved so far in Kosovo. However, we are also
very concerned about the growing confrontational
attitude in Kosovo towards the international
community, and in particular against the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). That attitude is manifested, for example, by
violations of the reserved powers of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, mostly by
Kosovo Albanian politicians, as well as by the
continued existence of illegal parallel structures within
the Kosovo Serb communities in the northern parts of
Kosovo.
We demand full respect for resolution 1244
(1999) by all sides, and we reject any attempts to
question UNMIK’s authority to administer Kosovo. We
particularly condemn any attempts to force UNMIK
into any kind of so-called co-governance, as well as
any interference with the reserved powers of the
Special Representative.
The question of Kosovo’s final status will be
addressed at the appropriate time and through the
appropriate process. Only the Security Council has the
power to assess the implementation of resolution 1244

13

S/PV.4770

(1999), and it has the final word in settling the status
issue. No unilateral move or arrangement intended to
predetermine Kosovo’s status — either for the whole or
for parts of Kosovo — can be accepted.
Germany expects the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in Kosovo to meet the benchmarks
set by the Special Representative, by advancing
legislation and developing policies for all Kosovans in
order to promote the economy and the development of
the social system. We therefore urge the Kosovo
leadership to guarantee minority rights, particularly the
right of freedom of movement. In Kosovo, an
environment must now be created both through
legislative and administrative acts and through public
awareness campaigns — an environment conducive to
the sustainable return of minority refugees and
internally displaced persons.
Like other delegations, we were shocked by the
news of the brutal murder of a Kosovo Serb family on
4 June. The German Government strongly condemns
those acts of violence. As I have stated in previous
meetings of the Council, no act of violence or atrocity
committed against the Kosovo Albanian population in
the past can justify violence today. Any form of violent
revenge or ethnic hatred is absolutely unacceptable. We
welcome the immediate, strong condemnation of that
act of barbarism by the Kosovo President and the
Kosovo Assembly, and the fact that 6 June, last Friday,
was designated a day of mourning in Kosovo. We
believe that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has taken the appropriate steps, and
we hope that the perpetrators will soon be brought to
justice.
Germany supports the Special Representative in
his efforts to transfer in a sustainable process nonreserved competencies from UNMIK to the Kosovo
Institutions by the end of this year. That process of
handing over responsibilities requires a further increase
in capacity and determination on the part of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. Only then
will they be able to fulfil their new role in a
responsible and accountable manner.
We support the efforts of the Council of Europe
to present, as early as feasible, a strategy on
decentralization in order to create the basis for multiethnic coexistence, with the aim of improving
integration, participation and collective rights for all
minorities, notably the Kosovo Serbs.

14

Germany supports the Special Representative in
initiating a trilateral direct dialogue at the expert level
with Belgrade and Pristina as early as feasible. That
dialogue should address technical, non-status-related
issues with the aim of building confidence, normalizing
relations and consolidating regional stability.
My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
that Greece will make shortly on behalf of the
European Union. We fully stand behind the European
Union’s intention to confirm, at its forthcoming summit
with South-Eastern European countries in Thessaloniki
on 21 June, the European perspective for the Balkan
region. Kosovo is part of that process.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
present meeting and to express our appreciation to
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for the valuable information
he has just given us.
The periodic consideration of the situation in
Kosovo
reflects
the
concern
and
steadfast
determination of our Council in following through on
the actions taken in the framework of implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).
At preceding meetings, my delegation welcomed
the progress achieved on the ground and expressed its
concern at the obstacles to be overcome. It remains a
fact that institutional, security and economic issues, as
well as those of returns and property, are still a source
of concern for the international community in general
and the Council in particular. We welcome the progress
achieved in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) with a view to finding a suitable solution for the
various issues.
However, my delegation notes with regret that the
security situation remains a concern. In that context, it
regrets the death of members of the Stolic family in
Obilic. That situation can only fuel tensions, which
undermine the efforts being made, particularly efforts
to assist refugees and displaced persons, who require a
certain level of security and confidence to return to
their homes. We are hopeful that the measures taken by
Mr. Steiner will quickly lead to the arrest and bringing
to justice of the perpetrators of those heinous crimes.
Economic issues such as investment are also a
source of great concern. My delegation believes that
the success of the entire programme in Kosovo hinges

S/PV.4770

upon taking into account the interests of all Kosovans
and on regional equilibrium. We note with satisfaction
the holding of last month’s Ohrid conference, where
members of the Governments of Balkan region
countries assembled to strengthen regional cooperation.
The leaders of the Provisional Institutions and
local
leaders,
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Belgrade authorities
must further strengthen their cooperation in order to
overcome the challenges for the future of a multiethnic Kosovo in a viable socio-economic, political and
cultural environment.
Furthermore,
my
delegation
notes
with
satisfaction the return last month of 800 bodies
exhumed in Serbia, thought to be those of Kosovars of
Albanian origin who had disappeared. It appreciates
the work done by the UNMIK Office on Missing
Persons and Forensics, as well as the activities of the
Contact Group on Missing Persons of the United
Nations Civilian Police and the Serb Government. That
work must continue for the definitive settlement of this
question.
Finally, my delegation is convinced that the
establishment of lasting peace in Kosovo depends on
the continued commitment of the leadership, of civil
society and of the entire population to put their
differences and futile disputes aside and to focus on
promoting shared interests that can help everyone
flourish. The contribution of the international
community will always be indispensable to those
efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
As all other Council members have stated, we are
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi,
for his thorough briefing on developments in Kosovo
and in Serbia and Montenegro. As noted, today is the
fourth anniversary of the adoption in this Chamber of
resolution 1244 (1999), which set the principles and
parameters for a settlement in Kosovo. There is no
doubt that, since then, huge efforts have gone into
reaching a settlement, and considerable progress has
been made. Mr. Annabi and Council members spoke
about that today.

However, they also emphasized that the problem
is far from resolved. Problems outnumber solutions.
The main conclusion today is that, four years after the
deployment of special missions to the area, local
citizens continue to lack equal conditions of security
and freedom of movement. There is ongoing ethnically
motivated violence, oppression and discrimination
against minorities, particularly the Serb minority. The
most flagrant example, though by no means the only
one, was the brutal murder on 4 June of a Serbian
family — an 80-year-old couple and their son — in
Obilic. The Security Council has vigorously
condemned that crime and has supported the effort of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to
arrest the culprits and bring them to justice.
Moreover, it is clear that we need to do more than
ensure that all such crimes are punished. We must
double and treble the efforts of the international
presences to fundamentally alter the entire atmosphere
in the region, where there are still extremist forces
creating a breeding ground for continued violence.
International
legal
defence
organizations
—
particularly Amnesty International in its 2003 report —
have noted serious violations of minority rights in the
region.
The idea of building a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo is bogged down and the level of trust between
the Kosovan communities is in fact back to square one.
The leaders of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment frequently shirk their obligations under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. Moreover, they are attempting to promote
decisions that incite ethnic hatred. Among these is the
Regional Assembly resolution on the “war values” of
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and the draft
legislation on the census, which, if adopted, could be
used for the arbitrary redrawing of the ethnic map of
Kosovo. Such actions are being undertaken in spite of
the clearly articulated negative position taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and as
a challenge to the United Nations and the Security
Council.
Without radical improvement of the situation in
that regard, we cannot expect the full participation of
minority representatives in the work of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and in disbanding
parallel structures. Our common challenge is to
promote normal conditions for the constructive

15

S/PV.4770

participation of all Kosovan communities in the work
of regional and municipal bodies.

reaching. This is too serious a matter for us to take a
decision that will last 99 years.

We are concerned by the maintenance of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) as a paramilitary
successor of the KLA. Ignoring decisions of the
Security Council, the KPC leadership is blatantly
trying to turn the Corps into an army for an
independent Kosovo. I am not even referring to the
commission of terrorist acts by Corps members, such
as the sabotage of a bridge in Svecan, which was also
referred to today.

I share the view expressed by the representative
of Mexico: we would expect that the assessments given
by Council members today will be borne in mind by
the UNMIK leadership in Kosovo in their continuing
efforts for the full and comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999).

Unfortunately, the reaction of the UNMIK
leadership was confined to placing a one-month travel
ban on Corps workers abroad, which has already
ended. We are convinced that, in its current guise, the
KPC is a potential source of destabilization in the
region, capable of inciting a new wave of violence on
multi-ethnic soil. We call on UNMIK to take a more
active and consistent position in countering the growth
of radical movements in the region and the assertion of
their legitimacy.
Due to the lack of progress in those areas, there is
also a serious impediment to establishing a dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. We support the concept
of “standards before status”. The process of
transferring some competencies to the Provisional
Institutions must be constructed strictly in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999) and must move forward at
a pace that is, above all, determined by the
effectiveness of the work of those bodies in areas in
which they have received all necessary competencies.
The international presences must strengthen their
oversight of this process, and must not allow abuses or
attempts to use the Provisional Institutions for political
purposes and turn Kosovo into a quasi-State structure.
The process of the transfer of competencies can in no
way be a substitute for a fundamental decision in
principle on the status of the region, which must be
taken at a later stage and exclusively on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999).
We deeply regret the serious interruptions in
dialogue between UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities. We believe it is necessary to take urgent
steps to restore constructive cooperation between them,
which will enable us to avert collisions, such as the one
that came about on the head of UNMIK’s regulation on
land-use rights. We have a serious concern about that
regulation. It could have consequences that are too far-

16

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Serbia and Montenegro. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Šahović (Serbia and Montenegro): Since this
is the first time that I am taking the floor in the Council
this month, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
June. I also wish to thank you for convening this
meeting today. I thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.
Exactly four years ago, the Security Council
passed resolution 1244 (1999) to chart the way to
durable peace in Kosovo and Metohija. At the time, a
future without the fear of persecution was envisaged
through the establishment of a multi-ethnic, democratic
and lawful society, in which the civil, political and
human rights of all would be ensured. While
confirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia — whose name has
been changed to Serbia and Montenegro — the
resolution aimed at preventing new conflicts, creating a
secure environment for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, demilitarizing the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) and establishing substantial
autonomy and self-government. What has been
achieved?
There is peace in Kosovo and Metohija, if peace
can be defined solely as the absence of war. However,
security exists selectively, that is to say, for the
majority but not for minorities. Again, freedom of
movement is the privilege of the majority alone. The
fate of more than 1,000 missing Serbs has not yet been
resolved. There is little stability to speak of. Almost a
quarter of a million internally displaced persons from
minority communities — primarily Serbs who fled the
province at the time of the arrival of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR — cannot return home.

S/PV.4770

Although a senior official from the Provisional
Institutions of Kosovo and Metohija recently attempted
to explain that failure by citing high unemployment
rates, facts point in a different direction. A gruesome
example of the real cause for the absence of returns
was the bludgeoning to death of two 80-year-olds and
their son in the town of Obilic on 4 June. They were
natives of Obilic who had placed their trust in the
international administrators of the province to ensure
their safety.

Security Council to see to it that UNMIK, in
accordance with its responsibilities defined four years
ago, ensures that violence is not yet again confirmed as
a legitimate political means in Kosovo and Metohija.
Without that outcome, the latest atrocity will be a
further setback in creating sufficient confidence to
initiate the dialogue on practical issues, whose
establishment my Government has consistently
supported and called for. Pristina has thus far rejected
every initiative in that regard.

My Government acknowledges the many
expressions of condemnation and outrage that this
atrocity has generated. We especially appreciate the
Security Council’s quick reaction to this gruesome
crime. We also take note of the fact that, in stark
contrast with previous murders of minority members, a
special police squad to investigate the killing has been
established and a cash reward is being offered for
information leading to the perpetrators.

As we are all aware, UNMIK has its own list of
achievements in connection with implementing
resolution 1244 (1999). The wave of Kosovo Albanian
refugees in 1999 was reversed very quickly. Elections
were held and the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment were established, which led to the
increasing transfer of responsibilities to local
authorities. However, those Institutions have proven to
be more efficient at insisting on their right to decide on
foreign policy and defence matters and on ignoring
minority rights — as witnessed by the law on higher
education — on pressuring for independence, and — as
in the most recent Assembly resolution, which called
for regulating “the status of the fighters for the freedom
and independence of Kosovo” — at creating ethnic
division.

It has been stated within the Council and outside
it that acts such as the Stolic murder are directed
against returns, against ethnic reconciliation and
against the creation of a multi-ethnic society. That is
true. However, given the fact that all forms of violence
against minorities, including terrorist attacks, have thus
far garnered only verbal condemnation, it is unclear
what arguments could be offered to 18 Serb families in
Obilic to convince them to reconsider their decision to
leave the town forever. Whose ultimate victory will
that be?
Security, of course, cannot be achieved by words.
The fact is that the perpetrators of that atrocity have
not been identified, much less brought to justice. It is
also a fact that the investigation of the 17 May murder
in Vitina of mathematics professor Zoran Markovic has
not made any progress that we are aware of. The same
is true of the case of 90-year-old Slavko Stamenkovic,
who was brutally beaten in his home in Vitina on 21
May, and of the 6 May stoning of a bus driving Serb
children near Mitrovica.
If the perpetrators are not speedily brought to
justice now — as they have not been in previous cases
of inter-ethnic murder since 1999 — the Obilic killing
will serve to strengthen the culture of impunity
surrounding the violence against minorities. It will also
provide further evidence that minorities, and Serbs in
particular, do not enjoy the basic human right to life,
let alone any other right. We therefore call on the

As part of that trend, the Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC), which has been officially designated as a
civilian emergency organization, has retained and
enhanced its military capacities. It is engaged in
tireless efforts to preserve itself as the future army of
an independent Kosovo. The activities of Albanian
National Army (ANA) terrorists within the KPC in
connection with the 12 April railway attack in northern
Kosovo and Metohija have been confirmed beyond a
shadow of a doubt. UNMIK and KFOR demands for
data regarding the presence of the ANA within the
KPC were met by a very characteristic response from
the commander of the Corps, who said that, under his
limited powers, he could offer no more information.
We fully expect prompt and visible results from the
international special investigative civil board formed
on 2 June to investigate current and future members of
the KPC who may be involved in proscribed
organizations or activities.
In such overall conditions, UNMIK developed a
strategy based on the principle of “standards before
status”, defining eight basic criteria for assessing
progress in achieving the standards. In each of those

17

S/PV.4770

eight areas — for example, in the area of the rule of
law — substantive achievements are almost negligible,
yet UNMIK is speedily and systematically continuing
to transfer responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government.
We consider it absolutely necessary to make the
benchmarks operational, in line with repeated requests
made by members of the Security Council. If the aim is
truly to establish institutions functioning according to
basic principles of democracy, the transfer process
should be firmly conditioned on the capacities of the
Institutions to responsibly exercise the authority
entrusted to them for the benefit of all communities in
the province.
With regard to the benchmarks, UNMIK itself is
actually not contributing to their implementation in
some cases. A stated UNMIK benchmark dealing with
property rights requires that all property — including
land, enterprises and other publicly owned assets —
will have a clear and rightful owner. UNMIK
regulation 2003/13 is clearly not a step towards
fulfilling that benchmark. Rather, it creates additional
confusion. By promulgating regulation 2003/13, on
land use, UNMIK has in fact taken steps that exceed
the authority conferred upon it by the Security Council.
The regulation creates consequences of a structural and
permanent character. A 99-year land lease is brushed
away as a temporary measure that does not merit
consultation with the owners of the land. That
disregards the basic fact that the measure will by far
exceed the term of the United Nations Administration
itself. We are speaking here of a permanent transfer of
publicly owned property and, to a large extent, the
property of the Republic of Serbia. The regulation will
also jeopardize the return of property nationalized after
the Second World War to their rightful owners.
On 16 May, we requested an explanation of the
legal basis for that regulation from the Legal Counsel
of the United Nations. To date we have received no
response. My Government is looking forward to the
Counsel’s response in order to decide on a further
course of action with regard to this issue. In any event,
our firm view is that the term of the lease for the land
in question cannot exceed UNMIK’s term of existence.
As stated by Foreign Minister Svilanović in a
letter dated 20 May to the President of the Security
Council, it is the position of my Government that the
need for privatization in Kosovo and Metohija is

18

undisputable. The method of establishing a
privatization model without the participation of the
Republic of Serbia as the largest creditor is, however,
highly disputable. According to the Kosovo Trust
Agency model, the burden of privatization — primarily
a sovereign debt of close to $1.5 billion — first falls
squarely upon the budget of Serbia and Serbian
creditor companies or owners of soon-to-be privatized
businesses in Kosovo and Metohija, then on Serbian
guarantor banks and, finally, on workers who are
currently
displaced.
Among
other
obvious
consequences, that model is certain to adversely affect
the return of internally displaced persons. However,
nothing but the loss of life is irreversible. We expect
that those legitimate concerns will be addressed prior
to the full implementation of the process of
privatization. We stand ready to further discuss these
issues with UNMIK.
My country has fully complied with resolution
1244 (1999). In the last two and a half years we have
consistently demonstrated the political will to
constructively participate in its implementation, as
evidenced by our support for the electoral processes in
2001 and 2002 and our active participation in
formulating the November 2001 common document on
cooperation with UNMIK. However, to a great extent,
efforts to cooperate with UNMIK have been a one-way
process. We expect channels of cooperation to be reestablished in the near future. A constructive policy of
transparency by UNMIK — including in the
privatization process — will be a necessary new
element in future communications between our
Government and UNMIK.
There seems to be common agreement that the
work in Kosovo and Metohija is far from done.
Stability and prosperity are our shared goals. However,
as the Secretary-General stated on the occasion of the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), what counts is not
only the commitment to peace, but also the will to
implement it. I can assure the Security Council of my
country’s willingness to participate constructively in
this process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Greece. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

S/PV.4770

Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, since this
is the first time that we are speaking under your
presidency, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of your duties. I should also like to
congratulate the previous President, the representative
of Pakistan, on his excellent work.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia, the
associated countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey,
and the European Free Trade Association countries
belonging to the European Economic Area Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway declare that they align
themselves with this statement.
We
welcome
Assistant
Secretary-General
Annabi’s briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We
should like to stress that the continuous and unabated
interest and involvement of the international
community — especially through the Security
Council — is of paramount importance if that area is to
finally achieve peace, stability and prosperity.
On this fourth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), let me reiterate that full
implementation of that resolution remains the
cornerstone of the European Union’s policy on Kosovo.
Building a democratic, multi-ethnic and multicultural
Kosovo with full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights is our stated course of
action. The “standards before status” policy provides
the agreed framework for achieving those objectives.
Terrorism and violence — be they ethnically,
politically or criminally motivated — will not be
tolerated. We unequivocally condemn incidents such as
the recent killing of two 80-year-old Kosovar Serbs
and their son in the village of Obilic. We welcome the
condemnation by all parties in Kosovo of that act of
violence, as well as Prime Minister Rexhepi’s visit to
Obilic. We expect all parties to do their utmost to
ensure that the perpetrators are soon brought to justice.
A Kosovo where members of minority
communities are oppressed will face a bleak future of
self-imposed isolation. Our efforts should aim to
establish appropriate security, economic and legislative
conditions that will allow minorities to be — as they
should be — an integral part of Kosovo’s political,
economic, social and cultural life, while making the
return of refugees feasible and sustainable.

Organized crime is the single most urgent
challenge that we must address in the region. Coupled
with extremism, and with deep roots in the area’s
political and social life, organized crime threatens the
very foundation of the principles and values that we are
trying to instil in the new institutions formed there,
thus rendering our efforts fruitless.
Political stability in Kosovo requires the building
of stable institutions through the establishment and
strengthening of local democracy. We fully support the
process of transfer of competencies to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, as set out in chapter 5
of the Constitutional Framework, and taking into
account the capacity of those institutions to handle
them. Building effective, transparent and accountable
institutions for the benefit of all communities, while
adhering to the obligations arising from Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework, and not prejudging the final status should
be our main objectives.
The European Union is strongly committed to
securing peace, security and the right conditions for
political and economic development in the region by
enhancing its European perspective through the
Stabilization
and
Association
Process.
The
Thessaloniki Summit, to be held on 21 June, will focus
on precisely that European perspective, which is aimed
at promoting both regional ownership and regional
cooperation, including dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Greece for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Annabi: There were two specific questions
from our colleague from the United Kingdom. The first
question related to the issue of parallel structures. As I
indicated in my briefing, parallel structures offering
administrative and other services to Kosovo Serb
residents continue to operate in certain parts of Kosovo
with the support of Belgrade. Efforts to strengthen the
institutional links between Belgrade and those parallel
structures in Kosovo have been most evident in the
areas of health and education.
Although Belgrade has agreed that the parallel
structures should be disbanded, there continue to be

19

S/PV.4770

areas — mostly in northern Kosovo — which, for
example, still have parallel courts, even if those courts
play only a marginal role. Nevertheless, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been able to establish a minor offences
court and a municipal court in the municipality of
Zubin Potok, in the Mitrovica area.
In Mitrovica itself, UNMIK continues to provide
the Kosovo Serbs in the north of the city with a number
of administrative services. As I indicated in my
briefing, Mr. Steiner has also appointed a multi-ethnic
advisory board that is intended to act as a forum for
cooperation among the communities. The board’s first
meeting was held on 13 May. The Kosovo Serbs
participated, but they then expressed reservations about
the board’s composition, wrongly claiming that there
had been some kind of understanding that it would
include only Kosovo Serb members.
UNMIK is in the process of developing a
comprehensive action plan and policy to address this
problem of parallel structures, and Belgrade’s
cooperation will, of course, be essential in that process.
The second question related to UNMIK’s
downsizing and to how, in that context, the Mission
intends to proceed with the shift from executive to
advisory functions as it transfers chapter 5
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions.
UNMIK’s downsizing plans, of course, have to be
seen in the context of its budget, which has been
established at the level of $315 million for the fiscal
year beginning on 1 July this year. That planning is
being developed in a manner which will ensure that, as

20

powers are transferred, UNMIK retains an overall
capacity in all areas to effectively discharge or exercise
its authority under resolution 1244 (1999) and to
discharge its powers and responsibilities, including
those in the Constitutional Framework.
As UNMIK gradually transfers the non-reserved
competencies listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework to the Provisional Institutions, it will retain
sufficient staff to have the capacity to monitor and
advise the Provisional Institutions and municipalities,
as well as to intervene whenever that becomes
necessary, to ensure that those bodies exercise their
responsibilities in compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework.
UNMIK also takes into account in its planning
the fact that at a later stage there will be increased
involvement on the part of the Provisional Institutions
and the people of Kosovo in the administrative and
operational functions in specific reserved areas
identified in chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework. This process will naturally involve a
reallocation and reduction, in some cases, of UNMIK’s
resources from the transferred areas to the reserved
areas, in line with UNMIK’s budget.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Annabi for his clarifications.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
