VIII.

32/72.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

Committee on Conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3351 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974,
Having noted the report of the Committee on Conferences,23
1. Decides to retain the Committee on Conferences,
composed of twenty-two Member Stat~s, subject to
review of its terms of reference as reqmred;
2. Requests th~ President of the General Asse~bly,
after consultations with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint Member States, on the basis of an
equitable geographical balance, to serve on the Committee on Conferences for a three-year term;
3. Decides that the Committee on Conferences shall
have the terms of reference set forth below:
(a) To advise the General Assembly on the calendar of conferences;
(b) To act ,on behalf of the General Assembly in
dealing with departures from the approved cale~da~ of
conferences that have administrative and financ1a'1 implications;
( c) To recommend to the General Assembly means
to provide the optimum apportionment of conference
resources, faciliti•es and services, includi~g documentation, in order to ensure their most efficient and effective use;
( d) To advise the General Assembly on the current
and future requirements of the Organizat_ion for conference services, facilities and documentation;
(e) To advise the General Assembly on means to
ensure improved co~ordination of conferences within
th~ United Nations system, including conference services and facilities, and to conduct the appropriate consultations in that regard;
4. Requests its subsidiary bodies to seek the advice
of the Committee on Conferences with regard to the
scheduling of their regular meetings and with regard
to any proposed changes in their established pattern of
sessions.
99th plenary meetin,g
9 December 1977
*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed
the Secretary-Genera/24 that, in accordance with paragraph11 1
and 2 of the above resolution, he had appointed the member.r
of the Committee on Conferences.
As a result, the Committee on Conferences is composed of
the following Member States: ALGERIA, AusTRIA, CANADA,
CHILE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, FRANCE, HONDURAS, INDONESIA, IVORY COAST, JAPAN, KENYA, MEXICO, NEW ZEALAND,
NIGERIA, PERU, PHILIPPINES, SRI LANKA, UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERIC'A and
YUGOSLAVIA.

32/73.

Investments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations and in developing countries
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 31 / 197 of 22 December 1976 it requested the Secretary-General to ensure
Supplement No. 32 (A/32/32).
24 A/32/ 497 and Add. I.

23 Jbid.,

187

that the resources which the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund holds invested in shares of transnational
corporations are invested on safe and profitable terms
and, to the greatest extent practicable, in sound investments in developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-~neral on United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund investments in transnational corporations and in developing
countries,2''
Noting that since the adoption of resolution 31/197
United Nations Joint Staff P.:!nsion Fund investments
in transnational corporations have risen to $772 million
in bonds and equities as at 31 March 1977, while direct
bond investments in the developing countries have only
increased to $22 million,
Recalling that the third preambular paragraph of
resolution 31 / 197 took into account that investments by
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in shares
of transnational corporations might contradict the objectives and purposes of the organizations of the United
Nations system,
Recalling also the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations and other imernational organizations concerning the new international economic order and the transnational corporations,
Noting with satisfaction the decision of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board that, where investments in the developed and the developing world equally
satisfy the criteria of safety, profitability, liquidity and
convertibility, priority should be given to investment in
developing countries,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts in consultation with the Investments Committee,
in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31 / 197,
to ensure that, subject to careful observance of the requirements of safety, profitabHity, liquidity and convertibility, and in strict conformity with the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
a larger proportion of the investment of the resources
of the Fund is made in developing countries;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
99th plenary meeting
9 December 1977
B

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board26 and of the Secretary-Generai27 with regard to the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations and in developing countries,
Recalling that in its resolution 3527 (XXX) of
16 Dlcember 1975 it requested the Secretary-General
to intensify his efforts to increase the investments of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund directly in
developing countries on safe and profitable terms,
Noting that the efforts of the Secretary-General to
increase the investments of the United Nations Joint
2r. AIC.5/32125.

2 6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-secoT1d
SessioTI, Supplement No. 9 (A/3219) and A/32/9/ Add.I.

27 A/C.5/32/25.
