VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

system which have ~ontinue~ to _co-ope~ate in vary~g
degrees with the Umted Nat10ns m the 1mpl~mentat10n
of the Declaration and other relevant resolut10ns of the
General Assembly;
4. Expresses its concern that the assistance exten?ed
so far by the specialized ag_encies and oth er organ~ations within the United Nations system to the colomal
peoples, particularly those of Zimbabwe an~ Namibia,
and to their national liberation movements 1s far from
adequate in terms of the actual needs of the peoples
concerned;
5. Regrets that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have not yet taken the necessary
measures towards the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
or continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and material assistance to the colonial peaples in Africa struggling for their liberation from colonial rule;
7. Recommends that the organizations conce~ed
should initiate or broaden contacts and co-operation
with the colonial peoples in consultation wi th th e Organization of African Unit)'., review their p_rocedures
with respect to the formulation and preparation of assistance programmes and projects and introduce greater
flexibility in these procedures so as to be able to extend
the necessary assistance without delay to help the colonial peoples and their national liberation movements
in their struggle to exercise their inalienable right _to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
8. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take all
necessary measures to withhold any financial, economic,
technical or other assistance from the Government of
South Africa and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until they restore to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
and to refrain from taking any action which might
imply recognition of the legitimacy of the domination
of the Territories by those regimes;
9. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements made
by several specialized agencies and organizations which
enable representatives of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity
to participate fully as observers in the proceedings relating to matters concerning their respective countries,
and calls upon those international institutions which
have not yet done so to follow this example and to make
the necessary arrangements without delay;
10. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system of which
they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that connexion,
should accord priority to the question of providing assistance on an emergency basis to the peoples in the
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
ll. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United

119

Nations system, having regard to the recommen~ations
contained in paragraph 7 above, to formulate with the
active co-operation of the Organizati~n .of Africa~
Unity and to submit, as a matter of pnonty, to their
governing and legislative organs concrete P!oposals_ for
the full implementation of the relevant Umted ~at10ns
decisions, in particular speci~c prog~am~es of assi~tance
to the peoples in the colomal Temtones and their national liberation movements;
Requests the Secretary-General:
To prepare for submission to the relevant
bodies concerned with related aspects of the present
item with the assistance of the specialized agencies and
othe; organizations within the United Nations system,
a report on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant reso1utions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations systern in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations systern in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
12.

(a)

14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/31.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 3422 (XXX) of 8 December
1975,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1975/76, 10
Taking note with satisfaction of the increase in contributions to the Programme which permitted the continuance in 1975/76 of a substantial level of assistance,
in the form of individual awards, for the education of
persons from the Territories concerned,
Recognizing however that, because of significant increases in the costs of educational and training awards,
additional funds are essential if the Programme is to
continue in operation at a satisfactory level,
Considering that the Programme has been a significant and worth-while effort of the international community, and that a continuation and expansion of the
Programme is desirable to meet the increased needs
arising from recent developments in the Territories concerned,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa;
10 A/31/268.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

120

2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in order to ensure its continuation and expansion, particularly during this most important period.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/32.

Offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3423 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 11
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;.-~--3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by
States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
<;olonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/45.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
11 A/31/287.

Considering the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at Port
Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary
session devoted to the question of Western Sahara,12
Taking note of that part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to Western
Sahara, 13
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the
Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3412 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of selfdetermination of peoples in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples;
2. Takes note of the decision taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity to convene an extraordinary
session with a view to finding a just and lasting solution
to the problem of Western Sahara;
3. Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of Western Sahara until its thirty-second session;
4. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the progress
achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity concerning Western
Sahara, and invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to report on that information to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/46.

Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 14
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 15
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemb~r 1960, containing the. Declaration on the Granting
of Independenc~ to Colomal_ <;:ountries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and dec1S1ons of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3431 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Solomon Islands ,
12
See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, resolution AHG/Res 81
(XIII). Fo~ the I?rinted text, see Official Records of the Se~urlly Counczl, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1976.
i:lA/31/197, annex I, para. 35.
14
_
Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sessw11, Sf!pplem~nt J>!o. 23 (_A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XXI.
15
.
Ibid., TJurty-fzrst Sesswn, Fourth Committee I Ith meet1~g, paras._ 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, S~ssional Fasc,c/e, corngendum.
