S/2004/497

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 June 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 16 June 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1529 (2004), I have the honour to
convey the attached status report of the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti (see
annex). I should be grateful if the present report could be brought to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-39408 (E)

220604

*0439408*

S/2004/497

Annex
Multinational Interim Force in Haiti
Status report
1.
The United Nations Security Council adopted resolution 1529 (2004) on
29 February 2004 in response to the deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Haiti. Resolution 1529 (2004) authorized the immediate
deployment of the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti (MIFH) for a period of three
months to help secure and stabilize the capital, Port au Prince, and elsewhere in the
country.
2.
The Commander of MIFH submits the present 90-day report in accordance
with operative paragraph 9 of resolution 1529 (2004).
Task implementation
3.
In the past month, MIFH extended operations to include Hinche and the
southern claw of Haiti. Finding conditions stable and relatively secure in the
southern claw, MIFH forces withdrew to focus resources on Hinche and the Port au
Prince area. The following results have been noted since the MIFH status report
dated 1 May 2004:
Task 1
Contribute to a secure and stable environment to support the constitutional
political process
(1) Ongoing MIFH assessment indicates that the constitutional political
process has significantly improved since the current government of Haiti
(GOH) was established. GOH is still limited in its ability to maintain civil
organizations and infrastructure in some isolated cities. Examples include
Hinche, Les Cayes and Jeremie. Former rebel groups with a vested interest in
maintaining a perception of security in order to conduct business or secure a
role in the Haitian political process continue to stabilize these cities.
(2) MIFH continues to provide site security to the Presidential Palace to
ensure unimpeded function of critical GOH facilities.
Task 2
Facilitate humanitarian assistance and humanitarian worker access
(1) MIFH took immediate action to relieve human suffering caused by heavy
flooding in the towns of Fond Verrettes and Mapou. On 25 May, MIFH
delivered 18,000 litres of bottled water, 500 boxes of fruit and 500 boxes of
bread to Fond Verrettes from existing MIFH supplies. On 27 May, MIFH
began a sustained effort to deliver disaster-relief supplies provided by NGOs
and private voluntary organizations. In conjunction with United Nationsestablished prioritization of relief efforts, MIFH utilized its helicopter assets to
deliver 10,000 pounds of food, 72 gallons of cooking oil, and plastic sheeting
for shelter to Fond Verrettes. This delivery provided a week’s worth of food to
464 families that lost their homes in the recent floods. On the same day, MIFH
delivered 27,000 pounds of drinking water and 3,500 pounds of medical and

2

S/2004/497

hygiene kits to Mapou. On 28 May, MIFH transported 64,000 pounds of rice,
water, beans and cooking oil to Mapou and 19,000 pounds of rice, beans and
hygiene kits to Fond Verrettes. Over this period, MIFH also provided
helicopter transportation to GOH officials, the United Nations, NGOs and the
international media. This support allowed those organizations to develop a
detailed assessment of the disaster and plan future aid for this area. Facilitating
transportation for the media brought international attention to this crisis, which
will probably increase humanitarian aid to the area.
(2) MIFH collaborates with humanitarian assistance organizations through
the Civil Military Operations Center to distribute assistance in targeted areas.
This is in addition to the direct disaster relief efforts described above. MIFH
civil affairs teams assess and communicate critical needs within Haitian
society to the appropriate humanitarian assistance organization.
(3) Over the past 90 days, MIFH escorted 3,106 tons of food in the southern
claw, the Cap Haitien and the central plateau. MIFH assisted in the distribution
of 1,400 tons of food to orphanages and rest homes in Port au Prince through
partnerships with NGOs and the GOH social service food distribution
programme. MIFH also facilitated distribution of 70,000 40-pound bags of rice
to orphanages, charitable and religious organizations and NGOs in support of
the GOH food distribution programme.
(4) Over the past 90 days, MIFH has completed 13 medical civil action
projects (MEDCAPS), benefiting approximately 2,500 Haitians in Cité Soleil,
Bel Air, Les Cayes and Hinche. The total cost for medicines used at those
MEDCAPs was $25,000.
(5) Ten hospitals and clinics have received approximately $900,000 worth of
medical equipment. Also, 12 tons of medicine was distributed to 11 hospitals
in Port au Prince.
(6) In conjunction with NGOs, MIFH distributed more than 800 hygiene kits
to students and families in Cité Soleil and the Bel Air area.
(7) MIFH worked with the United States Embassy to distribute $855,000 of
excess medical property received from the United States Southern Command
(SOUTHCOM) humanitarian assistance programme to 10 hospitals and clinics
in Port au Prince and Les Cayes.
(8) In conjunction with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO),
MIFH assisted in the distribution of a medical kit to the University Hospital in
Bel Air. This kit will provide basic care to 3,000 Haitians over a three-month
period.
(9) The Chilean Task Force received 12 tons of medicine and equipment
through the Chilean Embassy, and distributed it to 11 hospitals and clinics in
the Port au Prince area.
(10) MIFH secured funding for the installation of a new roof to support the
surgical wing of the Cap Haitien hospital from the SOUTHCOM humanitarian
assistance programme fund. The existing roof had a leak that severely
disrupted the use of the surgical suite.

3

S/2004/497

(11) MIFH distributed more than 98,000 gallons of water to families, schools,
rest homes and orphanages. Also, five water wells have been completed in the
Port au Prince area and two water points for the local village near MIFH
headquarters. Local villagers had to walk two miles to obtain fresh drinking
water before those water points were built.
(12) MIFH removed 450 dump trucks of trash and 70 vehicle hulks. That
street cleaning project has allowed the safe movement of vehicle traffic and
has improved overall health conditions. The Cité Soleil canal ditch cleaning
project excavated 1.5 km of drainage canal, including dredging operations for
300 metres to allow drainage into the bay. This will significantly reduce
flooding of the local community. That project employed over 100 Haitian
citizens. MIFH also contracted for the construction of 24 public latrines in the
Cité Soleil area. This provided the only sanitary facilities to residents in the
area.
(13) MIFH supported educational programmes by distributing 1,200 school
kits to primary and middle schools in Cité Soleil and Bel Air. More than 550
pieces of school furniture were distributed to 10 schools in Port au Prince.
MIFH engineers constructed school benches, desks and other furniture for
schools and orphanages in Cité Soleil, Bel Air and the Carrefour area. The
engineers are currently working on three Organization of American States
(OAS)-funded renovation/repair projects at schools in Cité Soleil. The
estimated cost of those projects is $38,000.
(14) MIFH made significant improvements to the Port au Prince International
Airport, the pier at Les Cayes and major roads to better facilitate the
distribution of humanitarian assistance. At the airport, a significant drainage
effort was undertaken, a 1.2 km road was built and a 15,000 square foot
gravel-top area was installed. At Les Cayes, engineers conducted shoring
operations to stabilize the pier and built tread bridges to span unsafe portions
of the pier. The result is that the Les Cayes pier is now capable of offloading
light vehicular traffic. MIFH engineers also undertook a project to fix a serious
drainage problem on route 200. The project involved re-routing 1.1 km of the
original riverbed that was flooding the road. The road has been cleared of
1,200 cubic metres of silt and traffic has been restored.
(15) United States Coast Guard forces attached to MIFH ensured safe
navigation and accessibility to seaports for the delivery of critical
humanitarian aid for the Haitian people.
Task 3
Facilitate assistance to the Haitian National Police (HNP) and Haitian Coast
Guard (HCG) to support public safety and human rights
(1) The MIFH maritime component conducted on-the-job training with HCG
by performing over 520 boarding evolutions. Also, more than 100 hours of
classroom and hands-on training were conducted for maritime law
enforcement, small boat coxswains, boat crewmen, weapons safety and
maintenance, and outboard motor maintenance.
(2) The maritime component also conducts joint maritime patrols with the
HCG and provides assistance in fixing HCG boats and physical structures.

4

S/2004/497

Additional support over time is required to allow HCG to develop the ability to
operate independently.
(3) MIFH conducted a thorough assessment of HCG personnel, training,
equipment and infrastructure to support increased HCG competence. A longterm training and technical assistance plan was completed in coordination with
HCG to restore, stabilize and sustain HCG.
(4) The primary MIFH means of ensuring security continue to be joint
patrols of population centres with HNP. Those patrols reinforce the public’s
perception of security and normalcy, and have served to increase the
experience level of HNP.
(5) MIFH has taken custody of 68 weapons. More than 30 have been
destroyed; however, those that are functional will be distributed to HNP. All
MIFH weapon-confiscation efforts are intended to support the ability of HNP
to ensure public safety, provide force protection to MIFH personnel and
improve the overall security situation in Haiti.
(6) MIFH engineers conducted an assessment of the national prison, issued a
contract for removing approximately 300 cubic yards of debris and affecting
significant repairs to the facility. The prison was unusable prior to those
repairs. The prison can now hold 1,500 prisoners under Haitian occupancy
standards.
(7) MIFH engineers also upgraded the facilities and the pier at Killick Coast
Guard base. Improvements include the renovation of offices, the barracks,
support spaces and the security wall surrounding the base. MIFH engineers
also modified the pier to prevent damage to small patrol boats.
(8) MIFH assisted the national police in conducting assessments of the Port
au Prince police stations to determine the level of required repairs.
(9) MIFH facilitated repairs to the local police academy, including
improvements to 27 classrooms and four bathrooms and the provision of
dormitories and new beds.
(10) Joint patrols between MIFH and HNP have been extremely productive in
providing HNP with basic training and increased professionalism. The positive
results of that interaction have resulted in an increased presence of HNP
patrolling in the community. Joint operations have provided HNP with the
security and support necessary to carry out operations against known or
suspected weapons caches as well as pursuing outstanding arrest warrants.
Those operations have illustrated the willingness of HNP to take action against
criminal activity in Port au Prince.
(11) MIFH placed a liaison officer with the HNP Director General to improve
information flow and coordination.
(12) MIFH temporarily secured outlying HNP stations, which allowed HNP to
install new leadership and personnel. MIFH also provided airlift support to
HNP to remote northern territories to rapidly establish new HNP leadership.
(13) MIFH helped HNP to design a new training syllabus for the police
academy. The new syllabus will include human rights and anti-corruption

5

S/2004/497

training. MIFH also assisted in establishing vetting procedures for both exmilitary and new civilian recruits.
(14) MIFH procured funding from the Department of State for a new
identification system for HNP, which will allow HNP an uncompromised
identification capability that will enable them to accurately track manning
levels.
(15) MIFH recommended and implemented the establishment of an
emergency phone system. MIFH also assisted in establishing an anticorruption hotline linked directly to the Inspector General’s office. MIFHHaiti assisted in establishing a 45-man rapid response force that will work
directly for the Director General.
(16) MIFH has included a detachment of HNP for each disaster-relief delivery
site. Those HNP teams have been used to provide an augmentation to on-site
security during relief supply distribution.
Task 4
Support the establishment of conditions for international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations and the Organization of
American States, to assist the Haitian people
As reported in the first MIFH report in March 2004, thanks to the rapid
deployment of MIFH, the staff of international and regional organizations,
including OAS and the United Nations, were able to return to work on site and
assistance projects have been resumed.
Task 5
To coordinate, as needed, with the OAS special mission and the
United Nations Special Adviser for Haiti to prevent further deterioration
of the humanitarian situation
As reported in the first MIFH report in March 2004, the MIFH commander has
met with United Nations Special Adviser Dumas and with OAS representatives
in order to exchange views on the situation in Haiti and the best means of
responding to humanitarian objectives. MIFH contributors believe that the
coordination of international and regional organizations is crucial to improve
the humanitarian situation and to maximize the effectiveness of international
assistance. That vital work has continued throughout the MIFH engagement.
Transfer of responsibility to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH)
4.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1542 (2004) to establish the mandate
of MINUSTAH. The resolution authorizes the extension of the current MIFH
mandate up to 30 days on request of the MINUSTAH commander, in recognition of
the need to continue MIFH operations beyond the 1 June 2004 mandate established
by Council resolution 1529.
5.
MIFH forces have worked to ensure a smooth transfer of responsibility for
operations in Haiti to MINUSTAH. French forces will withdraw from the northern
sector and complete redeployment on 20 June 2004. Canadian and Chilean forces
have agreed to remain in Haiti, switching to MINUSTAH control upon transfer of

6

S/2004/497

responsibility. United States intent is for the earliest possible transfer of
responsibility to allow forces in Haiti to redeploy to the United States, reconstitute
and prepare for their next operational commitment. MIFH planners have maintained
regular contact and communication with United Nations representatives to ensure
the synchronization of United Nations and MIFH planning efforts.
6.
MIFH hosted a joint MIFH-MINUSTAH transition planning conference from
3 to 7 May 2004. Current MIFH partner nations, the United Nations, Brazil and
Argentina were all represented. The conference resulted in a draft joint transition
document, which is pending final approval and signature by the Commander of
MIFH and the appropriate United Nations representative.
7.
MIFH planners continue to develop an MIFH-specific transition and
redeployment order to ensure an orderly and efficient handover of sectors within
Haiti and redeployment of French and United States forces to their parent nations.
The MIFH redeployment process will be coordinated with MINUSTAH deployment
to prevent the limited air and seaport facilities in Haiti from being overwhelmed.
Comment
8.
The spirit of cooperation and mission accomplishment displayed by each of
the MIFH partner nations and their forces provided to this mission have allowed
noteworthy success in restoring stability in Haiti and renewed hope of prosperity for
its people.

7
