zo

General Aaaembly

4. Requests the Economic :ind Soci~l Coun~il, not
later than its nineteenth session and m _the hght ?f
proposals to be subm_itted to i_t by t~e High Co~m1ssioner upon the advice of his Adv1s?ry Comm1t!ee,
either to establish an Executive Committee responsible
for giving directives to the High Commis~i?ner in
carrying out his programme and for exerc1smg the
necessary controls in the use of funds al~otted to the
Office of the High Commissioner or to revise the terms
of reference and composition of the Advisory C<;>mmittee in order to enable it to carry out the same duties ;
5. Requests the High Commissioner to prepar~, for
presentation to the inter-go~ernmental body mentl?ned
in paragraph 4 above, detailed propos~ls for_ proie.cts
designed to achieve permanent solut1o?s, .mcludmg
plans for adequate financial or other. contributions from
sources within the countries of residence;
6. Requests the Governments c?ncerned, ~n !he negotiation of agreements with the H1~h Comm1ss101:er for
the projects for permanent solut10ns ui:ider this programme, to give assurances that they will assume full
financial responsibility should any of. the r~fugees
within the scope of the programme still require assistance at the end of the stipulated period;
7. Urges Member and non-member States to cooperate with the High Commissioner to the fullest
extent in this programme ;
8 Requests the High Commissioner to include in his
ann~al report a statement on the measures which he
has taken under the terms of the present resolution.
495th plenary meeting,
21 October 1954.
833 (IX). Draft international covenants on
human right•

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the draft intenatio_na! covenants on
human rights 8 prepared by the Comm1ss1<?n on Hum~n
Rights and transmitted• by the Economic and ~0~1al
Council and expressing its gratitude to that Comm1ss10n
for the work accomplished,
Having considered these draft international covenants on human rights at its ninth session,
Reaffirming that it is important that . these. draft
international covenants should be adopted m their final
form as soon as possible,
Considering that it is desirable to give Governments
of States Members and non-members of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies time to make a
full study of these draft international covenant~ _and
to submit, if they so desire, amendments or additions
thereto, or further observations thereon,
Considering that it is desirable for each Government
to be informed in good time of the views of other
Governments and of the specialized agencies concerning
the provisions to be included in the draft international
covenants on human rights so that it may take due
account ·of these views in determining its own attitude,
Considering that it is desirable that public opinion
should continue to express itself freely on the draft
international covenants on human rights,
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7, an?exes I, I~ and III.
• See Economic and Social Council, resolut10n 545 B

(XVIII).

Ninth Session

1. Invites:
(a) Governments of States Members an_d non-members of the United Nations to communicate to the
Secretary-General, within six months after the end of
the present sessio!1. of the Gener~! Asse';llbly, any
amendments or additions to the draft mternabonal covenants on human rights or any observations thereon;
( b) The specialized agencies to communicate to the
Secretary-General, within six moI?ths after the ~nd
of the present session, any obser_vat10ns .they may wish
to make with regard to the draft mternattonal covenants
on human rights ;
( c) The non-governmental or~anizat.ions ~oncerned
with the promotion of human nghts, mclu~mg_ those
in the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Tern tones, to
stimulate public interest in the draft. internation~l cov~nants on human rights by all possible means m their
respective cquntries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare and distribute to Governments, as
early as possible, a concise annotation of the te~t of
the draft international covenants on human nghts,
taking account of the observations made before and
during the ninth session of the ~eneral ~ssembly,
including those made in the Economic an? Social Council and in the Commission on Human Rights;
(b) To distribute to Governments, as soon as they
are received, the communications which may be made
by Governments and by the specialized agencies during
the next six months ;
(c) To prepare as a working paper a compilation
of all the amendments and proposed new articles which
may be submitted by Governments during that period;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give the ~raft
international covenants on human rights the widest
possible publicity through all the media of information
available to him, and within the limits of his budget;
4. Recommends that, during the tenth session of the
General Assembly, the Third Committee give priority
and devote itself ma'inly to the discussion, article by
article, in an agreed order, of the draft international
covenants on human rights with a view to their adoption
at the earliest possible date. The discussion shall also
cover any new articles which may be proposed.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

834 (IX). United Nations Narcotics Laboratory

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 548 D
(XVIII) of 12 July 1954 on the subject of the establishment of a United Nations Narcotics Laboratory,
Having considered the Secretary-General's note 5 of
15 October 1954 which sets out the comparative cost
of setting up such a laboratory at Headquarters and
at Geneva,
Noting the statement by the Secretary-General in the
above note that he "would regard it as important that
the laboratory should be situated in the same place,
and preferably in the same building, as the Division of
Narcotic Drugs as a whole",
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document A/C.3/573.

Re11olution1 adopted on tbe report, of the Third Committee

Taking into account that, under the Secretary-General's proposals• for the reorganization of the Secretariat, the Division of Narcotic Drugs is to be transferred to Geneva,
Decides to establish a United Nations Narcotics
Laboratory in Geneva.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
835 (IX). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 802 (VIII) of 6
October 1953 it decided to continue the activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund without time limits,
Taking note of resolution 543 (XVIII) adopted by
the Economic and Social Council after consideration
of the reports made by the Executive Board of
UNICEF on the work of the Fund,
Being of the opinion that the work of UNICEF
is developing with success in the various parts of the
world, especially in under-developed areas,
1. Congratulates the United Nations Children's Fund
on its work;
2. Considers that further efforts are desirable to
familiarize the public with the needs of children and
with the work of UNICEF;
3. Invites all States Members and non-members of
the United Nations to continue their efforts to expand
the resources of UNICEF.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
836 (IX). Universal Children's Day

The General Assembly,
Considering that the obligations of the United
Nations to succeeding generations can only be fulfilled
by increased efforts on behalf of the children of the
world, who are the citizens of tomorrow, and that the
world-wide observance of a children's day would contribute to human solidarity and co-operation between
nations,
Believing that the objectives of the Charter can best
be realized if they inspire and are shared by the children
of the world,
Recalling the increased interest in the work of and
the support given to the United Nations Children's
Fund and its acceptance as an integral part of the
United Nations, and that various resolutions relating
to children adopted by the General Assembly have
shown the Organization's concern for children in all
parts of the world,
Considering the increasing attention given by States
and peoples to a better observance of the rights of
mothers and children, as well as the action of civic,
social, professional and cultural institutions, national,
international and regional, on behalf of children,
Expressing its appreciation of the work done by
governmental and voluntary organizations for the
children of the world, including the observance in a
certain number of countries of a Universal Children's
Day,
8

Ibid., agenda item 53, document A/2731.

Zl

Considering that the observance of Universal Children's Day should be used for a concrete and effective
expression of the support of Governments for the
purposes of UNICEF,
1. Recomends that, with effect from 1956, a Universal Children's Day shall be instituted by all countries,
to be observed as a day of world-wide fraternity and
understanding between children and of activity devoted
to the promotion of the ideals and objectives of the
Charter and the welfare of the children of the world,
and to the strengthening and broadening of the efforts
made by the United Nations in favour and on behalf of
all the children of the world ;
2. Suggests to the Goyernments of all States that
Universal Children's Day be observed on the date ancl
in the way which each considers appropriate;
3. Also-invites the cultural, professional, trade union,
workers' and social welfare organizations, for men and
women, to support and co-operate actively in the ot>sen·ance of Universal Children's Day;
4. Requests the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund, in co-operation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to take steps in accordance with the present
resolution and to include in its annual reports a report
on progress achieved in accordance with the above
recommendations.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
837 (IX). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its resolutions 637 (VII), 648 (VII) and
738 (VIII),
Noting the recommendations 7 of the Commission on
Human Rights to the Economic and Social Council,
Noting, further, resolution 545 G (XVIII) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council,
Considering that the preparation of recommendations
on measures for promoting the right of self-determination is a matter of immediate concern,
I. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete its recommendations concerning international
respect for the right of peoples and nations to selfdetermination, including recommendations concerning
their permanent scvereignty over their natural wealth
and resources, having due regard to the rights and
duties of States under international law and to the
importance of encouraging international co-operation
in the economic development of under-developed countries, in order that the General Assembly may give
those recommendations full and due consideration at
its next regular session;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit these recommendations to the General A~
sembly for consideration at its next regular session.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7, annex IV, draft resolution F.
