Rel!olutionl! adopted on the reportl! of the Second Committee

the magnitude of the problem makes it far beyond the
means at present available to most of the countries
concerned and requires the mobilization of considerable
human, financial and technical resources, and concerted
international action,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1128 (XLI) on the world campaign for universal literacy, adopted unanimously on 26 July 1966;
2. Invites, in the name of human solidarity, Member
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, foundations, institutions and private enterprises to provide continuing and effective financial,
material and technical support for the world campaign
for universal literacy ;
3. Expresses the hope that additional resources will
be made available to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the world
campaign for universal literacy in the manner which
each State may deem appropriate;
4. Makes an urgent appeal to the conscience of the
world to support world-wide efforts to eliminate mass
illiteracy by providing the necessary and indispensable
means to this end.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
2206 (XXI). Second session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Considering that the second session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development will
provide a forum for the further examination of major
issues of trade and development, including the consideration of further action for the implementation of
the recommendations adopted at the first session of
the Conference,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference, at its
second session, to concentrate in particular on a limited
number of fundamental and specific subjects with a
view to achieving practical and concrete results by
means of negotiation aimed at securing the greatest
measure of agreement,
Stressing the need for adequate preparatory work to
ensure the success of the second session of the Conference,
Expressing the hope that the preparation for the
second session of the Conference will result in new and
determined efforts on the part of all States members of
the Conference to achieve substantial progress both in
the implementation and in the further elaboration of
international policy on development,
Noting with interest the recommendation of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its third session,
held at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, that
a meeting of the developing countries should be held
at the ministerial level to prepare for their participation
in the second session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development,
1. Decides to convene the second session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at New Delhi from 1 February to 25 March 1968;
2. Calls upon the Trade and Development Board and
its subsidiary bodies to take into account the objectives
outlined in the first three paragraphs of the preamble
of the present resolution in their preparations for the

39

second session of the Conference, and to attempt to
identify the issues on which preparatory work will have
progressed sufficiently to enable specific programmes
of action to be drawn up at the second session of the
Conference by means of negotiation aimed at securing
the greatest possible measure of agreement;
3. Urges the Governments of the States members
of the Conference to ensure effective participation in
the second session of the Conference and to make the
maximum efforts, both in their preparations for the
second session and during the deliberations of the
Conference, to ensure its success, bearing in mind the
objectives referred to above;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut to pay special attention, in their programmes, to preparations for the second session of the
Conference, and to take such steps as may be feasible
to extend their full co-operation in ensuring its success ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference
to begin forthwith the preparatory work for the second
session in the light of th~ guidance given by the Trade
and Development Board and its subsidiary bodies,
which will meet in the interim, in co-operation wherever
possible with the regional economic commissions, the
United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut
and the appropriate international organizations.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2207 (XXI). Technical assistance in trade and
related fields

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trade and Development Board
resolution 31 (IV) of 23 September 1966 on technical
assistance in tr_ade and related fields,
Taking note of the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on this subject at the fourth session
of the Board,27
1. Endorses the recommendations contained in Trade
and Development Board resolution 31 (IV);
2. Decides to amend paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
so as to include the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as a
member of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board of the
United Nations Development Programme.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2208 (XXI). International monetary reform

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report entitled International
Monetary Issues and the Developing Countries,28 prepared by the Expert Group on International Monetary
Issues of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, and of the comments made thereon by
the members of the Conference, including the memo21 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/
Rev.1), part two, para. 177.
2 8 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 66.II.D.2.

40

General A111embly-Twenty-fint Seeaion

randum on international liquidity29 presented by the
developing countries to the Committee on Invisibles
and Financing related to Trade at its special session in
January and February 1966,
Bearing in mind the annual report of the International Monetary Fund for 1966,30
Recognizing the need for a reform of the international
monetary system that would make it more responsive
to the requirements of the economic growth of both
developed and developing countries,
Noting the initiatives taken in promoting the informal
meetings now being held between the executive directors of the International Monetary Fund and the
deputies of the Governments participating in the General Arrangements to Borrow,
1. Endorses the need for those developed and developing countries which so desire to be fully represented in the discussions and decisions leading to any
new international monetary reform arrangements, including those relating to the problems of international
liquidity, and to participate fully in the operation of
such arrangements as may be made;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
consult with the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund on the progress of activity relating to
international monetary reform and to report to the
Trade and Development Board at its fifth session
through the Committee on Invisibles and Financing
related to Trade.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.

2209 (XXI). Implementation of the recommendations made by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its first session

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2085 (XX) of 20 December
1965 regarding the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
H<Wing considered the annual report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 31 October
1965 to 24 September 1966,31
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1188
(XLI) of 17 November 1966 on the report of the
Board,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of the Conference entitled "Review of International
Trade and Development 1966"32 and the discussions
thereon at the fourth session of the Board,
Expressing serious concern at the lack of progress
in solving, in the light of the Final Act adopted by th~
Conference at its first session, 88 the substantive problems of international trade and development with which
the Conference was faced,
29 See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board,
Third Session, Supplement No. 14 (TD/B/57), annex I.
80 International Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year ended April 30, 1966
(Washington, D.C.). Transmitted by a note of the SecretaryGeneral {E/4282).
1 1 OffiC11Jl Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/Rev.1).
82 Official Records of the Trade and Develapment Board,
Fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, documents TD/B/82
and Add.1-4.
83 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and De-uelof,ment, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11).

Emphasizing that, while the developing countries
themselves are primarily responsible for their own economic development, the international environment in
which the effort to develop their economies is made and,
particularly, the policies of the developed countries
relating to . trade and development are of crucial importance to their economic growth,
Recognizing that the advancement of international
co-operation for development and the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference, in the light
of the Final Act, call for greater political will on the
part of the States members of the Conference to take
action, jointly or separately, as may be feasible,
Noting a growing awareness in the world of the
problems of the economic development of the developing countries and of the need to take urgent measures
to solve them,
I. Takes note of the annual report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 31 October
1965 to 24 September 1966;
2. Reiterates its call to the Governments of the
States members of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to continue to examine their
policies and to take action, jointly or separately, as
may be feasible, in the light of the Final Act of the
Conference, with a view to implementing the recommendations of the Conference in the various fields of
their national and international programmes;
3. Urges the Governments of the developed and
developing States members of the Conference, each in
their particular spheres of responsibility, to do their
utmost to achieve the greatest possible progress in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference at its first session, in the light of the Final Act,
relating to matters in which progress can be expected
before the second session of the Conference, such as:
(a) The conclusion of international commodity arrangements, particularly on cocoa, and the removal of
obstacles and expansion of trade ;84
( b) The adoption of tariff and non-tariff policies in
respect of manufactures and semi-manufactures from
developing countries, 85 including the possibility of special tariff treatment for them ;86
( c) Measures for the expansion, diversification and
promotion of the exports of developing countries ;
( d) Expansion of trade among the developing
countries;
( e) Measures to increase the flow of financial resources to developing countries and to improve the
terms and conditions thereof, including a possible
scheme of supplementary financing;
(f) Further mobilization by the developing countries
of their domestic resources for development purposes;
(g) Consideration of problems of trade between
countries having different economic and social systems,
including problems of "East-West" trade, attention
being pa:d, in particular, to the trade interests of
developing countries ;
(h) Steps to be taken to achieve complete agreement on principles governing international trade relations and trade policies conducive to development. 81
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
34 Ibid., annex A.II.1, p. 26.
811,[bid., annex A.III.4, p. 37.
86 Ibid., annex A.III.5, p. 39.
87 Ibid., annexes A.I.1, A.I.2 and A.I.3, pp. 18, 25 and 26.
