United Nations

S/PV.6504

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6504th meeting
Thursday, 24 March 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2011/119)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-27602 (E)

*1127602*

S/PV.6504

indeed of this Council, is now directed at finding
urgent solutions to these political and security
developments, which are bound to shape the future of
the entire region.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2011/119)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Joseph Dauda,
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. John McNee,
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Canada, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/119, containing the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. von der Schulenburg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
giving me this opportunity to introduce the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on Sierra Leone (S/2011/119).
This biannual review of Sierra Leone’s progress
towards peace and stability takes place at a time of
dramatic political events that are unfolding in many
countries of Northern Africa, adjacent regions and
places closer to home, such as Côte d’Ivoire. Much of
the attention of the international community, and

2

Against this background, political developments
in Sierra Leone may appear pale in comparison.
However, I would like to argue that the events in
Northern Africa and adjacent regions may make it even
more important for the Security Council not to lose
sight of Sierra Leone and to continue to give it the
attention it deserves and still needs.
Sierra Leone, which was once a symbol of a
failed State, is now gradually evolving into a model
country for overcoming old divisions and developing
into a peaceful, democratic and prosperous country.
Success in Sierra Leone would create hope, and hope is
possibly the best ingredient for finding political
solutions for peace in other countries. That is why I
believe that any success in Sierra Leone is also bound
to have its own ripple effect on the search for peace in
other countries. Sierra Leone is on track towards
achieving these goals, but it is not yet out of the
woods. It will therefore continue to require
international attention and support.
In Sierra Leone, it was also disillusioned young
people who initially rose up against years of successive
authoritarian and unaccountable Governments, against
the plunder of its natural resources, and against
widespread corruption that benefited a small elite while
much of the country slid into widespread poverty. It
was mainly the young people who felt marginalized
and protested against the continuous deterioration of
social services, the lowering of educational standards
and the lack of job opportunities. At the time, Sierra
Leone was unable to solve its growing unrest, and the
country submerged into 11 years of a brutal and
devastating civil war.
It is now nine years since Sierra Leone’s civil war
ended. During this short time, Sierra Leone has made a
truly remarkable post-conflict recovery. When my
Sierra Leonean friends see the images from a number
of other African and Middle Eastern countries, it
ignites in them the tragic memories of the recent past,
but at the same time there is also a sense of pride
among them in what they achieved over time. I fully
share that pride.
Sierra Leoneans now elect their Governments,
not only at the central level but also at the district and

11-27602

S/PV.6504

local levels. These elections take place regularly, and
as in all other democratic processes they have led to
the transfer of power from one elected Government to
another, both at the central and the local levels. The
conduct of these elections is not always without
problems, but what is encouraging is that elections in
Sierra Leone have become the norm.
Today, Sierra Leoneans live largely at peace with
each other, there is discernible security throughout the
country, and citizens as well as foreigners are all free
to travel to any part of Sierra Leone without any fear or
security threats. There are no longer any armed groups
terrorizing the population, nor are there any former
warlords with a political following in the country.
Sierra Leone no longer has any political prisoners, and
after years of brutalities there are no longer any
manifestations of systematic human rights abuses in
the country. Freedom of speech has given rise to an
independent, diverse and at times highly critical media.
Sierra Leone’s freedom of association has resulted in
the creation of vibrant and active political parties, civil
society organizations, non-governmental organizations
and professional associations.
Above all, Sierra Leone remains a rare example
of exceptional religious freedoms and tolerance. It is
the diversity of Sierra Leone’s society, in which
modern State authorities cooperate with traditional
leaderships, in which political parties interact with
independent media, and in which Muslim and Christian
communities work together closely with civil society
organizations that drives the country’s evolving
democratic culture.
As we witness developments in Northern Africa
and adjacent regions, we must realize that Sierra
Leone’s achievements are by no means automatic or
self-evident. These achievements are even more
remarkable when we consider that Sierra Leone had a
less fortunate start as a new nation, that it is a much
poorer country, and that its population is largely
illiterate.
Despite all achievements in overcoming its civil
war, Sierra Leone will remain fragile and vulnerable to
sudden economic, social and political shocks, both
from outside and from within the country. As Sierra
Leone is one of the world’s poorest countries, the
capacity of the Government to absorb any adverse
shock will continue to remain weak. For example,
recent concerns over excessive budgetary expenditures,

11-27602

although small by any standards, could suddenly turn
into a sequence of incalculable political fallouts.
In a country in which the large majority of its
people live on less than $2 per day and with a
relatively small revenue base, even problems that
should be manageable — such as hikes in international
oil prices, increases in rice prices, the failure to pay
salaries on time, unfinished public work programmes,
and insufficient rains, combined with a large
population of unemployed and disillusioned young
people — could explode beyond control and threaten
Sierra Leone’s hard-won achievements.
Any past, present and future Government in
Sierra Leone is therefore compelled to walk a very fine
line between mounting needs and financial constraints;
between the lure of a globalized economy and the
aspirations of it local population; and between the
demands on the Government to accelerate
development, coupled with a lack of budgetary and
human resources at its disposal. That is indeed the
reason why I believe that Sierra Leone will continue to
need strong international assistance, in particular
development assistance.
Let me also reflect on the two critical issues that I
had brought to the Council’s attention during its review
of Sierra Leone in September (see S/PV.6391). These
are the exploitation of natural resources and the 2012
elections. At the end of my statement, I would also like
to talk about progress that is being made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security.
Although challenges remain, I am encouraged by
the progress the Government has made on mining and
the elections over the past six months. Since our last
meeting, the President has repeatedly stressed in public
and in private that he is determined to ensure that the
exploitation of Sierra Leone’s rich mineral and
possibly hydrocarbon resources will be transparent and
for the benefit all Sierra Leoneans. Recently, the
President separated the previously combined Ministries
for Political Affairs and Natural Resources and Mining,
an important step that will allow the Government to
deal with the all important issue of mineral exploration
in a professional and politically more neutral manner.
The President has kept his pledge and initiated a
review of all old and new mining contracts to ensure
their conformity with Sierra Leone’s mining laws.

3

S/PV.6504

After initial difficulties, the Government has now
renewed its commitment to fully implement the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative process in
consultation with civil society and other stakeholders.
The Government has agreed with the World Bank and
United Kingdom Department for International
Development (DFID) on a major technical assistance
programme to improve its capacity to manage the
exploitation of its mineral resources. Similarly, the
Government has agreed with Norway and the United
States on a comprehensive technical assistance
programme to reform and strengthen its institutions
dealing with oil and gas exploration and exploitation
matters.
However, the possible transition of Sierra Leone
into a major exporter of mineral and hydrocarbon
resources could test the country’s social cohesion and
provoke greater social changes than previously
envisaged. For Sierra Leone to succeed in that vital
endeavour, much wider national consultations may be
required in the future.
Considerable progress has also been made in
preparing for the 2012 elections. In January, the
Government and its development partners — mainly
DFID, the European Union, Germany and Irish Aid —
agreed to fund a large election support programme that
will be jointly implemented by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL). Recently, the United States agreed
to a parallel but well-coordinated contribution for the
2012 elections. In addition to the more traditional
support to electoral management bodies, the security
services and the judiciary, the election support
programme will for the first time include the
introduction of modern biometric voter registration
systems and support to the so-called non-State actors,
aimed at ensuring an environment of political tolerance
and non-violence in 2012.
Despite the progress made so far, the 2012
elections still face a number of important challenges.
First, and probably most important, there has to be
greater and more regular engagement between the
National Electoral Commission and political parties,
including the main opposition party, the Sierra Leone
People’s Party, over important electoral issues, such as
voter registration, planned reforms of electoral legal
frameworks, the planning for elections and so on. It is
important that all sides agree on the rules of the game

4

as early as possible, to prevent misunderstanding and
conflicts over the interpretation and implementation of
the rules at a later stage.
Secondly, with the nomination of its new chairman
and commissioners, the Political Party Registration
Commission (PPRC) should now engage more
forcefully in mediating among political parties and in
implementing the political party, code of conduct.
Thirdly, strong political parties are the
cornerstones in any functioning democracy. Together
with the PPRC, we must find ways to strengthen them.
Recent intra-party frictions within a major political
party remain worrisome, and certainly not in the
interest of the country’s democratic process.
Fourthly, on the background of recent budgetary
constraints, the Government must give early indication
as to what it will be able to afford in supporting the
2012 elections. In particular, the electoral management
bodies should critically review their stated
requirements in order to bring them in line with
available resources for 2012.
Fifthly, to ensure peaceful elections, Sierra
Leone’s security forces, and in particular its police
force, will have to improve their skills in preventing
the use of unnecessary force. In that context, the
mobility of police units is paramount. I hope that
Member States will be able to respond to a call by the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for additional police
vehicles.
Finally, Sierra Leone’s civil society organizations
engaged in the elections, in particular the National
Election Watch umbrella organization, should be given
the financial and technical resources necessary to
fulfill their important roles in voter education and in
monitoring voter registration and the electoral process
in 2012.
As this is the tenth year of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security, allow me to say a few
words about the role of women and gender equality in
Sierra Leone. The empowerment of women and greater
gender equality must be an integral part of
peacebuilding processes. As democracy in Sierra Leone
has matured, so have the chances for women. Indeed, it
is now within reach to ensure women’s greater say in
political decision-making and to attain a 30 per cent
quota of women representation in Parliament and other
elective bodies by 2012.

11-27602

S/PV.6504

In the economic and social fields, it will be above
all women who benefit from the Government’s free
health care initiative. After the first year of operation,
we can observe that maternal mortality rates have
dropped dramatically in some parts of the country.
Similar initiatives are being undertaken to increase the
enrolment of girls in secondary education and to fight
any kind of gender-based violence.
In line with our Joint Vision for Sierra Leone —
the joint United Nations programme — UNIPSIL and
the United Nations country team have developed a
joint United Nations approach to peacebuilding and
gender equality, which we will present at the PBC
tomorrow. It will focus on five priority areas, namely,
access to political decision-making, access to health,
access to education, access to justice and protection
against gender-based violence. To implement this joint
approach, we will work closely with the Government,
the political parties, the police, the judiciary, civil
society organizations and religious and traditional
leaders, as well as with traditional women’s
organizations, including so-called bondo societies. I
believe that the progress that we can now achieve in
empowering women will no doubt help to consolidate
peace, development and social progress in Sierra
Leone.
Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
draw attention to the fact that we have quite a lot of
support with us. Behind me here are members of civil
society organizations from Sierra Leone, which I think
is a great symbol of the diversity of society in the
country. They include leaders from the women’s wings
of the political parties, who will tomorrow present to
the PBC their plans for reaching the 30 per cent target
for women’s participation in decision-making. Also
with me are two civil society goodwill ambassadors
who help to build schools in Sierra Leone. I would like
to congratulate them on the good work they are doing.
And we have post-graduate students from Colombia
University and New York University. Finally, I would
like to say that I am accompanied by two of my
colleagues from the United Nations country team,
Ms. Mia Seppo from UNDP and Ms. Ratidzai Ndlovu
from the United Nations Population Fund. We asked
them here today to illustrate to the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission the unity and integration
we have achieved in Sierra Leone, which will not only
benefit the Council but, ultimately, the country itself.

11-27602

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Von
der Schulenburg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. John
McNee.
Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Sierra
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). At the outset, I would like to commend the
impressive work of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and indeed of the entire United
Nations country team, in support of Sierra Leone’s
progress and development. Mr. von der Schulenburg
has given us a very clear and insightful briefing this
morning.
Sierra Leone is entering another transition period.
This phase, marked by a gradual shift in emphasis from
late-stage peacebuilding towards longer-term economic
development, will be largely defined by three
processes, namely, the continued pursuit of the Agenda
for Change, which is Sierra Leone’s national strategy
for peace consolidation and economic growth; the
conduct of elections in 2012; and the steady
realignment of international assistance behind
development priorities. I would like to focus on each of
those processes briefly and outline the PBC’s
anticipated activities during the next six months.
First, I would like to commend the tremendous
strides that the Government and people of Sierra Leone
have made since the conclusion of the conflict. The
PBC is particularly pleased at the advances that have
been made in three areas of focus, that is, good
governance and the rule of law, youth employment and
drug trafficking. However, in spite of that progress,
each of those issues still represents a long-term risk to
Sierra Leone’s stability. Each will require concerted
attention from the national Government and from
international community. As such, I would like to
reiterate the need for continued financial support.
The United Nations multi-donor trust fund
established to fund the Joint Vision and to support the
Agenda for Change remains nearly $175 million short
of its $381 million objective. For its part, the PBC’s
Sierra Leone country configuration will be active with
donors and other key partners to help address Sierra
Leone’s outstanding peacebuilding challenges. The
configuration will also continue to seek innovative
non-financial contributions to support the Agenda for

5

S/PV.6504

Change by facilitating South-South and North-South
partnerships.
Secondly, Sierra Leone also faces a more
immediate challenge in conducting successful national
and local elections in 2012. It is essential that political
conditions be established for free, fair and peaceful
elections. That will require continued progress on
implementing the agreements in the joint communiqué
of April 2009, further strengthening the Political Party
Registration Commission and providing the National
Electoral Commission with the necessary support. It is
especially important that the national institutions
charged with overseeing the elections, and the major
political parties, build a stronger relationship based on
improved cooperation and mutual trust. Successful
elections depend on the commitment of the parties that
contest them to play by the rules and respect the
results. The elections must be not only technically
sound, but also widely accepted.
In that respect, the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone have
played an invaluable role in facilitating open dialogue
and building relevant national capacities. The PBC
fully supports those efforts and will focus more
directly on elections preparations in the coming year.
Should the necessary support be provided, there
is every reason to be optimistic. Last December’s
peaceful by-election in Kono district demonstrates that
collective efforts to avoid violence can yield powerful
results. It is telling that the Sierra Leone police played
a significant role in the successful by-election.
Unfortunately, the police lack the capacity to perform a
similar service throughout the country. We see that as
an important gap. Continuing to build the capacity of
the Sierra Leone police to serve as a neutral and
effective force for stability is critical. The Sierra Leone
configuration has reiterated its appeal to the
international community to ensure that the police have
the necessary resources at their disposal — particularly
vehicles, parts and fuel — to respond to cases of
election-related violence in a timely manner.
Thirdly, the PBC will continue to have an
important role to play in the next two years as focus
shifts further from peacebuilding to development.
However, a number of risks will endure over the longer
term. Sierra Leone’s significant youth population
expects progress and prosperity. Disappointment could

6

present a latent risk of political instability. In that
respect, rising investment in natural resources offers
promise for economic growth, but also poses a number
of challenges, some of which the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General outlined this
morning. That was a major topic of discussion during
my most recent visit to Freetown. The international
community, including the PBC, should be prepared to
respond promptly to any requests for technical
assistance or other forms of support.
Sierra Leone will also have to contend with
threats from outside its borders. Sustainable economic
development depends heavily on stability within the
subregion and on access to the assistance necessary to
weather any financial difficulties. Similarly, the flow
of illicit drugs and other forms of trafficking remains a
serious challenge, with the potential to encourage
corruption, undermine democratic progress and create
new socio-economic problems.
Those challenges demand continued support and
a wider regional focus. The Sierra Leone configuration
seeks to build stronger partnerships with relevant
international institutions and regional actors to address
those issues. It will also encourage closer collaboration
between the four West African country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission to facilitate the
pooling of resources, the exchange of national
approaches and the adoption of regional initiatives in
order to address those shared challenges, particularly in
the areas of illicit drug trafficking and youth
unemployment. A recent regional seminar on youth
unemployment, sponsored by the Austrian Government
and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as the
West African Coast Initiative, sponsored by the United
Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, are two examples of the kinds of partnerships
through which the PBC will support more effective
action on transborder risks.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone rightly stands as a
multilateral success story in peacebuilding. Yet the
story is not quite finished. One of the important lessons
learned over the past two decades is that peacebuilding
requires constant and continued support. Faltering now
would risk all that has been gained. I therefore strongly
encourage all donors and partners to provide Sierra
Leone with the support it needs to pursue its Agenda
for Change, conduct successful elections and embark
on long-term development. As always, the

11-27602

S/PV.6504

Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to be a
constructive partner through that transitional process.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. McNee for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Dauda, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. I also wish to extend a warm welcome to the
representatives of the new members of the Council. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone, as well as for
giving my delegation the opportunity to contribute to
this debate.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
detailed report (S/2011/119) on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). Among other things, the report highlights
the important developments that have taken place in
the country, the challenges to surmount and, of course,
the activities of UNIPSIL during the period under
review. I would also like to thank the Executive
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
introducing the report.
In a similar vein, we appreciate the Council’s
sustained engagement and interest in Sierra Leone as
we continue to work in partnership to ensure
sustainable peace and development in the country. We
are also grateful for the indomitable efforts of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), through the tireless efforts of its
Chairperson, Ambassador John McNee of Canada, to
maintain the momentum. We also thank him for his
progressive and innovative efforts and his instructive
remarks in contributing to this debate.
We take note of, and acknowledge with
satisfaction, the reference made in the report to some
of the progress and achievements since September
2010 and the challenges that we still have to contend
with. Those achievements are the product of the joint
efforts of the Government and people of Sierra Leone
and the United Nations, through the United Nations
Joint Vision aligned with the Agenda for Change and
development partners. To that end, I would like to

11-27602

express my appreciation for the investment that has
been made in successful peacebuilding efforts and to
encourage the further consolidation of the gains made
by continuing to stand by Sierra Leone as it deals
comprehensively with the remaining challenges and
invests and builds on the success already achieved.
His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma, in
partnership with the international community, remains
fully committed to consolidating peacebuilding and the
sustainable economic development of Sierra Leone as
mapped out in the Agenda for Change. Youth
unemployment, corruption and illegal narcotics were
the three risks identified in the Agenda for Change and
endorsed by the Sierra Leone PBC configuration in its
outcome document of September 2010.
As reflected in the report, we are making steady
progress in the fight against corruption and, with the
support of development partners and the United
Nations, we have created the structures at the local and
regional levels to stem drug trafficking and organized
crime. In response to youth unemployment, which
remains a significant challenge to the peace
consolidation process, a new Ministry of Youth
Employment and Sports has been established and a
national Youth Commissioner and Board have been
appointed to provide the policy framework and
implementation that would pave way for the
meaningful participation of young people in national
development.
The Government is fully cognizant of the
importance of some of the issues raised by the
Secretary-General in the report regarding the
implementation of the joint communiqué of 2 April
2009 and has, in that regard, with UNIPSIL’s support,
established the All Political Parties Youth Association
and the All Political Parties Women’s Association aimed
at preventing political violence, fostering inter-party
dialogue and, in the case of the Women’s Association,
further enhancing women’s participation in politics.
Here, I am happy to report that 14.5 per cent of political
offices are now held by women, almost halfway to our
target of 30 per cent. We also continue to make progress
towards the education of the girl child and providing
free health care to pregnant women, lactating mothers
and children under the age of five.
The Government remains committed to the
conduct of peaceful, free, fair and transparent elections
in 2012, and we welcome the support of the United

7

S/PV.6504

Nations and development partners in passing what has
come to be identified as a key test for the consolidation
of peace and stability in Sierra Leone. The National
Electoral Commission and the Political Parties
Registration Commission enjoy the independence to
deliver effectively on their constitutional mandates,
free of interference. Additionally, structures, such as
the former national broadcasting service, which was
recently transformed into the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, the Independent Media
Commission and the Editors’ Guild are also of added
value.
President Ernest Bai Koroma recently made his
Cabinet more inclusive by appointing ministers from
across political and regional divides to further promote
national unity and cohesion. He has equally been
responsive to concerns regarding the mining sector by
taking measures to improve the governance of the
sector, ensure greater transparency and maximize
benefits from the country’s mineral resources. To that
end, we have sought the support of development
partners to build the capacity of the Ministry of Mines
and Mineral Resources.
Despite all these efforts of the Government and
the progress that has been made to date in addressing
the many problems that led to the civil war, the
sustained support of the international community and
our development partners is required if we are to build
on the gains made and to further consolidate
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, as well as to enhance
the country’s capacity to absorb shocks, be they
economic, social or political. Support is still required
in several areas, in particular youth unemployment; the
provision of vehicles to the Sierra Leone Police to
enhance their capability and visibility during and after
the elections; drug trafficking; and the reparations
process as recommended by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.
On the socio-economic front, prevailing global
economic and financial uncertainties are seriously
undermining our efforts to turn the economy around as

8

quickly as we would wish. In the light of the severe
impact of these uncertainties on our efforts and in
support of the strides we have made in socio-economic
development, we urge and support the appeal that
urgent and appropriate attention be given to the
delivery of pledges made at the most recent
consultative conference on Sierra Leone, held in
London.
His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma is
committed to reducing aid dependency through
partnership with the private sector, in particular in the
mineral and agricultural sectors, and recognizes the
importance of strengthening institutions that will drive
the economy, leading to the ratification by Parliament
of the Public Private Partnership Act of 2010, which
aims at providing the legal framework for the private
sector to design, build and administer major
infrastructure development programmes with the
intention of attracting more foreign investment.
In conclusion, we welcome recent developments
in Guinea resulting in the conduct of peaceful, free and
fair elections and the smooth transfer of power to an
elected Government. This development will contribute
to peace consolidation efforts in Sierra Leone.
However, we see the situation in Côte d’Ivoire as a
threat to subregional peace and security and we support
subregional, regional and other international efforts to
adequately address it before it escalates into a fullblown conflict that could undermine the stability of its
neighbours, including Sierra Leone.
Once more, I wish to thank the United Nations,
the Peacebuilding Commission and all development
partners for their contributions to the peace we have
achieved so far.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Minister Dauda for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

11-27602
