United Nations

S/PV.4688

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4688

th meeting
Monday, 20 January 2003, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Galouzeau De Villepin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Miranda
Mr. Passy
Mr. Ngoubeyou
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Tang Jiaxuan
Mr. Fischer
Mr. Fall
Mr. Derbez
Mr. Kasuri
Mr. Ivanov
Mrs. Palacio Vallelersundi
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Straw
Mr. Powell

Agenda
High-level meeting of the Security Council: combating terrorism

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-21525 (E)

*0321525*

S/PV.4688

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
High-level meeting of the Security Council:
combating terrorism
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/60, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations.
As international news unfortunately confirms, the
terrorist threat, because of its multifaceted and global
nature, cannot be eradicated unless the international
community, together, continues to mobilize actively
and in a lasting way against this scourge. The United
Nations has a central role to play in order to ensure
such mobilization. It is therefore fundamental that we
give it our full support. That is why France, which
holds the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of January, has taken the initiative to convene
this Council meeting at the ministerial level. I thank
you, fellow members, for your participation.
Our objective must be to maintain and to
strengthen the mobilization of all against terrorism. We
must also give new impetus to the struggle against this
scourge, and our debate today must contribute to that.
It should give us an opportunity to reflect on new
actions that might be necessary in order to attain that
objective.
I should like to remind participants that, as
agreed, we shall limit the length of our statements to a
maximum of five to seven minutes.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French):
Today’s meeting of the Security Council shows the
steady determination of the international community to
address the scourge of terrorism. Your presence here at
the ministerial level is a sign of the importance that the
world places on dealing effectively with this global
threat.
Terrorism is a menace that requires a global
response. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September

2

2001 on New York and Washington, the world has
focused unprecedented attention on terrorism and on
the means of countering it. The tragic loss of life in
terrorist attacks such as those in Moscow, Bali and
Mombasa is a dramatic reminder that success in
countering this threat remains elusive. Despite
enhanced attention and more concerted action, the
problem of terrorism will require sustained, long-term
action if it is to be addressed successfully.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations must play an increasing role
in dissuading would-be perpetrators of terror by setting
effective international norms and by issuing a clear
message on the unacceptability of acts of violence
targeting civilians.
The United Nations must also do whatever it can
to deny terrorists the opportunity to commit their
appalling crimes. The Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) will continue to have a
key role to play in this area, as will our common efforts
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
Greater efforts are needed to ensure universality,
verification and full implementation of the key treaties
relating to weapons of mass destruction, to tighten
national export controls over the items needed to
produce them, and to criminalize the acquisition or use
of such weapons by non-State groups.
Because of its responsibility in ensuring the
implementation
of
international
anti-terrorism
conventions and standards, the Security Council’s
Counter-Terrorism Committee will continue to be at
the centre of global efforts to fight terrorism.
Finally, it will be necessary to sustain broad
international cooperation by clearly articulating the
work of various international, regional and subregional
organizations in this effort. In that regard, I would like
to welcome the CTC’s initiative to hold a meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
early March of this year. I trust that that meeting will
constitute an important step towards the goal of
sustained international cooperation in counterterrorism. I am also proposing that counter-terrorism be
a major agenda item at the meeting that I will convene
with regional organizations later this year.
We face a grave and growing threat from
international terrorism. Terrorism is a global scourge

S/PV.4688

with global effects; its methods are murder and
mayhem, but its consequences affect every aspect of
the work of the United Nations — from development to
peace to human rights and the rule of law.
The United Nations has an indispensable role to
play in providing the legal and organizational
framework within which the international campaign
against terrorism can unfold. But we must never lose
sight of the fact that any sacrifice of freedom or the
rule of law within States — or any generation of new
tensions between States in the name of antiterrorism — will hand the terrorists a victory that no
act of theirs alone could possibly bring.
Even as many are rightly praising the unity and
the resolve of the international community in this crucial
struggle, important and urgent questions are being asked
about what might be called the “collateral damage” of the
war on terrorism: damage to the presumption of
innocence, to precious human rights, to the rule of law
and to the very fabric of democratic governance.
Domestically, the danger is that, in pursuit of
security, we will end up sacrificing crucial liberties,
thereby weakening our common security, not
strengthening it, and thereby corroding the vessel of
democratic government from within. Whether the
question involves the treatment of minorities here in
the West, or the rights of migrants and asylum seekers,
or the presumption of innocence or the right to due
process under the law, vigilance must be exercised by
all thoughtful citizens to ensure that entire groups in
our societies are not tarred with one broad brush and
punished for the reprehensible behaviour of a few.
Internationally, we are also seeing an increasing
use of what I call the “T word” — terrorism — to
demonize political opponents, to throttle freedom of
speech and the press and to delegitimize legitimate
political grievances. We are seeing too many cases where
States living in tension with their neighbours make
opportunistic use of the fight against terrorism to threaten
or justify new military action on long-running disputes.
Similarly, States fighting various forms of unrest
or insurgency are finding it tempting to abandon the
slow, difficult but sometimes necessary processes of
political negotiation for the deceptively easy option of
military action.
Just as terrorism must never be excused, so must
genuine grievances never be ignored. True, it tarnishes

a cause when a few wicked men commit murder in its
name. But it does not make it any less urgent that the
cause be addressed, the grievance heard and the wrong
put right. Otherwise, we risk losing the contest for the
hearts and minds of much of mankind.
We must act with determination to address —
indeed, solve — the political disputes and longstanding conflicts that underlie, fuel and generate
support for terrorism. To do so is not to reward
terrorism or its perpetrators; it is to diminish their
ability to find refuge or recruits in any cause or any
country.
In its efforts to address the problem of terrorism,
the United Nations and its Members must not lose sight
of the broader international agenda. While there is an
urgent and compelling need to prevent acts of terror,
there is a no less compelling need to pursue the goals
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. To the extent
that the Organization succeeds in fighting poverty,
injustice, suffering and war, it is also likely to help end
the conditions that serve as justification for those who
would commit acts of terror.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
In accordance with the agreement reached by the
Council in its prior consultations, I now give the floor
to Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to make a statement
under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock: A number of Security
Council delegations came to the view late last year that
the Security Council's work on counter-terrorism
needed to be stepped up a gear. For all the progress
made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in
monitoring
and
encouraging
the
working
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States, achieving real improvements in practice on the
ground everywhere is taking too long. The threat is real
and immense. The urgency is irrefutable. As Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I welcome this
ministerial meeting to raise the pace.
So what has the CTC achieved against the
objective of ensuring that all Governments have taken
effective steps to ensure that there is no support, active
or passive, for terrorism anywhere? In 15 months, the
CTC has received over 280 reports from 178 Member

3

S/PV.4688

States. These show that the vast majority of
Governments throughout the world have begun to
respond to the challenge laid down in resolution 1373
(2001) to prevent and suppress terrorism. In almost
every case, parliaments have begun to consider or to
adopt new laws. Governments have reviewed the
strength of their institutions to fight terrorism, and in
some cases have already strengthened them. But there
is still much more to do before terrorists find that the
bar against terrorism has been raised everywhere. It is
in recognition of this that I would like to set out for the
Council today the views of the CTC on what more we
can do to further global implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).
First, all States must begin to work towards this
shared goal. Thirteen States have not yet submitted a
report to the Committee. They are over a year late. Two
States have not yet even picked up the telephone; they
are Liberia and Timor-Leste — although that new
Member of the United Nations should be allowed more
time. We know that the others — Chad, Equatorial
Guinea, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, the Marshall Islands,
Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Swaziland, Tuvalu and Vanuatu — are working on
reports, three with outside assistance set up by the
CTC. We know that others have real difficulties. But,
whatever the underlying reasons, they are failing in
their responsibilities as Members of the United
Nations. The declaration to be adopted today sets a
final date for submission of 31 March. The CTC will
continue to be in contact with all these States, offering
whatever help or advice they need to complete the
reporting requirement. But after 31 March it must be
clear that any non-reporting State will be held to be
non-compliant with resolution 1373 (2001).
Secondly, States must understand what they need
to do to improve their implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), and do it. The Committee, through its
confidential letters to States, offers advice and
guidance on how to fill the gaps in implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), focusing as a first priority on
legislation and the issue of terrorist financing.
Resolution 1373 (2001) is a complicated resolution,
requiring significant effort by States to strengthen their
laws and institutions to cope with the modern threats of
terrorism. States must take prompt action, including
having a process in hand for becoming party to the 12
relevant conventions and protocols. The CTC will
bring to the attention of the Council any difficulties it

4

encounters, as requested in the declaration that will be
adopted today.
The CTC pays tribute to the large number of
Member States that have worked hard to meet the
requirements. We know that the task is not easy, and
that many States will require help. The Committee
stands ready to offer whatever guidance and advice it
can directly, and encourages States to contact the
Committee's experts on any matter arising from the
Committee's letters. The experts are a source of
tremendous knowledge, and I commend them for their
huge contribution so far. States can also use the online
directory of counter-terrorism information and sources
of assistance, a tool for Governments to access
information on best practices and potential assistance
programmes. The experts will continue to facilitate the
provision of assistance, being in touch with States
about their assistance needs, and with potential
providers on the current priorities, which at present are
legislation and countering terrorist financing. But all
States have the responsibility not only to improve their
own counter-terrorism capacity, but also, where they
can, to help others. Only by working together will we
defeat the universal threat of terrorism. It is right that
the declaration calls on States to assist each other. Not
enough has yet been done actually to get projects up
and running.
Achieving all this will be easier for individual
States if they work within the collective effort of their
region. Since its establishment the CTC has developed
links with international, regional and subregional
organizations that have, or intend to develop, counterterrorism programmes. International organizations
must work with States on standards in their own areas
of competence. Regional organizations must develop
an understanding of the international obligations of
States in the area of counter-terrorism, and help their
members to meet them. International and regional
organizations have key roles to play. The CTC looks
forward to discussing this with such organizations at
the special meeting to be held on 7 March, and to
setting action on hand.
So far the CTC has not initiated action on
paragraph 4 of resolution 1373 (2001), which notes the
potential links between terrorism and other forms of
international organized crime. But what is happening
out there, in areas of the world vulnerable to terrorism
and international organized crime, is threatening. The
structures that the Committee is helping to put in place

S/PV.4688

for counter-terrorism may have a wider value and
effectiveness in strengthening the capacity of all
Governments against international crime of all kinds.
There may be advantages, too, for our work as a
Council against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. I would hope that ministers will demand
accelerated action across the full range of these vital
security issues.
Let me close by paying tribute to the work of
Security Council members on the CTC, and to the
Vice-Chairmen, the experts and the Secretariat
throughout 2002. We begin the new year with five new
members and a new Bureau. The Vice-Chairmen —
Ambassadors Aguilar Zinser of Mexico, Gaspar
Martins of Angola and Lavrov of the Russian
Federation — and I look forward to directing the work
of the CTC in the coming months. I am determined to
make my last three months in the chairmanship count,
and intend to pass on to Ambassador Arias of Spain a
Committee with a continued sense of purpose, direction
and momentum. The Security Council would expect
nothing less; the world of law and order can afford
nothing less. I hope that ministers will hold their
delegations to account for the right results.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, His Excellency Mr. Joschka Fischer.
Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to
congratulate the French Council presidency on
initiating today’s meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Greenstock for
their reports.
The issue we are dealing with today is a top
international priority, since the Sword of Damocles of
international terrorism is hanging over all of us.
Terrorism kills innocent people and is a crime. It
threatens peace and security; it threatens democracy,
development and freedom, and it scorns national and
international law and brutally attacks human rights.
That is the message the horrific terrorist attack of 11
September 2001 sent to us all. What is more, the
attacks in Djerba and Bali, and in Moscow and
Mombasa, have made it clear to us that that threat
remains unchanged.
No country is willing to live with that threat. We
must therefore join forces to counter that brutal
challenge with determination and prudence. The threat
to our citizens has gained a new dimension. It is not

possible to negotiate with terrorists such as Osama bin
Laden and his network. They must be defeated. The
terrorist network must be destroyed.
At the same time, however, we must use political,
humanitarian and economic means to root out for good
the possible causes that lead people to support
terrorism.
I would like to briefly outline three fundamental
considerations. First, international terrorism poses a
strategic threat to peace and the international order. It
is aimed at forcing us to react rashly and entangling us
in a war among civilizations. That must not be our
response. We must react in a way which weakens
terrorism. There are no easy answers to this. The fight
against international terrorism must take place at
various levels. Intelligence, police, judicial and, in
extreme cases, even military measures are
indispensable. However, crisis prevention, conflict
management, participation, poverty reduction, the
promotion of education and a dialogue among
civilizations are equally important. It is crucial to
prevent acts of terrorism, but it is even better to
prevent people from becoming terrorists.
Secondly, we can win this fight only through
intensive international cooperation. Terrorism does not
stop at borders. The impressive international coalition
against terrorism that evolved following the attacks in
New York and Washington must be preserved.
Allow me to comment here on the current
situation. We are greatly concerned that a military
strike against the regime in Baghdad would involve
considerable and unpredictable risks for the global
fight against terrorism. We have no illusions about the
brutal nature of Saddam Hussein’s regime. Therefore,
we all demand that Baghdad implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions in full and without
exceptions. However, in addition to disastrous
consequences for long-term regional stability, we also
fear possible negative repercussions for the joint fight
against terrorism. These are fundamental reasons for
our rejection of military action. What we need is a
system of global cooperative security. Asymmetrical
conflicts in particular must be countered with an
international system of sanctions and verification
mechanisms. It is the United Nations that provides us
with the appropriate global framework for that.
Thirdly, our fight must always be legitimized
under international law. It must respect national and

5

S/PV.4688

international law, human rights and the United Nations
Charter. Human rights in particular should not be
suspended under the pretext of combating terrorism.
After all, this fight is not only about defending our
security, but also about our fundamental values —
freedom, democracy and human rights.
The United Nations reacted quickly and
resolutely to the events of 11 September 2001. Allow
me to single out the Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee here. It has done impressive
work, and its Chairman deserves our recognition. In
that connection, my country is prepared to assist third
States in developing suitable measures to combat
terrorism and to coordinate that assistance with the
Committee.
We also attach great importance to the General
Assembly debates and draft convention on that issue. It
would be desirable if the Assembly were to finally
conclude its work on conventions on the
comprehensive fight against terrorism and on nuclear
terrorism.
Germany will continue to participate actively and
constructively in all efforts to fight and prevent
international terrorism. That is one of our most
important foreign and security policy objectives. We
are working towards that goal in very close cooperation
with our international partners, particularly within the
framework of the European Union.
In addition to prosecuting terrorists, we are also
particularly keen on tackling terrorism at its roots. That
includes devising potential solutions to simmering
regional conflicts, as in the examples of Afghanistan
and the Middle East. It also includes the stabilization
and the development of countries stricken by crisis
through useful assistance and cooperation.
Furthermore, we continue to pay particular
attention to the risk of terrorists gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. However, that means that
international instruments of arms control, disarmament
and
nonproliferation
must
not,
under
any
circumstances, be weakened. Indeed, quite the reverse
should be the case: they must be strengthened. In that
connection, we have launched various initiatives within
the frameworks of the European Union and the Group
of 8. We also attach particular importance to dialogue
with other civilizations, particularly the Islamic world,
in that context.

6

Let me say once more that we cannot achieve
these goals without the international coalition against
terrorism. We must preserve and cultivate it, and it
would be best if we did so within the framework of the
United Nations. The momentum created by today’s
meeting must be used. During the German presidency
of the Council, we plan to take up this issue once more
in an open debate on 20 February.
The President (spoke in French): I call on His
Excellency Mr. François-Xavier Ngoubeyou, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cameroon.
Mr. Ngoubeyou (spoke in French): Humanity,
awakened after the tragic events of 11 September 2001,
understands more clearly the cataclysm to which blind
hatred, gratuitous violence and intolerance could lead
the world.
On 11 September 2002, the Council held a
solemn meeting, presided over by the President of the
Republic of Bulgaria, at which we paid, together and
with the emotion proper to the occasion, tribute to the
memory of the victims of the heinous terrorist attacks
of 11 September 2001. I wish once again to express to
the bereaved families the full solidarity of the people of
Cameroon.
Our decision to meet today at the ministerial level
is clear evidence of our refusal to accept the situation
and our resolve to tackle and to eliminate the tentacles
of terrorism.
I wish to thank and congratulate the French
presidency for this very wise initiative. This meeting
should enable us to develop the political momentum
needed for the world coalition and to reaffirm the
crucial role the United Nations must play in providing
the legal and institutional framework in which the
campaign against terrorist must be articulated.
I
would like to welcome the presence of SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan and thank him for his excellent
statement, his pointed and profound remarks and
pertinent analysis and suggestions in the area of
combating terrorism.
The United Nations was created to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war in its
various forms — and terrorism is one of them. There
can be no excuse or justification for terrorism. Of
course, much injustice exists. Real frustrations become
ingrained and trouble our consciences. Poverty, hunger
and insecurity grip us and slowly stifle and kill us. All

S/PV.4688

the inequalities that ensue from this must be addressed
thoroughly and immediately. The family of the United
Nations is endeavouring to do so, and we welcome its
efforts.
Nothing can excuse the heinous thrust of
terrorism. Terrorism, in whatever form, is unacceptable
and must be firmly condemned. It inflicts untold
suffering on humanity and seriously infringes on the
dignity of the individual human being, which is the
very foundation of the civilized world.
This is why Cameroon, through its President, His
Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, so strongly condemned the
events of 11 September and is resolved to give its total
support to the international coalition. A steadfast and
determined fighter against terrorism, the head of State
of Cameroon addressed the nation and the diplomatic
corps at the New Year celebrations on a single issue:
the campaign against terrorism. One year ago,
condemning terrorism, President Biya said:
“We have an imperative duty to combat
international terrorism in all its forms. The fear,
hatred and intolerance that it fosters are both a
major concern and a serious threat to
international peace and security.”
On 3 January 2003, before the diplomatic corps,
President Biya strongly reaffirmed:
“There is especially a need to attack evil at its
roots. Faced with fanaticism that knows no logic
or morality, there is no other remedy than
repression. On the other hand, we know that
poverty and injustice are often breeding grounds
for terrorism. Both afflict the majority of the
world’s people.”

Measures have been taken at all levels of State to
guarantee the application of this historic resolution.
The Cameroon criminal code punishes both violations
concerning terrorism and acts directed against the
security of civil aviation. An anti-terrorist strategy has
been elaborated. It is now being implemented and
coordinated by a focal point at the presidential level
designated by the head of State.
The frequency, scope and magnitude of terrorist
acts convince us of just how important and necessary it
is to develop unswerving preventive and punitive
policies to meet this scourge. Cameroon is firmly
committed to this end.
Our common security can be best guaranteed only
if we struggle against terrorism together. Therefore,
coherent, concerted and coordinated international
action is essential. The United Nations, thanks to its
universal nature, is the optimal framework for such a
crusade.
Cameroon welcomes here the largely positive
results of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). I would like to pay a welldeserved tribute to its chairman, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, and all the members of the bureau. I have
no doubt that Spain, which will soon assume the
Committee chair, will continue the work with the same
efficiency and determination.

My country is party to the vast majority of the
existing international conventions to combat terrorism,
and it fully adheres to the contractual measures taken
by the United Nations, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly 1373 (2001).
Cameroon also confirms its adherence to and renews its
full support for United Nations action through the
Monitoring Group of the Sanctions Committee
established under Security Council resolution 1267
(1999).

The recent attacks in Moscow, Mombasa and Bali
can only keep us vigilant. They have just reminded us
that to be effective our efforts should be pursued
consistently and tirelessly. This is why Cameroon
continues to support the idea of holding a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
determine the common response of the international
community to terrorism in all its forms and in all its
manifestations. In this campaign, cooperation among
States must play a fundamental role. Here, Cameroon
believes that technical assistance is an area in which
there is a need for greater emphasis and greater means.
Specifically, Cameroon believes that international,
regional and subregional organizations with proven
expertise can play a crucial role in strengthening
national capacities to combat terrorism.

The report submitted by my country to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee confirms that Cameroon
has a general legal framework conducive to the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Terrorists of all stripes take full advantage of the
disparities in logistic and technological resources that
separate our respective States to escape being tracked
down. They also exploit the gaps in existing national

7

S/PV.4688

and international legislation. This is why it is vitally
important to strengthen legal norms against terrorism
by completing the urgent work on a comprehensive
convention on terrorism and a convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. This is all the
more necessary given that the current legal provisions
remain sectoral. The risk of one day seeing terrorists
using weapons of mass destruction haunts us daily. The
United Nations must promote the global ratification
and application of the 12 international conventions to
combat terrorism.
I would like to reiterate that our campaign against
terrorism must be comprehensive. If we are to succeed
we must calm the international context and, as I have
already said, remove injustices that fuel intolerance.
The attacks of 11 September, in striking more than 90
nations, have not only crystallized horror and fear but
have also strengthened solidarity between nations.
Henceforth, the campaign against terrorism should
brook no complicity on the part of any State.
At the historic Millennium Summit, we all made
commitments to free humanity from fear — from all
kinds of fear. Let us stay the course and remain united
and determined in this lofty and legitimate struggle. As
the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel rightly said,
“We are all in a train that could head towards a
precipice. No one can get off, but all can
contribute to stopping it.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Jack Straw, Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I greatly welcome
the initiative of the French presidency in calling this
ministerial meeting. I would like to thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his address and to
express my personal thanks to Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for all his work while chairing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I would also like to thank members of the
Council for the continuing, if I may say so, the very
well-placed confidence which they have shown in him
throughout his period of office.
The cold war was dangerous and at times
frightening, but it had some certainties and ground
rules. Today’s terrorists, however, respect no rules and
no one’s life — not others’ lives, not even their own.
They respect no values and no religion. They are

8

criminals cloaked in a cause — psychopathic killers
who define themselves by the terror which they inflict
on others.
Some call this international terrorism. That does
not make it distant from our own lives, but immediate
in each of our nations, down our street or the next. At
least 13 of the 15 countries represented here in the
Security Council have seen the killing of their innocent
citizens by terrorists. In the United Kingdom, we have
just lost a brave police officer, killed in the course of a
terrorist-related arrest — three children now without a
dad, a devoted wife with no husband.
We have to unite as never before in the face of
this threat and act, I suggest, in five key ways.
First, we must ensure that the duties imposed by
the United Nations counter-terrorism law - Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) — are vigorously
enforced in every Member State. We have to expose
the laggards and confront every danger effectively. As
Sir Jeremy Greenstock has just laid out, the momentum
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee has to be
sustained.
As a former Interior Minister, allow me to say
this. The key challenge is not to set up new institutions
or figureheads, but to ensure that existing lawenforcement arrangements work better.
Secondly, we have to expose the connection
between the terrorists who respect no rules and the
States which respect no rules either. It is the leaders of
rogue States who set the example, brutalize their
people, celebrate violence, provide a haven for
terrorists to operate, and — worse than that — through
their chemical, biological and nuclear weapons,
provide a tempting arsenal for terrorists to use.
The world must be in no doubt: if terrorists can,
they will. If they can get their hands on nerve gases,
killer viruses or nuclear bombs, they will use them.
Thirdly, action to stop rogue States’ proliferation
is as urgent as action to stop terrorism. Wherever we
can, we should use diplomatic means to get
proliferators to comply, as we are with North Korea,
patiently. But there has to come a moment when our
patience must run out, and we are now near that point
with Iraq.
Well before Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) was adopted, on 8 November last year, Saddam

S/PV.4688

Hussein was already in breach, not of one or two, but
of 23 mandatory obligations in nine separate Security
Council resolutions stretching back over 12 years. The
moment of choice for Saddam Hussain is close. He
must either resolve this crisis peacefully, by active
compliance with his Security Council obligations and
full cooperation with inspectors, or face the serious
consequences — the use of force — which the Council
warned would follow when it adopted resolution 1441
(2002).
Fourthly, we have absolutely and emphatically to
reject the lie that the action of the international
community in fighting terrorism and rogue States is
anti-Muslim. It is not. It is pro-Muslim, as well as proChristian, pro-Buddhist, pro-Jew, pro-Hindu, proSikh — pro-humanity.
Down the ages, tyrants and terrorists alike have
sought justification for their ends by claiming that they
have God on their side. Today is no different. Let us
remember this: Al Qaeda and the Taliban murdered
thousands of Muslims in Afghanistan well before 11
September.
Let us also remember that almost every one of the
hundreds of thousands of people killed by Saddam
Hussain have been Muslim, and that, in contrast, in the
four international conflicts of the past 12 years — the
Gulf, Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan — it happens to
have been innocent Muslims who have been saved by
international military action.
Fifthly, we must, of course, work relentlessly to
eliminate the environment in which terrorism breeds.
This can be done by firm security action and a political
agenda. In Northern Ireland and in Sri Lanka, we see
the hope which can be built after decades of killing and
hatred.
We must not give up in other theatres, least of all
in the Israel-Palestine conflict. Only the terrorists will
rejoice if grief at the endless killings gives way to total
despair. There, a two-State solution is the only just
response, as the Council has determined. Such an
outcome would be a vindication of the founding ideal
of the United Nations that reconciliation is possible
between all nations and all faiths.
People of my generation will recognize that at
times, over the past 50 years, the ideals of the United
Nations have seemed sometimes beyond reach. The
vile hostility of the cold war stood in stark contrast to

the noble principles of the United Nations Charter. Yet
the ideal of the United Nations survives. It prevailed
through the era of super-Power confrontation, and, with
our collective effort, it will prevail over the twin
threats of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction
which haunt the world today.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Solomon Passy, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria.
Mr. Passy (Bulgaria): Allow me first to express
my gratitude to the French delegation and to Minister
De Villepin for organizing this meeting, which gives us
an opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved
and to consider new measures and initiatives. I wish
also to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the
President of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
for their important statements.
I wish to avail myself of this occasion to
welcome the five new non-permanent members of the
Security Council and to wish them success in carrying
out their responsibilities. I am confident that the
tradition of unanimous decisions on matters related to
the fight against international terrorism will be
maintained.
Fifteen months after the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), we can affirm that a great deal has been
done. However, the multifaceted measures undertaken
so far do not give us grounds to conclude that
terrorism, as a major threat to international peace and
security, has been eliminated. We condemn in the
strongest terms the recent terrorist acts, as well as
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as no
circumstances or motives can ever justify them.
Worldwide, in the past three months alone, three
Bulgarians have been killed by terrorists.
International cooperation is of key importance for
results in the fight against terrorism. Other
international regional and subregional organizations,
with the appropriate expertise and mechanisms, can
play an important role as well. In this regard, I would
like to welcome the initiative of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to hold a special meeting on 7 March with
representatives
of
international
and
regional
organizations. As a member of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) troika
and, consequently, as its future Chairman-in-Office in
2004, Bulgaria will actively contribute to the synergy
between the different bodies.

9

S/PV.4688

Looking at the balance of what has been
achieved, we cannot but underscore the great input of
the CTC in strengthening the overall capacity of the
States Members of the United Nations to fight this evil.
I would like to express my high esteem for the
activities of the Committee and of its Chairman, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock. I wish Spain success also as the
next Chairman of this most important subsidiary organ
of the Security Council.
We consider that the CTC has successfully
managed its initial task of focusing attention on the
need for legislation covering all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) and for ratification of the 12 international
instruments related to the fight against terrorism. In
supporting the priorities set out in the various phases of
CTC activities, Bulgaria is of the opinion that, even
now, the Committee can direct greater attention to the
close links that exist between international terrorism
and international organized crime, drug trafficking,
money-laundering and the illegal trade in weapons.
A matter of growing concern is the risk of access
by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction and
materials for their production. In this regard, I would
like to express Bulgaria’s support for “Principles to
prevent terrorists, or those that harbour them, from
gaining access to weapons or materials of mass
destruction”, adopted by the Group of Eight in June
2002 in Kananaskis, Canada and endorsed by the
General Assembly.
Bulgaria recognizes that the 12 United Nations
conventions and protocols constitute the primary legal
framework for the fight against terrorism. The last two
of them to which Bulgaria was not yet a party have
now been ratified. I avail myself of this occasion to
appeal to all States that have not yet ratified those
conventions to do so as soon as possible. As well, I
would like to stress that the legal framework that those
instruments outline will be incomplete until the
negotiations on a comprehensive convention against
terrorism and on an international convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism are concluded.
The coordination and the harmonization of the
fight against terrorism at international level must be
coupled with adequate efforts at the national level.
In order to improve and broaden cooperation at
subregional level, Bulgaria hosted in 2002 a regional
political forum of the South-East European States,
dedicated to international cooperation in the fight

10

against terrorism. That initiative was consistent with
the view that achievements can be improved when
States work within the collective efforts of the region
and was meant to boost cooperation with NATO, the
European Union, the Council of Europe, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe and the
Central European Initiative.
Bulgaria has, on many occasions and at different
political levels, declared that terrorism cannot be
identified with an ethnic or religious group. We must
not allow the terrorists to use cultural and religious
differences to breed feelings of mistrust and hatred
among nations and in that way to justify their terrible
acts of violence.
Counter-terrorism measures need to be constantly
improved because terrorists have demonstrated an
extraordinary ability to take advantage of the
weaknesses and omissions of international cooperation.
I am confident that today’s open meeting of the
Security Council will give new impetus to
strengthening the capabilities of States in their fight
against one of the most dangerous phenomena of the
present world.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Minister of External Relations of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me
first to welcome France’s initiative to convene this
high-level meeting of the Security Council to assess the
international community’s efforts in the struggle
against terrorism.
They have been very strenuous efforts. The
adoption of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
demonstrates
the
international
community’s
determination to continue to work towards this
common objective: the fight against this scourge,
which does not respect borders and which represents a
serious threat to world peace in the twenty-first
century.
In our view, the results of the international
community’s fight against terrorism have been positive,
thanks to the Security Council’s leadership role and to
the prompt response of States, which took measures to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). We should
underscore the large number of States that sent national

S/PV.4688

reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and which
took practical measures to prevent and to fight terrorist
networks.
But success in the fight against terrorism requires
not only the adoption of domestic policies by States; it
must also and above all include regional and
international cooperation.
The African continent was a pioneer in the
adoption of measures against terrorist activities, which
ravaged many of our countries on countless occasions.
In 1999, the Organization of African Unity adopted a
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism.
Angola, a country which directly suffered
terrorism for so many years, is seriously engaged in the
struggle against that phenomenon, regardless of who is
behind it or where it occurs. As President José Eduardo
dos Santos stated, Angola condemns all forms of
political, religious and ethnic acts of radicalism and all
terrorist activities.
Preventing terrorism is a priority challenge for
my Government, particularly in this period of the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Angola. Of
course, an effective defence against terrorism requires,
first and foremost, a strong State that is politically
stable and able to fulfil its responsibilities as a member
of the international community.
Those have been the goals of the Angolan State,
as it spends a significant portion of its resources not
only to develop its capacity for the protection and
control of its air, land and maritime space — an
essential requirement to avoid the infiltration of
terrorist groups — but also to meet the fundamental
needs of the Angolan people, such as their well-being,
security and justice, thus strengthening the Angolan
social fabric and preventing the very roots of some
forms of terrorism.
Of course, at this stage, Angola is endeavouring
to provide relief from the suffering caused by 30 years
of war. That includes the resettlement of 3 million
displaced persons and more than 400,000 refugees, the
reintegration of thousands of former combatants and
the reconstruction of infrastructure. As a result, my
Government is not yet capable of contributing its full
share in the struggle against all forms of terrorism
without the assistance of the international community.
In that regard, very soon, Angola will be welcoming a

technical assistance mission from the United Nations
Centre for International Crime Prevention.
In Southern Africa, Angola was an early promoter
of a meeting of our regional integration organization,
the Southern Africa Development Community, to
coordinate a prevention and combat strategy against
terrorist activities in our region. That strategy relates to
the very nature of terrorism in the region and its impact
on States. It also includes measures to impede
movements of the people and funds of terrorist
networks; to prevent potential attacks such as those that
occurred recently in Nairobi, Dar Es Salaam and
Mombasa; and to increase information exchange and
training for immigration, customs, police and civil
aviation personnel, among others.
Nevertheless, the implementation of some of
those measures requires international assistance,
including the provision of equipment, the training of
specialists and financial support.
At the same time, we stress the urgent need for an
international convention on terrorism providing a
universally acceptable definition of that scourge.
Beyond the mere adoption of measures to
prevent, combat and disassemble terrorist networks,
great attention must given to the objectives and
motivations of those groups. We believe that it is not
very helpful to attribute terrorist acts simply to a wish
to kill and destroy. We must also focus on identifying
the true purposes of terrorism and thereby make our
methods to combat it more effective.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
efforts made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
whose report was introduced earlier by its Chairman,
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. I
also wish very warmly to welcome the statement made
by the Secretary-General, who has given us a
comprehensive and realistic picture of the efforts that
need to be made by the entire international community
to make the fight against terrorism a worldwide reality.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Khurshid M. Kasuri, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan.
Mr. Kasuri (Pakistan): It is a pleasure for me to
participate in this important meeting of the Security
Council under the presidency of France. We warmly

11

S/PV.4688

welcome the initiative of the French Government and
Foreign Minister De Villepin to convene this special
ministerial meeting. We believe that it is timely and
essential for the Security Council to consider the issue
of terrorism from a wider perspective in its various
manifestations and its multifarious origins and causes.

scores of innocent Pakistanis and some foreigners,
including 11 French nationals, have lost their lives.
But, despite these attacks, Pakistan has remained
resolute. We have achieved considerable success in this
anti-terrorism campaign, which will be pursued until
the terrorists have been eliminated.

We welcome the important statements made today
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Pakistan has a strong interest in the
subject, as it has itself been a victim of terrorism for a
very long time.

In accordance with Security Council resolutions,
Pakistan has devised a legal and practical mechanism
to effectively halt financial and other support to
terrorist organizations and groups. Several sectarian
and extremist groups have been banned and their assets
frozen. We have signed or ratified 11 out of the 12
United Nations anti-terrorism conventions. We have
also signed the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Convention on Combating Terrorism.

The tragic events of 11 September 2001
mobilized the international community to launch a
comprehensive campaign against terrorism. The
Security Council has made a significant contribution to
this campaign. An international coalition has waged a
successful war against the Al Qaeda terrorist
organization in Afghanistan and elsewhere. Of course,
this process of seeking out, arresting and eliminating
the Al Qaeda elements wherever they may be will be a
long and painstaking one. Let me assure the Council
here that the Government of Pakistan will leave no
stone unturned to achieve that objective.
Pakistan is and will remain a key member of the
global coalition against international terrorism. As
President Musharraf said last year,
“the strategic decisions we took after 11
September are consistent with our moral
principles and national interests. Our unstinting
support has been critical in the battle against
terrorism. This support will continue until our
shared objectives are fully met and the evil of
terrorism is completely eliminated.”
Pakistan’s actions speak louder than our words.
Despite the constant threat on our eastern frontier,
70,000 Pakistani troops continue to conduct extensive
operations on our western border with Afghanistan to
interdict Al Qaeda infiltration. Our law enforcement
agencies are engaged in an extensive operation to hunt
down Al Qaeda and other terrorists who may have
infiltrated into Pakistan. Pakistan has arrested and
deported over 420 suspected members of Al Qaeda,
including some of its top leaders, such as Abu
Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh. Several members of
our security forces have made the ultimate sacrifice in
this operation. Pakistan has also been the target of Al
Qaeda’s retaliation and revenge attacks, in which

12

The horrendous attacks of 11 September have
highlighted the vulnerability of the modern,
technologically advanced societies, as well as of those
that are backward. We share the fear that terrorists may
acquire sophisticated technology and weapons of great
destructive power. Let me reaffirm that Pakistan’s
nuclear assets are under strict safeguards and credible
custodial controls. With a vigorous security and
monitoring system, there has never been any danger of
leakage of nuclear or sensitive technologies in
Pakistan, yet we must also acknowledge that the
instruments of terror can be multifarious. The focus of
the anti-terror campaign must therefore remain on
eliminating the terrorist organizations and groups and
in halting support for them.
Greater effort is necessary to identify those acts
of terrorism which are the consequence of incorrigible
fanaticism or criminal intent, and others which arise
from a sense of political or economic injustice. In the
latter case, attempts to address underlying causes could
be the most effective approach to arresting terrorist
actions.
At this juncture, however, I would like to point
out that some States have unfortunately sought to
misuse the campaign against terror to denigrate and
suppress the right of peoples to self-determination,
such as those in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and in
Palestine. Pakistan wishes to reaffirm emphatically that
the aspiration of the people of Jammu and Kashmir to
self-determination is sanctioned by the resolutions of
the Security Council. Their struggle against Indian
occupation is a just, legitimate and noble struggle.
Equating such a freedom struggle with terrorism is

S/PV.4688

unjust. The Kashmir dispute can and should be
resolved through dialogue between Pakistan and India
in accordance with the Security Council’s resolutions
and the wishes of the Kashmiri people.
The international community cannot ignore the
phenomenon of State terrorism as a tool of foreign
occupation and defiance of United Nations resolutions.
Terrorism has no creed, culture or religion. Pakistan
resolutely rejects attempts to identify our noble
religion, Islam, with terrorism. Such attempts must be
collectively opposed by the international community
lest they sow the seeds of endemic confrontation
between cultures and civilizations. There should be no
double standards in combating terrorism. We are
surprised that acts of terrorism committed by other
religious fanatics in non-Muslim societies have not
been condemned as vigorously. I refer to the recent
killings of Muslims in the State of Gujarat, India, in
particular.
As President Musharraf has stated:
“Hate should have no market. It must be stamped
out with the same zeal with which the fight
against terrorism is being pursued.”
We shall do this vigorously in Pakistan. We seek to
build Pakistan, as envisioned by our founding father,
the great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah, as a tolerant,
modern and democratic Islamic State. While
collectively opposing terrorism, the international
community must also endeavour collectively to
promote greater cultural and religious harmony all over
the world. To this end, Pakistan has proposed the
adoption by the General Assembly of a declaration on
religious and cultural understanding, harmony and
cooperation.
In conclusion, let me state that Pakistan believes
that this ministerial meeting is the beginning of a
serious dialogue within the Security Council on ways
and means to combat terrorism collectively,
comprehensively, effectively and — I also hope —
equitably. Success in this historic endeavour will
strengthen international peace and security and put to
rest the prophecies of those who project a coming clash
of civilizations.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Luis Ernesto Derbez, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico.

Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me sincerely to congratulate the
delegation of France for the pertinent way in which it
has conducted the work of the Security Council and to
express my deep appreciation for having you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, preside over the
Security Council at this important meeting.
My country extends a greeting to SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan. Under his leadership, the United
Nations is fulfilling with vision and wisdom its
commitment to keeping the peace. This meeting has a
special meaning, for here we renew our purpose to go
further in our multilateral effort to fight terrorism. I
should also like to congratulate Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, on his
tireless efforts over the past months. In addition, I
welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Permanent Representatives of the States members of
the Security Council.
The tragic events that occurred on the territory of
the United States on 11 September 2001 revealed the
immense destructive capacity of international terrorism
and drew our attention to the grave threat that such acts
pose to world peace and security. The Security
Council’s decisive and immediate action and the
creation of a Committee charged with monitoring
measures adopted by States in implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) are innovative initiatives to
fight terrorism.
The impetus that the entire community of nations
is giving to such efforts will enable us to strengthen the
legal framework necessary for confronting this grave
evil. In parallel, it provides an incentive for
international cooperation to tighten the noose around
those who use terrorism to destabilize and to spread
uncertainty in our world.
However, the challenge posed by this threat is
enormous and especially complex. That has been
demonstrated by the grave terrorist attacks perpetrated
recently in places such as Indonesia, the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Kenya. I take this
opportunity to reaffirm Mexico’s solidarity with the
Governments and the peoples that have been victims of
terrorism as well as Mexico’s confidence in good
policy and good diplomacy to eradicate this pernicious
phenomenon.
Today, the urgency of strengthening the
international community’s efforts to combat and

13

S/PV.4688

eradicate this scourge — and to prevent this
phenomenon from jeopardizing peaceful coexistence
among nations — is more evident than ever before.
Mexico condemns all acts or manifestations of
terrorism and rejects any argument that seeks to justify
it.

agreements. That effort will have special significance
for strengthening cooperation between the CounterTerrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations with responsibility in this area, within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The international community faces a unique
challenge in such threats. In order to act successfully, it
must proceed from three principles: first, the
establishment of an international order based on
universally recognized rules and norms — in other
words, the building of a framework of certainty that
responds to the wishes and needs of the international
community; secondly, the continuous strengthening of
international cooperation for the resolution of global
problems; and finally, the primary role of the United
Nations as the forum that the community of nations has
established to channel its action in facing global
challenges.

In various international forums, Mexico has
participated in and supported initiatives to prevent and
combat terrorism. As of January this year, it has
assumed one of the vice-chairmanships of the CounterTerrorism Committee. In the International Atomic
Energy Agency, we have actively promoted an early
conclusion of the protocol to the Vienna Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material as an
effective mechanism to prevent nuclear materials or
facilities from being used for terrorist ends.

The fight against terrorism must fully respect the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law, including the protection of human
rights. That is why Mexico especially welcomes the
initiative to convene this ministerial meeting. Today’s
gathering attests to the importance we attach to acting
effectively and with justice in the fight against
terrorism. It should provide an opportunity not only to
reaffirm existing commitments but also to reflect with
imagination, creativity and a lofty sense of
responsibility on the actions that we must undertake in
the future.
As a member of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Mexico has devoted special attention to
proposing formulas that would ensure full compliance
by all States with the international obligations required
by the fight against terrorism. Mexico wishes to
emphasize that conflict prevention and the peaceful
settlement of disputes are essential premises in our
effort to eradicate terrorism. The international
community has the responsibility to foresee and create
the necessary space for negotiation in order to avoid
conflict situations, which are fertile ground for the
growth and proliferation of terrorism.
For that reason, we recognize that the
forthcoming meeting, on 7 March, between the
Security Council Committee and various international
and regional organizations will be an important step
towards improving specific strategies and cooperation

14

In the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, Mexico has supported the adoption
of recommendations to combat the financing of
terrorism, which complement the work of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering against
money laundering. Currently, Mexico is working to
implement those recommendations.
At the same time, Mexico has been taking
measures to strengthen its internal legal framework for
combating terrorism. That is an ongoing and
inescapable task, and both the executive branch and the
Mexican Congress are working on initiatives to
strengthen our laws for combating terrorism. Recently,
the Senate of the Republic approved the ratification of
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and Mexico’s accession to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. I am pleased to announce that,
shortly, I shall have the privilege of depositing the
relevant instruments on those two Conventions with the
Legal Counsel of the United Nations, in fulfilment of
Mexico’s responsibilities with regard to the fight
against terrorism.
We are convinced that the effective fulfilment of
international obligations in good faith and the
strengthening of global efforts to resolve conflicts are
the best way to ensure the eradication of terrorism.
Through our work in this and other meetings, we shall
help to ensure that the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee can cooperate with all
States in such tasks and ensure their success. The fight

S/PV.4688

against terrorism is a battle that mankind cannot afford
to lose.

regimes for
strengthened.

The President (spoke in French): I call next on
His Excellency Mr. Igor S. Ivanov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

The recent brazen terrorist acts in Russia,
Indonesia and Kenya — and the almost daily
occurrence of such acts in the Middle East — are clear
evidence of the need for a comprehensive approach to
combating terrorism at the national, regional and global
levels.

Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, the Security Council is discussing an
issue of paramount importance: how to further
intensify and increase the effectiveness of cooperation
in combating terrorism. This initiative by France is a
very timely development, and we welcome it. The new
wave of terrorist acts that shook the world late last year
reaffirmed with alarming clarity that the world
community continues to face a strong and ruthless
enemy. Today, that enemy poses the major threat to
international security and to the foundations of the
modern world order. That is precisely why the Council
must further intensify its active involvement in
addressing the urgent problem of fighting terrorism.
The multidimensional strategy to combat
international terrorism, developed under United
Nations auspices and defined in Security Council
resolutions, has already proved its effectiveness. That
took place when an extremely dangerous hotbed of
terrorism in Afghanistan was virtually eliminated
through a joint effort. That development should be
further strengthened. A successful outcome will depend
largely on preserving the unity of a broad anti-terrorist
coalition, which must continue to be based on the solid
foundation of the Charter of the United Nations and on
international law. We must be careful not to take
unilateral steps that might threaten the unity of the
anti-terrorist coalition.
In that context, we favour a political settlement of
the situation concerning Iraq, in strict conformity with
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1441 (2002), which the Council adopted
unanimously.
We must all realize that we are only at the
beginning of the difficult road of combating terrorism.
Terrorism is far from being crushed; indeed, it has
considerable financial and human potential and is
preparing to deliver new blows in various parts of the
world.
It is also alarming that terrorists are seeking to
acquire weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
such a catastrophe to take place. The non-proliferation

such

weapons

should

be

further

The insidious sophistication of terrorists must be
countered by united, thoroughly considered and
decisive action by the international community. A
common understanding must prevail, including at the
level of the Security Council, that there can be
absolutely no justification for terrorist acts. We
ourselves should act accordingly. Criminals must face
punishment for what they have done.
But equally decisive measures must also be taken
against the accomplices of terrorists. Those who give
refuge to criminal gangs, finance them or in any way
assist them are themselves criminals. This basic logic
of criminal law has become an international imperative
with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). This matter could be actively pursued by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which since its
establishment has earned an excellent reputation due to
its dynamic, unbiased and transparent work. It is
important that the Committee not only assist Member
States in improving their anti-terrorist laws; it should
also examine how those laws are being applied in
accordance with today's requirements.
There are good prospects for cooperation between
the Committee and international and regional
organizations. Russia will continue to actively
contribute to the activities of the Committee in that
area, including through promoting working contacts
between the Committee and the anti-terrorist
mechanisms of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In broader terms, the international anti-terrorist
legal framework must be further strengthened, first of
all by making existing anti-terrorist conventions
universal. Russia is a strong advocate of expeditious
action to that end. On 27 December 2002, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism came into force in our country.
Work is currently under way in Russia to ratify the
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection.

15

S/PV.4688

At the same time, we are greatly disappointed
about the slowdown in the work on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and the draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. The inability
to overcome political and ideological differences runs
counter to the interests of the entire international
community and raises doubts about our ability to act
effectively and responsibly in complex situations. The
time has now come to rise above differences, for the
sake of our common goals of eliminating the terrorist
threat and finalizing the work on those important
documents as soon as possible.
It is perfectly clear that terrorism is a gross
violation of human rights and freedoms, including the
fundamental right to life. That is why we have on our
agenda the task of establishing the human right to
protection from terrorism. We believe that we must
implement as soon as possible the well-known Russian
initiative to develop, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a code to protect human rights against
terrorism.
It is also very clear that the complete eradication
of terrorism will be possible only if the fertile ground
for it is removed. In particular, that ground includes
regional conflicts, organized crime, drug trafficking,
the illegal arms trade and uneven socio-economic
development.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the
Russian draft resolution entitled “Responding to global
threats and challenges” (General Assembly resolution
57/145). We believe that this indicates that the world
community has come to understand the leading role of
the United Nations in establishing a comprehensive
approach to neutralizing terrorist and other dangerous
threats to international security. We should now start to
work together to build a global system to counter new
challenges and threats.
For Russia, strengthening international solidarity
in the fight against terrorism is not mere verbal tribute
to political rhetoric. Our President, Mr. Putin, has said
that our country is living in a virtual state of war
declared by international terrorism. Last year’s largescale terrorist acts in Kaspiysk, Moscow and Grozny,
and the traces of Chechen terrorism in a number of
European and Muslim countries, leave no doubt that
Chechen terrorism is an integral part of the world

16

terrorist infrastructure, which includes Al Qaeda. We
have considerable irrefutable evidence to that effect.
Russia greatly appreciated the international
community’s solidarity with our country in the
aftermath of the Chechen terrorist attacks. However, it
is important not to confine ourselves to solidarity
alone. We must learn the main lesson that all those
engaged in terrorist activities must be duly punished,
wherever they may be. It is the duty of every State not
to let them escape justice. There can be no double
standards in that regard; otherwise victory will belong
not to us, but to terrorists and their accomplices.
There is much to be done to root out the evil of
terrorism, but we can do so if we work together. For its
part, Russia will remain at the forefront of the
international community's fight against terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I call now on
Her Excellency Ms. Ana Palacio Vallelersundi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain.
Ms. Palacio Vallelersundi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Terrorism is today an urgent threat to the
peace of our community of nations, which wants to be
governed by the rule of law. We are confronted by a
major challenge of the twenty-first century. Even minor
complacency towards terrorism would be a crime;
inaction would be a mistake of unimaginable
consequences. Those who think that this problem does
not affect them are wrong. Recent events have
provided a painful reminder that something which
seems a distant possibility in our society can instantly
become something both commonplace and appalling.
Millions of people all over the world, thousands
of them living in the Basque country of Spain, must
live every day with the knowledge that they are targets
for terrorist attacks. Terrorism is one of the main
concerns of our democratic societies. Our fellow
citizens are perfectly aware that the death, murder,
devastation and destruction are not aims in themselves
but, rather, constitute means to an end. Ultimately, the
goal of terrorism is to undermine the basic values upon
which our common existence is founded, namely,
democracy, freedom and the rule of law.
We in Spain were aware very early on that
terrorism is no longer just an internal police matter for
States. Today terrorism is a problem for the
international community. If we have learned anything
from terrorist attacks, it is that security is indivisible

S/PV.4688

and that States and regions are not hermetically sealed
off from one another. The international community has
shown that it too understands this by reacting jointly at
both the regional and the global levels. It has done so
by acting through both the United Nations and the
European Union, as well as through the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and, now,
through the Council of Europe, which has just taken up
the subject of drafting a substantive comprehensive
convention against terrorism.
Because terrorism concerns all of us, because it
threatens all of us, the United Nations must lead and
direct the fight against terrorism. In that context, I
commend the fresh evidence of resolve, consideration
and leadership just given to us by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.
There are three focal points of the fight against
terrorism. To be effective, we must focus on a common
understanding of terrorism; to be effective, we must cut
the lifeline of terrorism by suppressing its means of
financing and standing firmly against international
crime; to be effective, we must be implacable with
regimes that harbour, encourage or protect terrorists,
particularly if they posses or can develop weapons of
mass destruction.
Freedom and security are not opposing concepts
in this fight. In this fight, freedom and security have a
symbiotic relationship in which both must be
strengthened.
In the global sphere, the various United Nations
conventions on the fight against terrorism are
instruments of prime importance, and we must continue
our efforts to achieve universal ratification of those
texts, without losing sight of the objective of a
comprehensive United Nations convention in that field.

instruments for the exchange of information and early
warning systems that can prevent attacks; making
recommendations for effective border control; and the
issuance and control of identification and travel
documents.
We must also insist on the adoption of measures
against the active or passive support of terrorism,
administrative and legal cooperation and granting
refuge to terrorists. Furthermore, we must consider the
adjustment of the Committee’s mandate to allow it to
continue to play the active and efficient role it has been
developing, because we know that terrorism is often
linked to other illegal international activities and
because we cannot fight terrorism effectively without
confronting those matters: arms trafficking, money
laundering and other international wrongdoing. We
must pay very special attention to prevent access by
terrorist groups to weapons of mass destruction.
The international community is a reality, and it
shares the hope for a more just world, just as it shares a
painful vulnerability to terrorism and other global
threats. International relations cannot be confined to
constant crisis management. Rather, they must include
a definitive component in the fight for a better world.
Our great common challenge is to articulate those
relations in legal terms in order to achieve international
coexistence that is more just and secure. The fight
against terrorism is a basic priority to achieve that
objective.
Thus, the initiative of the French presidency is
very timely, and Spain firmly supports the draft
resolution that we expect will be adopted at the
conclusion of this debate.
In conclusion, in this common endeavour, the
international community can always count on the
resolute participation of Spain, which, as I have just
stated, will guide the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, whose presidency, as of April, has been
entrusted to us, which I appreciate.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee are vital steps forward. We commend the
Committee for the work it has done. We must continue
to build on the work accomplished, as Ambassador
Greenstock has stated. I congratulate him on his work.

The President (spoke in French): I call on His
Excellency Mr. Colin L. Powell, Secretary of State of
the United States of America.

The work of the Committee cannot be limited to a
mere theoretical review of reports. Rather, it must
propose legal and political measures of real-world
effectiveness in the areas of preventing and suppressing
the financing of terrorism; identifying and proposing

Mr. Powell (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for bringing us together today to
reaffirm our commitment to the fight against terrorism.
I thank the Secretary-General for his excellent remarks
earlier.

17

S/PV.4688

It is so fitting that this body meet at the
ministerial level to take stock of our campaign against
terrorists and to help chart the way forward. And it is
fitting that we meet here in New York, the site of the
bloodiest of the attacks of 11 September 2001.
Let me begin my remarks by joining all my other
colleagues in thanking Ambassador Greenstock for his
tireless efforts as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Ambassador Greenstock’s vision,
his energy and his commitment have transformed the
Committee from an idea into a powerful weapon
against terrorism, and we all owe him a big debt of
gratitude. Thank you, Jeremy.
I would also like to thank our Spanish colleagues
for agreeing to assume the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in April. They will have
our full support as they build on Ambassador
Greenstock’s work to make the Committee an even
more potent weapon in the anti-terrorist arsenal.
We need an effective Counter-Terrorism
Committee for, despite the progress of the past year,
there is still much that we have to do. As the
murderous attacks in Bali and Moscow and Mombasa
and elsewhere have so tragically reminded us, the
terrorist threat continues, and no countries’ citizens are
safe. Innocent people from some 90 countries perished
on 11 September 2001. The Bali victims called at least
25 different countries home. No cause justifies the
murder of innocent people. We totally reject terrorists
and terrorism. We must rid the civilized world of this
cancer. We must wage our campaign at every level with
every tool of statecraft for as long as it takes. President
Bush has stressed that “we will win this conflict by the
patient accumulation of successes, by meeting a series
of challenges with determination and will and
purpose”.
The declaration that we will adopt today makes
clear that this war has many fronts: from money
laundering and the illicit drug trade to arms trafficking
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We must fight terrorism on all of these fronts.
I am very impressed by a number of the
comments that I have heard today from various
colleagues. I thank my colleague from Pakistan for
Pakistan’s commitment to continue going after Al
Qaeda. We must get every one of these terrorists and
bring them to justice or destroy them.

18

I also note that a number of my colleagues have
made reference to the situation with respect to Iraq and
to resolution 1441 (2002). In the very near future, the
Council will meet again to determine what to do about
this situation. Iraq was given a last chance with
resolution 1441 (2002). I am pleased that it was
President Bush who brought this situation to the
attention of the Council in the most forceful way last
September to give Iraq this one last chance. We must
not shrink from our duties and our responsibilities
when the material comes before us next week and as
we consider Iraq’s response to resolution 1441 (2002).
We cannot fail to take the action that may be necessary
because we are afraid of what others might do. We
cannot be shocked into impotence because we are
afraid of the difficult choices that are ahead of us.
So we will have much work to do, difficult work,
in the days ahead, but we cannot shrink from the
responsibilities of dealing with a regime that has gone
about the development, the acquiring and the stocking
of weapons of mass destruction, that has committed
terrorist attacks against its neighbours and against its
own people and that has trampled the human rights of
its own people and its neighbours. So however difficult
the road ahead may be with respect to Iraq, we must
not shrink from the need to travel down that road.
Hopefully, there will be a peaceful solution, but if Iraq
does not come into full compliance, we must not shrink
from the responsibilities that we set before ourselves
when we adopted resolution 1441 (2002) on a
unanimous basis; and so many other nations expressed
their support for resolution 1441 (2002).
Weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
terrorists or States that support terrorists would
represent a mortal danger to us all. We must make the
United Nations even more effective and we must build
even closer international cooperation to keep these
weapons out of the hands of terrorists. The United
Nations has long worked to marshal the international
community against terrorism. For example, as we have
noted here this morning, there are 12 counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols negotiated under the
auspices of the United Nations and its affiliated
agencies. It is vital that all States become parties to all
of these Conventions and Protocols and fully
implement them as soon as possible.
With the passage of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) in September 2001, the United Nations
fundamentally changed the way the international

S/PV.4688

community responds to terrorism. Resolution 1373
(2001) created an obligation for all Member States to
work together to deny terrorists the ability to solicit
and move funds, find safe haven, acquire weapons, or
cross international borders. Resolution 1373 (2001)
said that if you are a member of the community of
civilized nations, you must do your part to eliminate
terrorist networks and terrorist activities.
As we have seen and as we have discussed here
today, resolution 1373 (2001) is starting to have an
impact. Most Member States have submitted reports to
the CTC describing the measures that they have taken
to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and identifying
what more needs to be done. This is a very important
step, and, as Ambassador Greenstock noted earlier,
countries that have not taken this step should comply
as quickly as possible. Those that have should continue
to be responsive to requests from the CounterTerrorism Committee.
Some countries are eager to implement resolution
1373 (2001) and to take other measures against
terrorists, but they lack the necessary skills and
resources to do so effectively. We must help them build
up their capabilities. I challenge all nations with
counter-terrorism expertise to help our willing partners.
Many countries have already stepped up to the
challenge.
For
example,
the
Commonwealth
Secretariat, France, Australia, Germany, New Zealand
and Norway are all providing assistance in areas such
as drafting anti-terrorist legislation.
For our part, we have more than tripled our
capacity-building assistance. Last year alone, our antiterrorism assistance programme trained nearly 4,800
security personnel from 60 countries in everything
from bomb detection to hostage negotiations, crimescene investigations and the protection of dignitaries.
We are also devoting $10 million in the coming year to
help strengthen the ability of 18 countries to deny
terrorists the funds that they need to kill innocent
people.
Indeed, the international community has already
made impressive progress in freezing terrorist assets.
The United Nations has played the leading role in this
unprecedented effort. For example, the United Nations
has designated 324 names for asset freezing. In
addition, Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1390 (2002) laid a strong foundation for halting the

flow of money to terrorists associated with the Taliban,
Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden.
We are particularly pleased that just last Friday
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1455 (2003). This important new resolution is aimed at
improving Member State implementation of these
sanctions that are targeted at terrorists and are without
time limits. The international community could not
have sent a stronger message of its determination to
stamp out terrorism.
We look forward to working with Ambassador
Valdés of Chile as he assumes the chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) to implement the Al Qaeda
sanctions regime. That Committee has become even
more important with the unanimous passage of
resolution 1455 (2003).
But we all need to do more, and we need to
coordinate our efforts better. Many international
organizations at the regional and subregional level are
already working to counter the terrorist threat. These
organizations have an important role to play in helping
their member States fulfil their counter-terrorism
obligations. Now is the time for these groups to talk to
one another, to exchange information and to coordinate
their activities for maximum effect. The CounterTerrorism Committee is taking a good first step by
convening a meeting this March to bring many of these
organizations together.
The challenge before us is to weave counterterrorism into the very fabric of our national
institutions and our international institutions. We must
rise to the challenge. We must rise to the challenge
with actions that will rid the globe of terrorism and
create a world in which all God’s children can live
without fear.
The President (spoke in French): I call next on
His Excellency Mr. Tang Jiaxuan, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of China.
Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to express my appreciation to
France for initiating this ministerial meeting of the
Security Council on counter-terrorism. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
statement. My thanks go also to Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Since

19

S/PV.4688

the attacks of 11 September 2001 positive results have
been achieved in the international fight against
terrorism. The CTC has made some progress in helping
States formulate anti-terrorism legislation and cut off
financial support to terrorists.
At the same time, the root causes of terrorism are
far from being eliminated. The terrorist acts carried out
last year on the Indonesian island of Bali, at a theatre
in Moscow and in Mombasa, Kenya, demonstrate that
much hard work remains to be done in the international
fight against terrorism. We must take stock of past
experiences in the fight against terrorism with a view
to
maintaining
momentum
in
strengthening
international cooperation to combat terrorism. For this
purpose, it is incumbent on the international
community to formulate a systematic counter-terrorism
strategy. In that connection, the Chinese Government
wishes to share with the Council the following views.
First, we must ensure that the central objective in
the fight against terrorism is the maintenance of peace
and security for mankind. It is imperative to foster a
new security concept that emphasizes mutual trust,
mutual benefit, equality and cooperation so as to create
a favourable broad environment in the fight against
terrorism. Solving hot-spot issues and easing tensions
in places such as the Middle East and Iraq will promote
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
All the measures, ways and means employed by the
international community must be conducive to the
relaxation of tensions on both the regional and the
international levels.
Secondly, we should conduct our counterterrorism campaign on the basis of promoting universal
development and prosperity for all. Only when we
succeed in achieving common development by helping
one another’s economies can we eradicate once and for
all the root causes of terrorism. Only when we narrow
the gap between the rich and the poor and achieve
social justice can we remove the breeding ground of
terrorism. Only when we truly attain a global
development strategy that allows all to coexist and to
gain and share the benefits of prosperity can we deny
terrorism its last sanctuary. In this respect the early
attainment of all the development goals set forth in the
Millennium Declaration will be indispensable and
significant for promoting international cooperation on
counter-terrorism.

20

Thirdly, we should further enhance understanding
and integration among civilizations to guarantee the
broadest possible fight against terrorism. Terrorism is a
common enemy of all civilizations, ethnic groups and
religions. The fight against terrorism should provide
civilizations with a new opportunity to learn from one
another through mutual exchanges, a new starting point
for their dialogue and integration and a new engine for
their common progress and prosperity, rather than be a
cause of greater ethnic hatred, racial conflict, clashes
of civilizations or rifts between peoples. All countries
should strive to strengthen understanding and tolerance
among all civilizations and cultures.
Fourthly, we should promote further exchanges
and closer cooperation among nations, which is a key
to success in the fight against terrorism. Success in the
international campaign against terrorism requires
solidarity, cooperation and common action among
countries. There exists huge potential for the
international community to strengthen cooperation to
ensure safe aviation, safe maritime transportation and
network security. The success of this campaign also
depends on the leading role of the United Nations, with
the principles and purposes of the Charter and
universally recognized norms of international law as its
guidelines. We hope that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will adopt more forceful measures in
helping developing countries enhance capacitybuilding in countering terrorism and will support such
endeavours.
China attaches great importance to the fight
against terrorism. At the recent sixteenth National
Congress of the Communist Party of China, President
Jiang Zemin made an important statement that stressed
the importance of stronger international cooperation in
order to address both the symptoms and causes of
terrorism; guard against and crack down hard on
terrorist activities; and eliminate the roots of terrorism
through stepped-up efforts.
China has actively participated in the
international fight against terrorism. It has signed and
ratified almost all of the international conventions
against terrorism and cooperated with the countries
concerned.
China itself has been the victim of terrorism. East
Turkestan terror organizations have perpetrated
numerous terrorist attacks in China’s Xinjiang region
and in neighbouring regions of Central Asia, posing a

S/PV.4688

serious threat to peace and security in those areas. In
September last year, the Security Council placed the
East Turkestan Islamic Movement on the list of
terrorist organizations. The Chinese Government is
ready to join all parties in continuing resolutely and
effectively to fight against the East Turkestan terrorist
forces, safeguard peace and security for Chinese people
of all nationalities, and maintain regional peace and
stability.

We commend the work done by the CTC. The
progress it has made is evidence not only of its resolve
to discharge its responsibilities effectively and quickly,
but also of the political will of our Member States to
shoulder their responsibilities. I wish also to pay a
well-deserved tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his
ongoing dedication, his skills and the outstanding
manner in which he has guided the work of the
Committee.

The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Guinea, His Excellency Mr. François Lonsény Fall.

We welcome the CTC’s proposal to convene, in
the near future, a special meeting with representatives
of international, regional and subregional organizations
and institutions, which will without a doubt help to
strengthen the capacity of States to combat terrorism
through concerted and coordinated action at all levels.
My delegation would encourage the Committee to
continue its dialogue with all States on the specific
steps to be taken to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001).

Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to say how pleased my delegation is to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting, and also to
welcome the five new member countries of the
Security Council.
The Security Council, through this meeting, is
restating its determination to give high priority to the
international community’s fight against terrorism. Let
us recall that it was during the French presidency of the
Council, in September 2001, that the tragic terrorist
attacks were perpetrated against the United States of
America. Under the active leadership of France, the
Council, at that time, adopted important resolutions,
including resolution 1373 (2001).
I should like also, Sir, to stress the particularly
active part played by your country in the process of the
drafting and adoption of the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. That
is why I am pleased to commend your delegation for
France’s ongoing outstanding efforts effectively to
combat terrorism, which poses a clear threat to
international peace and security.
I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his introductory statement, and the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for his important
statement.
Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001,
the international community has taken many steps — at
the subregional, regional and international levels — to
combat the scourge of terrorism. The adoption and
implementation of various resolutions by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as well as the
actions taken by Member States, are part of this
approach.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the fact that
several Member States have undertaken to sign and
ratify the 12 terrorism conventions. My delegation
advocates the swift adoption of the comprehensive
convention against terrorism, and we support work on a
draft convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism.
The Committee has certainly been able to
highlight the relationship between terrorism and other
forms of organized crime. However, the Committee’s
work is far from over, for combating terrorism is a
long-term endeavour which requires the strengthening
of national legislations and the ratification by States of
the various international instruments.
My delegation would restate its strong
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, whatever the cause the perpetrators
claim to be defending. Political disputes and
differences should not overshadow our commitment to
combat this evil, which affects the international
community as a whole. Guinea believes that the fact
that a country has not been the victim of such acts
cannot be a reason for its failing to join in the struggle
to eliminate terrorism.
Therefore, Guinea has added to its penal code
provisions aimed at averting and suppressing all
terrorist threats or acts. Furthermore, our national
courts have jurisdiction over terrorist acts or threats
recognized in the international conventions to which
Guinea is a party. This derives from article 79 of our

21

S/PV.4688

Constitution, whereby international law has primacy
over our national legislation.
Our Government has taken steps to accede to all
international conventions on terrorism to which we are
not yet a party. The competent authorities have already
undertaken proceedings to that end.
My country, which has always been involved in
efforts by the international community to combat
terrorism, participated, inter alia, in the Special
Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, held in Kuala Lumpur from 1
to 3 April last. We also attended the High-Level
Intergovernmental Meeting of the African Union on
Terrorism, held in Algiers from 11 to 14 September
2002.
My delegation believes that we can gauge the
success of our efforts to combat terrorism by looking at
how many lives have been saved and how many
terrorist acts thwarted. Unfortunately, the Bali and
Mombasa attacks and the Moscow hostage-taking
resulted in the loss of human lives, making it clear that
we need to strengthen cooperation further to combat
terrorism.
Guinea is willing to contribute to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Policy
Working Group on the United Nations and Terrorism,
which were submitted to the Secretary-General.
Success depends on the solidarity of the entire
international community in order to overcome divisive
factors. This will require tolerance, a dialogue among
civilizations, and accepting our differences for the sake
of our common interests. We must also settle regional
conflicts, which are ravaging so many countries, and
seek just solutions to development problems.
We are convinced that the road ahead is long and
full of obstacles, but we must nonetheless continue to
move towards our common goal to eradicate terrorism.
We hope that the outcome of this meeting will give
fresh impetus to our common efforts, and, in this spirit,
we support the draft statement to be adopted at the end
of this meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Mikhail Wehbe.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to convey to you, Sir, to the Ministers,

22

to the Secretary-General and to the representatives of
member States the best wishes of Mr. Farouk Al-Shara,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic. As he could not
be present today, he has asked me to deliver the
following statement on his behalf.
“I am pleased to see France, a country that
has ties of friendship with Syria, presiding over
the Security Council for this month. I welcome
the initiative of Mr. De Villepin, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, to convene this
meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers to
discuss an important issue: cooperation in the
combat against international terrorism. In a
telephone call last Wednesday, I personally
expressed to Mr. De Villepin my deep
appreciation for this initiative.
“Our region is now living in a dangerous
situation. Syria and some of the countries
neighbouring Iraq that would be directly and
dangerously affected by potential events in Iraq
are currently striving to reach a peaceful
settlement to the problem of Iraq. Such efforts are
linked to the Security Council’s efforts to
implement its resolutions, particularly resolution
1441 (2002). It is for those reasons that I was
prevented from joining my Foreign Ministers
colleagues in this meeting. I hope that your
efforts will succeed in resetting priorities for
combating international terrorism, particularly as
terrorism does not target any specific country,
religion or people.
“Syria stresses the role that the United
Nations must play in mobilizing the efforts of all
Member States to counter international terrorism,
based on the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Such principles acquire
further significance when our world is facing
greater dangers and risks.
“The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, took serious measures to
fight international terrorism after the tragic events
in the United States of America. We all
condemned those attacks. Regrettably, terrorism
did not start with those events. Unfortunately,
neither did it end with them. In today’s world,
justice is mixed with injustice, freedom with
oppression and principles with double standards.

S/PV.4688

Briefly but more significantly, truth is mixed with
falsehood.
“There is no doubt that resolution 1373
(2001) constitutes the cornerstone of our efforts
to fight international terrorism. We must pay
tribute to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee
under
the
chairmanship
of
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock. Syria has
cooperated with the Committee both through its
membership on the Committee and through the
reports it submitted in full to the Committee. We
hope that the Committee and its new bureau will
continue to supervise all aspects of the
implementation of that resolution.
“However, have all the measures taken so
far been reassuring? The seriousness of
international terrorism calls for collective efforts
to make the issue a top priority of the
international community so that we do not stop at
addressing the issue in a superficial and
temporary manner. We must look at the causes of
terrorism. In other words, we have to diagnose
the phenomenon so that we can address it and
eradicate it.
“There are increasing concerns about the
possible link between terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction. The draft presidential statement
before the Council makes clear reference to that
potential link. We in Syria share the concern
about a possible link between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction, especially in the
region of the Middle East, where both terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction are a threat. For
that reason, for more than two decades Syria has
called attention to the gravity of this situation.
“First, Syria has called for the convening of
an international conference under the auspices of
the United Nations to define terrorism and to
distinguish between terrorism and a people’s
struggle for freedom. Syria has contributed to the
negotiations currently under way in the General
Assembly on a comprehensive draft convention
against terrorism that asserts the international
community’s understanding of the legitimate
struggle against foreign occupation — a right that
was guaranteed by the Charter of the United
Nations — and condemns as terrorism all acts of
violence outside occupied territories. Syria

believes that we should reach agreement on that
common ground. Otherwise, we cannot truly be
serious about fighting terrorism.
“Secondly, since 1989 we have called for
the declaration of the Middle East as a zone free
of nuclear, bacteriological and chemical weapons
of mass destruction. Many Arab and Islamic
countries in the region have joined us in that
appeal, and my country has worked towards that
objective during recent years. However, that goal
has so far remained elusive due to Israel’s refusal
to join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons on the pretext that it is waiting
for the conclusion of peace between it and its
neighbours. Successive Israeli Governments have
made such a peace truly elusive through their
refusal to withdraw from the Arab territories
occupied since 1967.
“If the international community truly wishes
to separate terrorism from weapons of mass
destruction and to fight both in parallel, we now
have a very precious opportunity that we must not
waste. Let us work together to fight both in
parallel through the initiative of Syria: a call for
international conferences to define terrorism and
to make the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, without the exception of any
State.
“Important proposals have been advanced in
our region — and even outside it — stressing that
it is extremely important to counter violence
while Israeli settlements and occupation persist.
Therefore, working seriously to arrive at a just
and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict will effectively contribute to the efforts
to fight international terrorism.
“Syria, which has been a victim of terrorism
since the 1980s, succeeded in harnessing the
country’s potential to address and to eradicate
terrorism. It worked within the League of Arab
States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the United Nations to fight
international terrorism. Towards that goal, Syria
undertook bilateral cooperation with many States.
We shall continue to cooperate with the CounterTerrorism Committee and all other sincere
international efforts to realize that noble
objective.

23

S/PV.4688

“Once again, I wish you success in your
efforts in the service of our common good.”
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Representative of Chile.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to convey the best wishes of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Chile, Soledad Alvear Valenzuela,
who for reasons beyond her control was unable to
participate in this meeting.
I thank the French presidency for convening this
important ministerial-level meeting. I thank the
Secretary-General for his wise words and Sir Jeremy
Greenstock for the report he presented to the Council.
The convening of this meeting is testimony to the
commitment and political will of the international
community to combat one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security.
Condemning terrorism in all of its manifestations
is an ethical and political duty. Terrorism threatens not
only innocent lives but also the moral and civilizational
bases of our societies. We therefore condemn all acts of
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, whatever their
motivation, form or manifestation.
However, that is not enough. What is needed is
effective commitment and a global approach to the
problem on the part of the international community to
confront it, thus contributing to making a safer world,
free from terror. There is no place for neutrality
vis-à-vis those who have placed themselves beyond the
pale of humanity — and even less for tolerance
towards those who harbour or encourage terrorism.
We must proceed on the premise that, in a
globalized world, the fate of each of our countries is
that of all peoples. We share a common space in which
no one can live unmindful of the fears and problems of
others. We have seen with horror the attacks on Bali,
Mombassa and Moscow. No society is safe from this
threat. The fight against terrorism is not only an issue
for Governments; it must include our civil societies and
it is therefore essential to understand that it must
unfold within a framework of legitimacy and of respect
for human rights. It is not possible to fight those who
hate our values by forgetting those very values. No
consideration of effectiveness is so imperative that it
should make us forget those principles.

24

It was in this spirit of full awareness of the
highest values of humankind that the United Nations
and this Council responded unequivocally to the tragic
events that shook the world on 11 September 2001.
Resolution 1373 (2001) marked the beginning of
unprecedented cooperation to establish the conditions
for combating terrorism effectively in its many
manifestations. It is a resolution of enduring value that
places the Counter-Terrorism Committee at the centre
of a process of cooperation from which no country
should remain aloof.
The work of the Committee offers a unique
opportunity for States, through their political,
legislative, financial and administrative decisions, to
create the conditions for confidence-building in order
to contribute to collective security. The relationship
that unites the Committee and the membership of the
United Nations is a legal one. It is built on clear
international obligations, compliance with which has
an impact on the values and principles that underlie the
Organization’s actions.
Following the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
Chile has fulfilled all the obligations established
therein. My country has prioritized efforts to combat
terrorism at the hemispheric level, within the
framework of the Organization of American States,
while at the same time promoting the coordination of
efforts in other forums of subregional cooperation,
such as the Rio Group and the Common Market of the
South.
The draft resolution that we shall adopt today
marks a turning point in the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee, so ably led by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, whom we thank for his efforts. Thus far,
the Committee has functioned on the basis of a vertical
relationship with the States Members of the
Organization. We feel it extremely important that, from
today forward, horizontal relationships be established
between countries and relevant international and
regional organizations. The aim of this is not only to
permit States to develop their own capacities for
combating terrorism, but also to help others to develop
them. My country fully supports this new approach,
which emphasizes the elements of cooperation and
envisages support for this effort from relevant
international and regional organizations. A joint
approach is critical to the global anti-terrorism strategy.

S/PV.4688

Cooperation among States is an essential
component of that new approach, which must go
beyond the exchange of information. Through it,
cooperation will have a long-term impact on efforts to
combat terrorism.
In this regard, it would seem appropriate for the
Committee to work in three directions. First, the
Committee’s group of experts should elaborate a
programme of work that includes operational measures
that take into account the differing realities of regions
and countries with a view to channelling technical
assistance so as to ensure the effective implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).
Secondly, we recognize that the participation of
international organizations, particularly those with
special capacities and competence in areas of relevance
to the fight against terrorism, is a key aspect of the
design of objectives and priorities for global action. We
propose the establishment of an inter-agency
coordination segment that covers specific sectoral
actions and programmes. Coordination should also be
enhanced among the various committees of the
Security Council entrusted with the fight against
terrorism.
Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations
must be part of an integrated focus on combating
terrorism. The Committee has launched programmes in
this respect that should be expanded. The Organization
of American States has developed a hemispheric antiterrorism
policy
through
the
Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism.
One contribution of our region in this field has
been the accession of 30 countries to the InterAmerican Convention against Terrorism. The
Convention could serve as a reference in the
negotiation of the draft texts of a comprehensive
convention on terrorism and a convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism that are
currently being developed at the United Nations. Chile
supports the efforts being made to conclude these
negotiations and thus to fill current gaps in
international law in this field. We further propose that
this hemispheric political effort be used in other antiterrorism standard-setting and regional coordination
processes. The meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to be held on 7 March will provide a good
opportunity for the further structuring of inter-regional
cooperation.

The United Nations today faces one of the
greatest challenges it has faced since its creation: to
provide an effective response in order to prevent and
eradicate this terrible new threat. We are convinced that
the Organization has the capacity and legitimacy to do
so.
As a member of this Council, Chile wishes to
reiterate its commitment to the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Committee. In assuming the chairmanship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on sanctions against Al Qaeda, we wish to
promote its work with the help of all the members of
the Council and of the Organization. We do so in our
conviction that the potential of terrorism remains vast
and that the effort to conquer it will be a lengthy one.
Its defeat, however, is inevitable if all members of the
international
community
fully
shoulder
their
responsibilities.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France.
The world is at a crossroads today. Crises have
global dimensions. In this context, the Security
Council, the highest body representing the will of the
international community, has a special responsibility.
That is why France has taken the initiative of
convening this meeting. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the many colleagues who
accepted my invitation.
I would not want to speak on the subject of
terrorism here in New York without mentioning, with
sorrow, the victims of the attacks of 11 September.
Their memory must inspire us to fight terrorism with
the utmost determination.
New attacks, of which France itself has been a
victim, have taken place in recent months. They have
confirmed that the terrorists are more than ever
resolved to shatter lives and sow destruction. They
have also confirmed that terrorism threatens all
countries and all peoples. It cannot therefore be fought
in isolation. In the face of terrorism we have a duty —
collective mobilization — and a goal: results.
Much has already been done. I am thinking of the
United Nations, with the vital role played by the
Security Council; the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001); the sanctions imposed on Al Qaeda; and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose activity I would

25

S/PV.4688

like to commend. I am also thinking of the G8, its work
on non-proliferation and its action against terrorist
financing.
Much remains to be done, however. Terrorism is
constantly changing face. It is able to adapt its methods
and networks and to assert its global character. It is
imperative for us to do more and better. How can we do
so?
We can start by strengthening the mobilization of
the international community as a whole. The United
Nations can and must play a major role in this new
drive. Because it is a world body, it must be at the
centre of our efforts, focusing our attention in a
pragmatic way on the areas in which the United
Nations is better able than others to make a
contribution. It is thus already playing a decisive role
in drafting international legal instruments against
terrorism. We must do still more in this area, both to
conclude the negotiations on such basic texts as the
comprehensive convention against terrorism and the
convention against nuclear terrorism, and to permit the
application of texts already signed. Let us give new
stimulus to the United Nations institutions responsible
for this task.
The United Nations, because it is a world body,
can also do more to help countries — especially
countries of the South — to strengthen their counterterrorism mechanisms at the national level. In that
connection, I propose that we consider establishing a
cooperation and assistance fund within the United
Nations that would have its own resources and would
work closely with the international financial
institutions.
But we must also pursue efforts undertaken in
other forums. We will be ineffective against terrorist
financing unless we mobilize all of the instruments
available to us — in the Group of Eight (G-8), in the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering and
in other forums — and unless we fully involve the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. In
its capacity as President of the G-8, France intends to
give strong impetus to the Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction, adopted at the Kananaskis Summit.
It is time to take action against the link between
international terrorism and other threats: the spread of
weapons of mass destruction, arms trafficking, illegal
financing. France intends to prevent terrorist groups

26

from using radioactive sources scattered around the
world to make “dirty bombs”. We shall make concrete
proposals in that regard, particularly with a view to
formulating an international convention strengthening
controls over the use and transfer of such radioactive
sources.
Let us look at things clearly. Terrorism feeds on
injustice. An equitable development model is therefore
necessary to eradicate terrorism once and for all. That
is why we must work ceaselessly to resolve crises: in
Iraq, in Korea and particularly in the Middle East, the
crux of the crises in the region and in the world. We
must once again put development at the centre of our
concerns, mobilizing more resources and more
imagination. Finally, we must foster dialogue among
cultures, looking beyond differences. In this area, the
United Nations has an irreplaceable role.
We see clearly that there is urgency. Each of these
points requires action. Our fate is in our hands. Let us
begin this process without delay and let us set
timetables for concluding it. I suggest that we plan to
meet at the next session of the General Assembly —
perhaps even in the context of a special session of the
Assembly — to adopt new measures aimed at giving
tangible effect to the new impetus that we intend to
bring to our mobilization.
The fight against terrorism is a universal cause
because terrorism is a universal evil. The only way to
conquer terrorism is through unity, imagination and
action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution (S/2003/60) before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

S/PV.4688

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1456 (2003).

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

I thank all participants for the part that they have
played in the work of this meeting. In particular, I
thank all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the
representatives of Chile and the Syrian Arab Republic,
and the Secretary-General.

27
