S/PV.9103

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9103rd meeting

Thursday, 28 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-44201 (E)
*2244201*

S/PV.9103

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/580, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, India, Ireland,
Mexico, Norway, Russian Federation, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Gabon, Ghana, Kenya
The President: The draft resolution received 12
votes in favour, none against and three abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2647
(2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
welcome the adoption of resolution 2647 (2022), which
renews the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The resolution contains a
number of important messages, including on the political
and security processes, the integrity of the National
Oil Corporation and human rights. Of particular
importance is the clear message to the Libyan parties
on the need to agree a pathway to deliver presidential
and parliamentary elections as soon as possible. We
thank Security Council members for their constructive
engagement and support for the substantive elements of
the resolution.
However, we share the frustration of our African
colleagues at the short three-month mandate. Their
2/6

28/07/2022

abstention is understandable given Russia’s refusal
to join the consensus on our proposals for a longer
mandate for UNSMIL. Russia’s approach goes against
what Libya, the region and the United Nations have
requested. Insisting on three-month rollovers in the
absence of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral is not only short-sighted, but it also undermines
the ability of UNSMIL to support Libyan leaders to
achieve the necessary political and security objectives
required to bring stability to the country.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s continued
efforts to find a suitable Special Representative
candidate. It is clear that this is not an easy task. We
call on all relevant stakeholders, including the Council,
to take a constructive and flexible approach so as to
enable a swift appointment.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
resolution prepared by the United Kingdom on extending
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) (resolution 2647 (2022)). It was the
only possible compromise for all of us at this stage,
and we all understand that the current configuration of
United Nations mediation efforts in Libya is regrettably
unable to address the pressing problems related to
settling the situation in the country, which is a situation
that satisfies none of us.
It is not normal for UNSMIL to have been left
decapitated for such a long time, which has limited the
tools at its disposal to support the Libyan dialogue.
The tenure of Stephanie Williams, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General, that capacity without an
appropriate security mandate has been unjustifiably
prolonged, despite assurances that the appointment was
a temporary measure.
We insist on António Guterres promptly submitting
a worthy and authoritative candidate for the post of
his Special Representative for Libya and the Head of
UNSMIL — and one that would suit the main Libyan
actors as well as regional stakeholders — for subsequent
approval by members of the Security Council. Resolution
2647 (2022) reiterates a clear signal of the need for
urgent action in this regard. We hope that we will not
have to observe a deliberate dragging out of this issue
to serve opportunistic interests. The Mission requires a
leader who enjoys the true trust of the Libyans.
We cannot agree with a Libyan settlement being
built outside of the framework set by the Security
22-44201

28/07/2022

The situation in Libya

Council. This is unacceptable, especially when we are
seeing another cycle of competing powers duelling in
Libya. The country has come to a brink beyond which
the resumption of armed conflict is possible. The fate of
Libya and its people is at stake right now. Our insistence
in the issue of appointing a special representative
is dictated solely by concern for maintaining the
effectiveness of United Nations efforts to promote a
settlement in Libya.
The current uncertainty unfortunately does not
help advance us towards that goal. We understand
that our African colleagues are dissatisfied with this
state of affairs. The longer it persists, the bigger and
more dangerous the situation becomes, not only for the
Mission but for the role of the United Nations in Libya as
a whole. The current state of affairs does not encourage
the Libyan parties to continue constructive efforts
towards uniting the country and its State institutions.
We will be ready to extend the Mission’s mandate
for a standard period of time and provide more
substantive content to a future resolution. After
UNSMIL finally has a head, we trust that the leadership
of the United Nations Secretariat will take this Council
signal seriously.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2647 (2022), which extends the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). We thank the United Kingdom, in its
capacity as penholder, for its efforts aimed at facilitating
the negotiations. We are hopeful that consensus can be
reached in future to renew the Mission’s mandate for
a longer period in order to enhance its effectiveness
and efficiency and build on the progress made in the
Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political process, with the
assistance of the United Nations.
We also stress the need for UNSMIL to be able to
implement the recommendations of the independent
strategic review, completely fulfil its mandate and
develop a long-term strategy to support Libyan efforts
aimed at achieving peace and stability. We also hope
that the Mission will soon resume its work under the
leadership of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, in line with resolution 2629 (2022).
In conclusion, we emphasize the need for the
Security Council to continue speaking with one voice
to support Libya and realize the aspirations of the
Libyan people.

S/PV.9103

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the United Kingdom as the
penholder on resolution 2647 (2022) for its efforts as
well as the other members of the Security Council for
their engagement during the negotiations.
Gabon abstained in the voting on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). This vote is a call for the interests
and concerns of Libyans to be put above all other
considerations. Council members must transcend
their differences and offer Libya the support it needs
to achieve a lasting peace. The Security Council’s
inaction only amplifies the suffering of the Libyan
people. Gabon had no choice but to abstain.
I would like to remind Council members that
the Libyan ambassador challenged us very recently,
on 25 July 2022, about the Council’s ineffectiveness
in agreeing on ways to resolve the Libyan crisis and
about the consequences of this inaction on the lives of
millions of Libyans who only want to live in peace (see
S/PV.9098). The Security Council has already made
four technical renewals of UNSMIL’s mandate for a
maximum of three months — on 15 and 30 September
2021, and 31 January and 29 April 2022. While all the
indicators are flashing red and instability is increasing
in Libya, the Security Council remains deaf. The
gradual deterioration of the security situation on the
ground accentuates the risk of losing all the hardwon gains of recent years. But the Council remains
insensitive. These short mandates undermine the
credibility of the Security Council and have deeply
shattered the confidence of the Libyan people and the
States of the region.
Gabon recalls once again that the deterioration of
the security situation in Libya has a visible impact on
the stability of the region and the stability of African
populations. The situation in the Sahel is there to prove
it. The proliferation of weapons and the spread of
terrorism have made it an unstable region.
It is high time to put an end to this cycle of shortterm renewals, which are not helpful to the Libyan
people. We reiterate our support for the SecretaryGeneral’s swift appointment of an African to the
position of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Let us empower Libyans to come together and
support a stronger Libya through an UNSMIL mandate
with substance.

22-442013/6

S/PV.9103

The situation in Libya

Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): Ghana would like to thank
the United Kingdom as penholder for its diligent and
committed efforts aimed at facilitating the negotiation
of the resolution just adopted (resolution 2647 (2022)).
Regrettably, Ghana abstained from the voting on the
resolution for the following reasons. First, the Security
Council once again, and for the fifth consecutive time,
has failed to show commitment to the Libyan people
through technical rollovers and by not extending the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) for a one-year period to consolidate
all the gains of the peace efforts and foster serious
engagement between the Council and the Libyan people
through UNSMIL.
Secondly, it may also be noted that the Secretariat,
in one of its briefings, drew the Council’s attention to
the fact that short mandates are a disincentive to wouldbe potential candidates for the position of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, the frustrations of the Libyan people were
amply demonstrated by the Permanent Representative
of Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni when he
addressed the Security Council on Monday, 25 July (see
S/PV.9098). He demanded action than rhetoric from the
Council. It is Ghana’s firm belief that a substantive
mandate renewal would have sent a positive signal to
the Libyan people.
Fourthly, much as Ghana appreciates the efforts of
the Secretary-General to fill the vacant position of an
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
failure of the Security Council to find consensus on his
proposed nominee further complicates the Libyan peace
process, with the departure of the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Libya. We take this opportunity
to call on the members of the Security Council to place
the overall interests of Libya above all else and work
constructively with the Secretary-General in appointing
the desired leadership for UNSMIL.
The people of Libya are crying out for elections as
a basic step towards the rebuilding of their nation. The
Security Council cannot let them down.
In conclusion, we encourage the competent Libyan
authorities to make all the necessary efforts in realizing
the aspirations of the Libyan people by holding the
presidential and parliamentary elections within the
mandate cycle.
4/6

28/07/2022

Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Currently, the Libyan political process is at a critical
period. The Libyan House of Representatives and the
High State Council have great deal of consensus on the
constitutional basis of the election, but a final agreement
has not yet been reached. Against that background,
China supports the United Nations continuing to play
the role of the main mediation channel, and voted in
favour of resolution 2647 (2022), on authorizing the
extension of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL).
The post of Head of UNSMIL and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has been
vacant for more than half a year. The resolution
once again called for the appointment of the Special
Representative for Libya as soon as possible. Appointing
the Special Representative as soon as possible will help
to restore the full performance of UNSMIL, strengthen
the United Nations capacity for good offices and help
to create conditions for UNSMIL to obtain a longer
extension in the future. China supports an African
candidate assuming the role of Special Representative
and hopes that the selection and appointment work will
make quicker progress.
The Libyan issue has been protracted for more
than 11 years. Strengthening dialogue and achieving
reconciliation will help to create a favourable climate
for the Libyan political process. China supports the
inclusion of an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process in the resolution, hopes that all
parties in Libya will implement confidence-building
measures and appreciates and supports the African
Union’s active support for the reconciliation process
in Libya.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico expresses its support for the work
conducted by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya at critical times for the political stability and
security of that country. It is in that same spirit that
we voted in favour of resolution 2647 (2022) so that
the Mission can continue to operate given the marked
deterioration of the situation in Libya. Nevertheless,
I would like to put on record the fact that, by once
again limiting the extension of the mandate to three
months, we are contributing to the uncertainty just
when the Libyan people most needs the certainty of the
international community’s support. After almost a year
of repeatedly resorting to that method, the conditions in
which the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is
22-44201

28/07/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9103

operating are increasingly uncertain due to the lack of a
substantive mandate that allows it to operate in a stable
manner. At the same time, the Special Representative
post remains vacant. It would be helpful for all of us
to once and for all break that vicious cycle. Mexico
reiterates the importance of strengthening the United
Nations presence in Libya to rechannel the political
process. We are convinced that for that we need a United
Nations Support Mission in Libya that is reformed in
line with the recommendations of the strategic review
conducted last year and under robust leadership that is
fully supported by the Security Council.

Indeed, the new provisions in the resolution can
be properly implemented only with a mandate closer
to 12 months. For that reason, we voted to abstain to
signal our dissatisfaction with what is fast becoming a
damaging status quo.

Mr.
Kimani
(Kenya):
On
four
occasions — 15 September last year, 30 September last
year, 31 January and 29 April, the Security Council
technically rolled over the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for not
longer than three-month periods. The same happened
today, for the fifth time. On each of the four previous
occasions, we expressed our deep disappointment
at such brief renewals. Nevertheless, we voted in
favour, with the earnest expectation that even in such a
diminished form, UNSMIL could still provide support
to Libya.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank the United Kingdom for its
constructive role as the penholder for the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Thanks to the
United Kingdom’s hard work and the efforts of most
members of the Council, we now have a more substantive
mandate, which includes important language in support
of the political process and assurances that Libya’s oil
revenue is managed transparently for the benefit of the
entire Libyan people.

What is really required is for the Mission to have a
substantial mandate for a period of 12 months, plus the
appointment of an appropriate African Special Envoy.
Since September last year, the Security Council
has been repeatedly briefed on the crippling effects that
the short mandates have on the ability of UNSMIL to
effectively execute its mandate. We heard that from the
Secretariat and from the representative of Libya. As
recently as last Monday, Ambassador Taher Elsonni
lamented the Council’s inability to find common
purpose in its engagement with Libya (see S/PV.9098).
He observed the frequency of meetings, the lack of
follow-up and how much our frequent conviction that
only Libyan-led and -owned solutions will work still
require a Security Council that is supportive of progress
since the country is under Chapter VII.
Resolution 2647 (2022), which we just adopted,
and its three-month mandate for UNSMIL constitute
yet another disappointment to the people of Libya.
We appreciate some substantial changes in the
resolution, but Kenya believes it is no longer tenable for
UNSMIL to operate with such a brief and, therefore,
uncertain mandate.

We hope that our vote will encourage all Council
members to reconsider their positions and agree to a
longer mandate when the present three-month mandate
expires in October. We also hope that a Special Envoy
from Africa will be selected and appointed during
this period so that the longer-lasting mandate is
implemented properly.

We are pleased to have a substantive mandate for the
first time since September 2020. But we are disappointed
that, once again, the Security Council has been forced
to accept only a three-month mandate extension.
We note that the abstentions of our colleagues, the
three African members of the Security Council (A3),
today in protest of Russia’s insistence on a three-month
mandate duration, and we share the A3’s frustration.
We believe that the A3 clearly have the best interests of
the Libyan people in mind.
Russia’s specious contention that a three-month
mandate will somehow assist the Secretariat in securing
the Security Council’s full support for a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General nominee has
already been proved false.
To the contrary, as the Secretariat has stated
numerous times, a short duration only further
complicates the Secretariat’s efforts. Revisiting the
mandate every few months makes it much harder for
UNSMIL to implement long-term plans. It makes
it harder to develop sustainable solutions to Libya’s
challenges. And it makes it harder to recruit the best
candidate for the role.
Libya is at a critical juncture, and UNSMIL has
a major role to play in supporting preparations for

22-442015/6

S/PV.9103

The situation in Libya

elections, monitoring the ceasefire, reporting on human
rights issues and providing technical assistance on State
finances and the budget. The Libyan people are relying
on UNSMIL. It does a disservice to them and all of us
to play games with the mandate. And the United States
will continue its full support of United Nations efforts
to establish a Libyan-led path to free and fair elections
based on a constitutional framework.
Finally, I would like to take this time to thank
the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on Libya,
Stephanie Williams. I want to thank her for her
extraordinary efforts to broker an agreement on the
constitutional framework for elections. We wish her
well in her future endeavours and call on the leaders of
the House of Representatives and the High State Council
to work constructively towards the goal Ms. Williams
sought to advance.
We also support the efforts of the Secretariat
and Council members in their discussions to find a
new candidate — someone who can effectively lead
UNSMIL and facilitate the necessary dialogue among
Libyan leaders towards a persistent peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
Brazil welcomes the renewal of the mandate of
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We consider it a positive step for the Security Council
to acknowledge the importance of peacebuilding

6/6

28/07/2022

efforts for the future of Libya. Examples of such efforts
are institution-building, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, all
of which have referenced in resolution 2647 (2022),
adopted today.
In that regard, we recall the positive role that
the Peacebuilding Commission can play in assisting
countries to implement their peacebuilding priorities
and renewing the mandates of United Nations missions.
With regard to UNSMIL’s mandate, the
compromise reached within the Council on its duration
offers the Secretary-General and Council members
a new opportunity to engage in the appointment of
the Mission’s leadership, with the expectation that
a suitable candidate will be appointed as soon as
possible. We hope that the subsequent renewals of
UNSMIL’s mandate will benefit from more predictable
time frames.
Finally, because regional dynamics should be taken
into account, we believe that a candidate from the
African continent would be well-suited for the position.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

22-44201
