United Nations

S/PV.5951

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5951st meeting
Friday, 8 August 2008, 1.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Grauls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Mubarak
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Qwabe
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 7 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2008/533)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-45458 (E)

*0845458*

S/PV.5951

The meeting was called to order at 1.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 7 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/533)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alasania
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to a
letter dated 7 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, contained in document S/2008/533.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
two letters dated 7 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia, which will be issued as
documents of the Security Council under the symbols
S/2008/534 and S/2008/535.
I call now on the representative of the Russian
Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation took the initiative of
calling for this emergency meeting of the Security
Council because of the alarming situation in South
Ossetia, which has been brought about by the blatant
and aggressive actions of the Georgian armed forces
against that republic, which is an internationally
recognized party to the conflict.

2

During the night of 8 August 2008 local time,
literally just a few hours after reaching an agreement
on holding negotiations to resolve the escalation in the
South Ossetian conflict, Georgian military divisions
began a treacherous and massive attack against
Tskhinvali. The military option was used by the
Georgian authorities despite all the diplomatic efforts
that had been undertaken in contacts between Moscow,
Tbilisi, Tskhinvali, Washington and other interested
capitals.
The Russian Federation has recently and
repeatedly warned members of the Council of a likely
escalation in the situation. We warned Council
members that the Georgian authorities had augmented
their offensive forces. Indeed, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe warned of growing
militarization in Georgia, as seen in the alarming buildup of the Georgian armed forces. Our warnings were
ignored, and the Council is obliged today not only to
deal with a resurgence in the conflict but to discuss a
situation that represents a threat to regional security
and peace.
Because of Georgia’s actions, the situation in the
conflict zone has now reached a critical phase. Massive
artillery fire is being directed against a peaceful
civilian population, including old people and children,
using Grad multiple launch systems and large-calibre
rocket launchers. Shooting is taking place in the centre
of the capital of South Ossetia, where dozens of houses
are engulfed in flames. According to available
information, at 3 a.m. local time, Georgian tanks and
infantry began to attack the southern parts of
Tskhinvali.
Such policies of the Georgian authorities
dramatically contravene the hopes that Tbilisi was
promoting. We can already say with certainty that the
aggressive acts ordered by the Georgian authorities
have done great damage to the peace process and to the
prospects of achieving a political or diplomatic
settlement. Tbilisi is trying to create a smokescreen
around its acts by both blaming the Russian Federation,
including Russian television channels, for everything,
and talking about peace, in sharp contrast with its
actual conduct.
The Georgian military are being more frank about
events. A few hours ago, General Mamuka Kurashvili,
commander of the peacekeeping contingent of the
Georgian armed forces in Georgia, announced in front

08-45458

S/PV.5951

of the television cameras that the decision had been
taken in Tbilisi to restore constitutional order in South
Ossetia — that is, to resolve a long-standing conflict
by military means. Even Georgian politicians have let
the cat out of the bag: Temur Yakobashvili, State
Minister for Reintegration, has said that the goal of his
leaders was to put an end to the regime in Tskhinvali.
As a result of all those actions, Tbilisi has totally
destroyed the credibility of the Georgian leadership as
a responsible party to the negotiating process and, in
general, as a member of the international community
guided by the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
It is now quite understandable why Tbilisi has,
for a long period of time and using many pretexts,
stubbornly refused to reach an agreement with South
Ossetia and Abkhazia on the non-use of force.
Members of the Security Council will recall that that
has been the principal element in many Council
resolutions. The Russian Federation has insisted on
that and will continue to do so. Since the current flareup of the conflict began, the Russian Federation has
done everything possible to de-escalate it. We have
sent a special representative of our Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the region, and we are using all
available leverage to exert positive pressure.
The Security Council must now play its role. We
are convinced that the Council must immediately call
for an end to the hostilities and for a rejection of the
use of force. The Council and the international
community as a whole cannot remain on the sidelines
at this difficult moment, when the fate of the hundreds
of thousands of people living in the region is being
decided. Together, we must put an end to the violence,
which has serious implications for regional and
international security.
There is still time to avoid further casualties,
including among the civilian population. The Georgian
leadership must reflect and must return to civilized
means of resolving difficult issues related to a political
settlement. The Russian Federation will continue its
efforts to prevent any further bloodshed and to put the
situation in South Ossetia back on a peaceful track.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Let me express my
gratitude to the members of the Security Council for

08-45458

this opportunity to address them. Today’s special
Council meeting is being held to consider the grave
escalation of the situation in the Tskhinvali region of
Georgia. First, I will reflect on the recent events that
have led to that tragic deterioration.
On 1 August, at about 8 a.m. Tbilisi time, a
pickup vehicle containing six Georgian police officers
was hit by two remote-control explosive devices. As a
result of that attack, five Georgian policemen were
severely wounded. The central authorities decided not
to retaliate, so as not to escalate the situation.
On 2 August, six civilians and one Georgian
policeman were injured during the overnight shelling
of seven Georgian villages in the South Ossetian
conflict zone. The seven Georgian-controlled villages
came under intense fire from South Ossetian separatists
using large-calibre mortars. Georgian law-enforcement
personnel fired back defensively for some time but
then received a ceasefire order aimed at not escalating
the situation.
On 3 August, the South Ossetian separatist
government announced the evacuation of more than
500 people, including 400 children. However, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Russia’s Republic of North
Ossetia told the Interfax news agency that it was not an
evacuation; the children were being sent to North
Ossetia as part of a prearranged summer camp
programme, as he explained it. Russian media outlets
started a massive propaganda campaign against
Georgia.
Late on 6 August, separatists opened fire with
mortars on Georgian-populated villages: Eredvi and
four others. Georgian Government forces fired back to
defend the civilian population. As a result of intense
crossfire during the night, two servicemen belonging to
the Georgian battalion of the Joint Peacekeeping
Forces were injured. The separatist regime also
claimed several injuries on its side. Despite the
targeted attacks on the peaceful population and
villages, as well as on the Georgian police and
peacekeeping forces, the central authorities decided not
to respond with a heavy exchange of fire, in order not
to injure the local population.
Temur Yakobashvili, Georgian chief negotiator
and State Minister for Reintegration, said in late-night
televised remarks on 6 August that it was the position
of the Georgian Government that only direct dialogue
with the Tskhinvali authorities would resolve the

3

S/PV.5951

deteriorating security situation. Mr. Yakobashvili also
stressed that Ambassador-at-Large Yuri Popov would
attend the talks as a facilitator. South Ossetian chief
negotiator Boris Chochiev refused to take part in the
negotiations.
Overnight and in the early-morning hours of
7 August, intensive fire came from four positions in
various Ossetian villages. The separatist authorities
continued firing on Georgian law-enforcement
personnel and peacekeeping units with mortars and
artillery. The central authorities responded with limited
fire in order to defend those positions.
In a morning interview with Russian news
agencies, South Ossetian de facto President Eduard
Kokoity declared that, if the Georgian Government did
not withdraw its military forces from the region, he
would start to clean them out. President Saakashvili,
speaking with journalists at the military hospital in
Gori, where he was visiting injured Georgian
servicemen, said that, despite the attacks on the
Georgian villages, Tbilisi was showing maximum
restraint. The President also called on Russia to recall
from South Ossetia its officials, who consider
themselves the so-called South Ossetian government.
On the morning of 7 August, Temur Yakobashvili
visited the conflict zone to meet with representatives of
the separatist government. The Minister of State met
with Marat Kulakhmetov, Commander of the Joint
Peacekeeping Forces, in Tskhinvali. Once again,
however, the separatists refused to negotiate with him.
Anatoly Barankevich, head of the separatist republic’s
Security Council, threatened that armed groups of
Cossacks from North Ossetia were headed towards
South Ossetia to fight Georgian forces.
By 4 p.m. the same day, the separatists had
resumed their shelling of Georgian villages. Three
Georgian servicemen were injured when the South
Ossetian separatist forces blew up an infantry combat
vehicle belonging to the Georgian peacekeeping
battalion. Georgian police responded by firing towards
groups of armed separatists in those villages, killing
two separatist militiamen and wounding two others.
Later, the Georgian peacekeepers’ checkpoint at Avnevi
was bombed, and several Georgian servicemen and
civilians were killed.
In a live televised address at 7.10 p.m., President
Saakashvili said that he had ordered the Georgian
forces to cease fire in South Ossetia. He stated that

4

there had been casualties, including both deaths and
injuries. Mr. Saakashvili said that he had ordered the
ceasefire specifically to give the South Ossetian
secessionist regime another opportunity to resume the
talks. Despite Georgia’s decision not to return fire, the
Georgian village of Avnevi once again came under fire
from South Ossetian militiamen at approximately
8.30 p.m. The village can be described as having been
totally destroyed as a result of that attack.
South Ossetian separatist armed groups fired at
the Georgian-controlled village of Prisi at about 10.30
last night. The attack left several people wounded on
the Georgian side. At approximately 11.30 p.m., the
same separatist authorities opened fire on all Georgian
positions around the South Ossetian capital of
Tskhinvali, including those in the villages of
Tamarasheni and Kurta. The police station in Kurta
was totally destroyed as a result of that heavy fire.
I want to state very clearly that the illegal
separatist authorities and armed formations are under
the control and direction of the security and defence
agencies of the Russian Federation. Numerous highranking Russian officers from among the ranks of the
peacekeepers, as well as other officials from the
Russian military, intelligence, and law-enforcement
services, are serving in senior roles in Tskhinvali.
That is a clear violation of Russia’s obligation to
remain neutral: instead, it has thus become a party to
the conflict. These Russian officers and individuals
include: Mr. Yuri Morozov, the Prime Minister, born in
the Russian Federation, who, before his appointment in
the government of South Ossetia in 2005, occupied
various positions in Bashkiria; Mikhail Minzayev,
Minister for Internal Affairs since 2005, a colonel in
the Russian police, who, in 2004, during the counterterrorist operation in Beslan, led FSB Special Unit
Alpha; Anatoly Barankevich, Secretary of the National
Security Council of South Ossetia since 2006 and a
colonel in the Russian military forces, who participated
in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and in both
Chechen wars; Boris Attoyev, Chairman since 2006 of
the Committee for State Security, analogue of the
KGB, who previously held various positions in the
Soviet KGB and who after the completing his mission
in Afghanistan was appointed to the central apparatus
of the FSB in Moscow; Vasily Lunev, Minister for
Defence of South Ossetia since March 2008, a general
in the Russian army; Vladimir Kotoyev, head of the
Government Protection Service since 2007, a colonel

08-45458

S/PV.5951

in the Russian army, who participated in the Chechen
and Bosnian wars; and Oleg Chebotariev, head of the
State Border Protection Services since 2005, a colonel
in the Russian FSB. Those individuals were granted
impunity by the Russian Federation from being held
responsible for atrocities that they have been
committing.
The Government’s military action was taken in
self-defence after repeated armed provocations and
with the sole goal of protecting the civilian population
and preventing further loss of life among residents of
various ethnic backgrounds. We believe that every
democratic State would have reacted in a similar
fashion to protect its own citizens. The Government
acted because the separatists not only defied the
ceasefire but sharply escalated the violence, killing
several peacekeepers and civilians within hours of the
ceasefire.
Additional illegal forces and military equipment
were and are entering Georgian territory from Russia
through the Roki tunnel, threatening even worse
violence. The separatists have also been continuing to
threaten to attack other parts of the country outside the
South Ossetian region, allegedly with the foreign
assistance that is flowing into that region. Russian
peacekeepers told Georgian officials that they were
unable to control the separatists. The security situation
was deteriorating and violence wais increasing rapidly.
The separatists were not heeding any appeal for direct
talks.
Georgia seeks a negotiated solution to the
conflict, with international engagement. Our offer of
autonomy in line with European standards stands, with
international guarantees including an elected regional
parliament, an elected regional president, shared
sovereignty and the protection of South Ossetian
identity, culture and language, still on the table. Until
such a solution is agreed, the region, we think, should
be governed by the elected head of the South Ossetian
administration, Dmitry Sanakoev, an ethnic Ossetian
and former separatist leader.
We invite Russia to be constructively engaged in
the economic rehabilitation of the region as well as to
contribute to the agreed security arrangements there.
The Government’s immediate goal at this point is to
restore peace, to facilitate the return to normal life for
all residents of the region and to allow the return of the
refugees and internally displaced persons. We stand

08-45458

ready to ensure adequate supplies of water, electricity,
food, emergency services, medical care and shelter.
Separatist rebels will be eligible for amnesty.
Humanitarian organizations will have access to the
region, and the Georgian Government has already
allocated funding totalling €2 million for the
immediate humanitarian and emergency needs of the
region.
According to verified reports, as we speak, a
huge contingent of military personnel and equipment is
illegally entering Georgia’s sovereign territory through
the Roki tunnel. The Russian Federation’s Republic of
North Ossetia has declared the mobilization of armed
mercenaries to be sent to Georgia. There are disturbing
signs that we are facing a calculated provocation for
the purposes of escalating the situation in order to
justify a pre-planned military intervention from the
Russian side.
We therefore demand that the Russian Federation
prevent the transit of armed mercenaries to Georgia,
exercise its influence over the separatist regime to stop
attacks on the civilian population and start
negotiations.
As in my last address to this forum, I want to
reiterate Georgia’s call to the international community
to explicitly condemn the continuing infringements of
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by the
Russian Federation. Despite this most recent
escalation, I want to emphasize that the Georgian
Government once again calls for, and is showing its
readiness to immediately begin, peace talks aimed at
resolving the conflict in South Ossetia and calls on the
separatist rebels to cease their military actions and
come to the negotiating table.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those Council members who wish to
take the floor.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before we came
into this Chamber, members of the Council met in the
Consultations Room. We regret that it has not yet been
possible to agree on a Security Council statement on
this issue. We hope that it will be possible in the days
to come. But the absence of a statement tonight should
not be taken as a sign that the Security Council is not
engaged on this issue and is unconcerned about the
direction that events are taking. On the contrary, this is
a grave matter, and it is one that threatens stability and
security in the region.

5

S/PV.5951

I would like to use this opportunity to express our
serious concern at the escalation of violence in South
Ossetia, Georgia. I would like to take the opportunity
to call for the immediate cessation of hostilities and
take the opportunity also to call on the parties to
immediately resume negotiations.
We have been concerned to hear about reports of
troops and other armed personnel from outside Georgia
and South Ossetia moving into the region, and the
United Kingdom calls on all actors in the region,
whether they are State or non-State actors, not to
escalate tensions and to exercise the utmost restraint at
this time.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having brought the situation in South Ossetia, Georgia,
to the attention of the Council at the request of the
Russian Federation and of Georgia. A clear threat to
peace and security is posed, and we are particularly
concerned at the risk of an escalation of violence.
Under these circumstances, it is legitimate and urgent
that our Council should be seized of the matter. We
hope that, to the greatest extent possible, the Security
Council will be able to rapidly speak with one voice on
the situation. France is alarmed by the serious incidents
that are taking place, all the more so because in this
situation of confusion the information we have
indicates numerous victims on both sides.
What is certain is that for all the parties to the
conflict the military option offers no way out. France
therefore calls on the parties and on all those who have
a decisive influence on them, first of all, immediately
to cease hostilities on the ground; secondly,
immediately to resume dialogue, with a view to a
ceasefire by which each party must make all of its
forces abide; and finally, to cooperate fully with the
mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). France fully supports
the search for a political solution, with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia.
To conclude, I would like to recall that France
currently holds the presidency of the European Union,
as Council members know. The European Union very
recently recalled that it was determined to spare no
effort in helping the parties to attain a lasting solution.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States, too, is seriously concerned by the
escalation of violence in South Ossetia, Georgia. We

6

appeal to all parties involved in this quickly changing
situation to step back and to order their forces to
disengage. We can conceive of no circumstances that
warrant a continuation of the violence. We can accept
no excuses from any party that refuses to disengage,
and we assure all parties that we will value restraint
and condemn aggression.
My Government has been working closely with
the Russian Government in recent days in an attempt to
de-escalate this situation. We welcome the cooperation
of Tbilisi and Moscow earlier today in establishing a
ceasefire and setting up a direct meeting of Georgian
officials and South Ossetian representatives. We
condemn the South Ossetians’ refusal to attend this
meeting or to honour the ceasefire.
We call on all parties to respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Georgia.
We also call on Russia to pull its troops back and not to
inflame the situation by sending its forces to Georgia.
Russia must cease the transport of troops and
equipment through the Roki tunnel from Russia into
South Ossetia. In the days ahead it is essential that the
parties agree to measures to restore stability and to
rejuvenate the peace process.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I welcome the representative of Georgia to this
meeting. The current situation in South Ossetia,
Georgia, is deeply worrisome. China is gravely
concerned about the military conflict and about the
escalation of the conflict in the region. The first
imperative is to cease hostilities and, at the same time,
to exercise restraint and avoid any action that may lead
to an escalation of tension and harm regional peace and
stability.
On 31 October 2007, at its sixty-second session,
the General Assembly unanimously adopted its
resolution 62/4, which relates to the Olympic Truce
during this year’s Olympic Games. In a few hours, the
XXIX summer Olympics will be opening in Beijing.
China shares the Secretary-General’s wish for the
parties concerned to comply with the Olympic Truce
resolution. The Security Council and the international
community should encourage the parties to cease the
hostilities without delay, resume dialogue and make
determined efforts to resolve their dispute in a peaceful
manner.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): We are extremely
concerned at the escalation of violence in the region of

08-45458

S/PV.5951

South Ossetia, Georgia. It is particular sad to face such
a scenario while in Beijing in a few hours the Olympic
Games will be declared open. Once again, all the calls
for a universal Olympic Truce, issued by our world
body, are being blatantly ignored. Even though this
conflict does not appear on the Council’s agenda, we
cannot dismiss our responsibilities vis-à-vis a situation
that could further deteriorate and affect the stability of
the entire region.

grave concerns about the latest developments in
Georgia, especially with regard to the current
heightened tensions and the reported fighting and
exchange of heavy fire between Georgian armed forces
and the forces of the Georgian region of South Ossetia
near the area of Tskhinvali. We note that a number of
casualties have been reported on both sides. In that
regard, we welcome the call of Georgian President
Saakashvili for the bloodshed to end.

Echoing the appeals made to the parties today by
the Secretary-General, by the presidency of the
European Union (EU) and by the EU High
Representative, we affirm that violence must
immediately give way to dialogue and negotiations.
The first important step is to restore the situation on
the ground that existed before. Any actor who is in a
position to advise the parties should exert all his
influence to inspire moderation and restraint. We still
see a key role for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the settlement of the
conflict, but for the OSCE to play that role, weapons
should first be put down and the sides should
immediately resume direct talks. The latest events
further demonstrate that the current situation in the
conflict areas of the region is simply unsustainable.

Croatia believes that the sides should promptly
invest credible efforts to reduce tensions, including
with an immediate ceasefire, so as to remove the
danger of further escalation. Croatia urges all sides to
refrain from any further acts of provocation and would
welcome an immediate resumption of negotiations. My
delegation is also concerned by reports of volunteers
coming from other conflict areas of Georgia, which
could have a destabilizing effect and could signal the
widening of the conflict.

Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Viet Nam is
deeply concerned about the situation in the area of
conflict of South Ossetia as tensions in the region are
rising. We especially regret last week’s and other
incidents, which led to numerous fatalities, injuries and
displacements. My delegation considers that force
cannot resolve the conflict, but rather will destroy all
hope of finding solutions. In that spirit, we call on both
Georgia and South Ossetia to exercise restraint, put an
immediate end to the military activities, strictly
observe the agreement on the non-resumption of
hostilities and renew direct talks towards a
comprehensive and durable solution to the situation
and towards preventing its deterioration.
My delegation commends and supports Russia’s
efforts to de-escalate the tension by sending envoys to
the region to restart the negotiating process aimed at
finding a mutually acceptable and peaceful solution to
the conflict. We believe that such initiatives are
necessary to end the mounting violence and to bring
the situation back under control.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): My delegation would like
to join other delegations that have expressed their

08-45458

Croatia would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate once again its support for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Georgia,
which were affirmed in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1808 (2008).
Finally, Croatia takes note of President
Saakashvili’s repeated offer, contained in his letter of
7 August 2008 circulated to the Security Council, in
support of his peace plan from three years ago that
contains almost unrestricted autonomy and local
governance for the region of South Ossetia, and would
welcome a return to peaceful negotiations within that
framework.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): We are deeply
concerned by the latest situation in Georgia. The
potential for further escalation of violence is real.
Almost invariably, such a spiral of violence has serious
humanitarian implications for those who are
vulnerable. Therefore, much is at stake. My delegation
deems it important that a cessation of hostilities be
established, and that the parties exercise maximum
restraint, including from making inflammatory
statements. While recognizing the obvious challenge, it
is important that open lines of communication be
established between the sides at the highest level and
that confidence be established and nurtured.
In the final analysis, there is no substitute for
dialogue. That open line of communication must be

7

S/PV.5951

coupled with tangible efforts on both sides to end the
bloodshed.
At this crucial hour, it is pertinent for the Council
to act collectively and in unison in expressing concern
and in calling on all sides to exercise maximum
restraint, to de-escalate the conflict and violence and to
embark on emergency talks in a timely manner. My
delegation attaches great importance to the Council’s
role in managing rapidly evolving crises. We therefore
very much regret the fact that, despite obvious
common concerns, the Council has yet to express its
collective view on this very important issue.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.
Belgium would like to express its grave concern
at the tension prevailing in South Ossetia, Georgia.
This tension has already led to the loss of many lives
and to a large number of injuries. In the face of this
very worrying deterioration of the situation in the
region, Belgium calls upon all parties concerned to put
an end to military operations and to demonstrate
moderation. Belgium calls upon the parties to accept an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire and to work,
with the help of international community, for a rapid
resumption of dialogue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, I must note that the statement
by the Permanent Representative of Georgia at this
evening’s meeting included many distortions and
contradictions. On the one hand, the representative of
Georgia said that the Russian Federation is controlling
everything in South Ossetia, but at the same time, he
alleged that the Russian military say that they are
incapable of controlling the separatists. If Russia has
aggressive intentions, as the representative of Georgia
alleged today, then why has the Georgian side, over a
long period of time, refused to reach an agreement on
the non-use of force in the Georgian-South Ossetian
and Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, which would protect
Georgia against any attempt to use force by anyone at
all. From listening to the Permanent Representative of
Georgia, it might appear that South Ossetian forces are
attacking Tbilisi; in fact, as we all know, the situation
is quite the contrary.

8

I would like also to comment on the point that
during Security Council’s prior consultations today, the
Council was unable to work out a clear reaction to
today’s events and was unable to send an unambiguous
message to both parties, primarily Tbilisi, on the need
to put an end to violence and on the need to reject the
use of force. The reason for the incapacity of the
Security Council to develop a clear reaction to these
events unfortunately lies in the absence of clear
political guidelines among a number of Council
members. This has been demonstrated again during this
evening’s discussion in our open meeting.
Let me comment on another specific point. In
fact, I spoke of this in my statement today and it was
also heard in the statement by the representative of the
United States: that in recent days Moscow and
Washington have very much been in contact. It seemed
to us that there was a certain mutual understanding
with our United States colleagues about the need to
take steps which could put an end to the escalation of
the conflict. But in her statement today in the Security
Council the representative of the United States only
once used the word “condemn” — and that was against
South Ossetia, for its alleged failure to attend one of
the proposed meetings. And yet, they failed to find
clear political terms to describe the aggressive actions
of Tbilisi and of the Georgian armed forces attempting
to invade Tskhinvali.
It is precisely this inconsistency and this
vagueness in the political position that are among the
main reasons for the critical situation regarding the
South Ossetian-Georgian conflict.
Nevertheless, I hope that today’s meeting of the
Security Council has been useful and that it will be
seen by Tbilisi as indicating that the Security Council,
one of the leading institutions of the international
community, is not prepared to accept the attempts to
resolve the long-standing Georgian-South Ossetian
conflict through armed aggression.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Very briefly, I want to
reiterate a few issues which were raised by my very
respected colleague, Ambassador Churkin. First of all,
I probably did not make myself quite clear: I was
saying that the Russian side had explained to the
Georgian side that they had no control over the South
Ossetian regime. That is why things were getting out of

08-45458

S/PV.5951

hand. I did not say that the Russians — the Russian
security and defence services — really do not have
control of the armed forces of the separatist regime. I
demonstrated very clearly who are the core decisionmakers in the South Ossetian Government — former
and current Federal Security Service (FSB) and
defence officials — precisely for that reason: for the
Council to understand who is really making decisions
in Tskhinvali.
On the other issue, I would like to stress that we
welcome the cooperation of the Russian Federation and
the United States, which is now happening at a high
level, to ease the tensions and to de-escalate the
situation. That is exactly what Georgia wants and that
is exactly what was proposed by President Saakashvili
recently — last night — in a televised address. And
that is exactly what we are offering our friends at the

08-45458

negotiating table: the State Minister for Conflict
Resolution, who was willing to go, and actually went,
to Tskhinvali twice to negotiate and who was rejected
by the separatist regime, was bringing those same
proposals.
So I would close my remarks with the hope that
reason will prevail in this situation and that both sides,
and the Russian Federation as well, will come to the
negotiating table and will resolve this conflict in a
peaceful manner.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2 a.m.

9
