United Nations

S/PV.6405

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6405th meeting
Tuesday, 19 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2010/522)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-59199 (E)

*1059199*

S/PV.6405

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2010/522)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand,
the Philippines, Portugal, South Africa and TimorLeste, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Borges
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Haq to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
It is so decided.

2

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/522, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Ameerah Haq, to whom I now give the
floor.
Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/522) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 January to 20 September 2010.
At the outset, I would like to pay special tribute
to Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Security
Sector Support and Rule of Law and my dear colleague
and friend, who passed away last March in Dili. He
made an important contribution in advancing the
causes of peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
As the report notes, the security and political
situation continues to be stable, allowing State
institutions the space to focus on the country’s longerterm challenges. This can be observed in the political
debate, which has generally moved beyond backwardlooking discussions on how to move past the events of
2006, to forward-looking discussions on how to build
on the gains made and ensure the future prosperity and
stability of Timor-Leste. This trend, thus far, has not
been much affected by the resignation of Deputy Prime
Minister Mário Carrascalão or the indictments recently
prepared against two members of the Cabinet.
Many plans, strategies and institutions have been
developed with a longer-term focus in mind. These
include the Anti-Corruption Commission, the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste, the package of
national security laws and the draft Strategic
Development Plan. These are critical initial steps on
the road ahead. However, their implementation and
sustaining momentum in efforts to tackle systemic,
institutional and political fragilities are the challenges
currently faced by Timor-Leste.

10-59199

S/PV.6405

I am pleased to note that the national leaders of
Timor-Leste continue efforts to ensure inclusive
consultation and dialogue on these long-term efforts. In
that regard, I would highlight the retreat involving
seven national leaders organized by the Catholic
Church on 21 and 22 August to discuss current
challenges facing the country, including sustainable
development, and to nurture and support a new
generation of future leaders. I understand that this
initiative will continue, and I encourage participants to
continue their mutual engagement in this and other
national forums. Future such initiatives will have
increasing opportunities for women and younger
leaders to participate.
Similarly, the Prime Minister has reached out to
the entire population on the draft Strategic
Development Plan, conducting a series of visits over
many months to each of the country’s 65 subdistricts.
Given the Plan’s long-term nature, it is important that
it reflect the aspirations of all the people in TimorLeste. I look forward to the Government’s continued
engagement with all relevant actors on the Plan.
I also congratulate the Governments of Indonesia
and Timor-Leste for reaching an agreement on bordercrossing authorization cards. The presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Marty
Natalegawa, at the inauguration ceremony indicated
the existing goodwill between the two countries.
The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and UNMIT police deserve much of the credit
for the current security and stability of the country.
Good cooperation with the international security forces
from Australia and New Zealand continues. I am
pleased to note that there has been no significant
change in the security situation in those districts where
the
PNTL
has
resumed
primary
policing
responsibilities. I would like to highlight the fact that
Liquiça, where the PNTL resumed primary policing
responsibilities on 7 September, is led by the first
woman PNTL district commander. This, I hope, signals
increasing opportunities for women to advance within
the PNTL.
Since the closing date of the report, the PNTL
resumed primary policing responsibilities in Aileu
district on 21 September, Manufahi district on
27 September, and in the Interpol Office, the
Immigration Department and the Border Patrol Unit on
28 September. Resumption is pending in only three

10-59199

districts and six units, with Dili remaining perhaps the
most challenging area, and I will speak on that in a
moment.
With the sustained momentum of the jointly
owned resumption process, the Government and
UNMIT are working in close cooperation on strategies
to guide the post-resumption challenges of continued
PNTL
capacity-building
and
institutional
strengthening. UNMIT police created five new position
profiles, tailored to reflect a growing focus on their
role as mentors and trainers. I encourage policecontributing countries to provide officers who meet
these new profiles and can effectively transfer skills to
their PNTL counterparts. Applications for 19 civilian
posts to work with the PNTL as mentors and trainers
are also currently being assessed.
Meanwhile, capacity-building continues under
the coordination of the PNTL Police Training Centre in
areas such as equipment maintenance, vehicle fleet
management, and basic and specialized police training.
The Government has stated that the 2011 State budget,
due to be presented to Parliament by 15 November,
will include significant allocations to address
outstanding logistical needs of the PNTL, including
additional vehicles, communications equipment and
generators.
One concern arising from the resumption process
is that the number of uncertified PNTL officers
remains high, at 202, and many have been transferred
to Dili district. We have urged the Government to
process these cases in order to conclude the
certification process. The Government has informed
UNMIT that it has created a mechanism within the
Secretariat of State for Security, which has assumed the
functions of the Evaluation Panel, and that this new
mechanism would complete sorting out all the
outstanding certification cases into two categories of
discipline and criminal tracks by the end of the year.
So far, this mechanism has yet to take any action on
non-certified officers. This slow action with regard to
uncertified PNTL officers is detrimental to the overall
integrity of the police service over the long term and
requires expeditious remedy.
Meanwhile, overall action plans have been
developed to prepare Dili district for resumption. Close
collaboration between the PNTL and its UNMIT police
colleagues on their implementation will help the
district meet the mutually agreed criteria for

3

S/PV.6405

resumption before the next assessment of the joint
technical team. This next assessment could take place
before the end of the year, depending on the district’s
readiness.
During this reporting period, the Government
clarified that municipal elections would not take place
until after national elections, currently projected to
take place by mid-2012. Those national elections will
be the first significant test of the PNTL’s ability to
provide security around a large and multifaceted event.
Bearing that in mind, it is advisable to maintain a
robust presence of UNMIT police and UNMIT formed
police units of about 800 and 490 respectively, through
the crucial period of national elections. In the
meantime, UNMIT police will focus on the capacitydevelopment of the PNTL specialized units that will
eventually fully assume the role of UNMIT formed
police units. This includes the prioritization of training
for new officers, whose recruitment is projected to
address personnel shortages in units such as Border
Patrol and Close Protection. Emphasis will also be
placed on basic and advanced training for the Special
Operations Company and the newly established
Weapons and Explosives Unit. Improvement of their
capacities will increase the PNTL’s ability to maintain
public security after the withdrawal of UNMIT.
There has been steady progress in strengthening
the justice sector. One sign of this is that the transition
of international legal actors from line functions to
advisory roles is gaining pace, with the number of
national actors in the sector now increased to 49,
including 18 women. A case management system for
the Office of the Prosecutor-General is expected to go
live by the end of this month, and the downward trend
of pending cases in the Office continues.
The Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste
provides an instrument to guide and coordinate the
work of justice sector institutions. The challenge lies in
ensuring that the Strategic Plan’s implementation is
effective and contributes to public confidence in the
justice sector. Similarly, while the adoption of the law
against domestic violence was a major milestone, the
United Nations system is supporting efforts to ensure,
in a coordinated manner, that the public, in particular
rural populations, understands the legislation and that
State institutions increase their capacity to implement
it.

4

Public confidence in the State’s willingness to
support the rule of law and human rights can be
adversely affected if the public perceives that
individuals involved in high-profile cases are given
favoured treatment. I expressed this concern to the
President with regard to his decision to commute the
sentences of those convicted for involvement in the
11 February 2008 attacks against him and the Prime
Minister, and of the three soldiers of the Falintil-Forças
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) convicted of
homicide and attempted homicide in the shooting
deaths of eight PNTL officers in 2006. The President
acted within his constitutional prerogatives and
consulted widely on this decision.
However, I hope that future such decisions will
be guided by the need to bolster the public’s
confidence in a system that ensures accountability for
criminal acts. Also, I am troubled that, as of
15 October, the three F-FDTL soldiers appeared to
have resumed work, although I am encouraged by the
President’s assurance in a meeting on 18 October with
my Deputy, Mr. Reske-Nielsen, that he had asked the
Chief of the Defence Forces to take action on this
matter.
There have been a number of positive
developments related to gender mainstreaming during
the reporting period. Most notably, on 28 June, Maria
Helena Pires — who has been playing an important
role in women’s empowerment in Timor-Leste — was
elected as one of 23 experts to serve on the United
Nations
Committee
on
the
Elimination
of
Discrimination against Women.
On 21 September, the plenary of Parliament
began consideration of the draft laws on reparations
and on the institution to follow up on the work of the
Commission of Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Truth and Friendship Commission. Parliament
engaged in a consultation process that incorporated a
range of actors, including other State institutions, civil
society, religious leaders and victims’ organizations.
Unfortunately, on 29 September Parliament
postponed the debate, and I hope that all parliamentary
benches will come to the consensus necessary to
expedite further consideration of the bills. These drafts
are important because of their substance and because of
the process that guided their development. Parliament
made efforts to ensure that the wide range of views was
taken into account, holding public hearings with

10-59199

S/PV.6405

groups including other State institutions, religious
faiths,
victims’
organizations,
human
rights
organizations, community representatives and other
civil society organizations.
On 20 September, in a speech made at the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) review
summit (see A/65/PV.4), President José Ramos-Horta
highlighted some of the gains Timor-Leste had made
towards the MDGs and spoke of the need to fast-track
achievement towards the MDGs. These gains have
been underpinned by macroeconomic stability and high
growth rates. Hopefully, the Strategic Development
Plan will be an instrument to further promote human
development and pro-poor growth, as well as to
minimize inequalities between urban and rural areas.
In our discussions with Timorese authorities, we
continue to emphasize the need to address the issue of
high youth unemployment and the need for their
absorption, initially by the public sector. The President
has taken up issues of sustainable development in the
international sphere, including his 16 February
proposal with the Government of Maldives for climatechange initiatives that will contribute to sustainable
development and poverty eradication in Asia.
On 17 September, I held a meeting with President
Ramos-Horta and the Government at which we agreed
to the establishment of a joint mechanism that will
guide UNMIT’s transition planning. Its first quarterly
meeting will be held in late November. This
mechanism is intended to ensure that the transition
process is consistent with Government strategies, such
as the Strategic Development Plan, and that there is a
smooth transfer of UNMIT functions to State
institutions, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, other international partners and civil
society. I understand that Prime Minister Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmão will brief the Security Council at its
next meeting on Timor-Leste in February 2011. That is
a strong indication of his Government’s commitment to
working together on planning the future activities
related to the transition of UNMIT.
I want to emphasize that transition is a
reconfiguration of the Mission’s activities within its
mandated areas to ensure that, when UNMIT does
withdraw — and it will — it has done everything
possible to ensure the future success of State
institutions. This will include a growing emphasis on
capacity-building, not only in policing but in all areas

10-59199

of UNMIT’s mandate. Capacity-building by our
partners will help facilitate the transfer of UNMIT
functions to State institutions and civil society.
Capacity-building for UNMIT’s national staff will help
prepare them to contribute to the future of Timor-Leste.
UNMIT is already implementing capacity-building
strategies for national staff with this goal in mind.
Another issue to be addressed by the high-level
mechanism is the possible transfer of UNMIT assets to
State institutions. If that does take place, it will require
coordinated planning in order to ensure that
appropriate systems and budgets are in place for the
continued maintenance of assets. The mechanism will
also examine ways to mitigate any possible negative
economic impact of UNMIT’s withdrawal.
Timor-Leste is entering a crucial period that will
help determine whether it has overcome, in a
sustainable manner, the political and institutional
weaknesses that contributed to the events of 2006.
Given the progress to date and the steadfastness
demonstrated by the national leaders of Timor-Leste, in
particular the President and Prime Minister, I believe
that work is under way that will contribute to TimorLeste’s stability. In that regard, the responsible stance
of the opposition is also noteworthy. UNMIT’s
transition plan through 2012 will be an essential part of
this.
I wish to thank the Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Finn ReskeNielsen and Shigeru Mochida, and all of the personnel
of UNMIT and the United Nations country team, who
have made such important contributions to TimorLeste’s progress. I also wish to thank the international
security forces for their continued support to UNMIT,
including with respect to the maintenance of a stable
security situation in Timor-Leste. Of course, none of
this progress would have been possible without the
continued determination of the people of Timor-Leste.
The President: I thank Ms. Haq for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Timor-Leste.
Mrs. Borges (Timor-Leste): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank you for giving me the opportunity to address
the Council today. I would like to commend the
Secretary-General for the report before the Council

5

S/PV.6405

(S/2010/522) and for the comprehensive briefing just
provided by his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah
Haq.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the leadership of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives and
for their contribution to the successes achieved to date.
In that regard, we were greatly saddened in March by
the untimely passing of Deputy Special Representative
Takahisa Kawakami, who worked tirelessly to support
the security sector. We look forward to fruitful
collaboration with his successor, Shigeru Mochida.
When Special Representative Haq addressed the
Security Council in February 2010 (see S/PV.6276),
she stated that Timor-Leste had reached a new stage in
which current leaders were working to consolidate
gains of the past and ensure a smooth transition to the
recovery and development phase. Today, the same
message has been echoed and Timor-Leste continues
on that path of consolidation, as evidenced in the
progress reported in key areas such as the ongoing
handover of policing responsibilities in 10 out of the
13 districts; the promulgation of the national security
legislation package; the finalization of the National
Strategic Plan, in consultation with the wider
community; the drawdown of the international
stabilization force in response to the more stable and
improved
security
environment;
the
overall
improvement in the socio-economic outlook and the
very important ongoing national dialogue, which is
forward-looking and premised on the need to find
sustainable solutions to the multiple challenges we
face.
Those are examples of some of the
accomplishments of the past year. However, we
continue to face many challenges. In order to build on
that momentum, Timor-Leste requires the support and
continued engagement of the international community
as we embark on this very important next phase. The
events of 2006 are a stark and unfortunate reminder of
the fragility of peace when the institutions of the State
are nascent and capacities need to be developed and
further strengthened.
Consequently, in his statement to the General
Assembly this past September, President Ramos-Horta
stated:
“In only eight years and in spite of the
overwhelming challenges facing us, we have

6

navigated out of the storms to a new period of
peace, stability and economic growth.
“Timor-Leste is a least developed country,
affected by pervasive poverty. We are still a
fragile country, partly because we are only eight
years old, and being an infant country, all the
institutions of the State are young and fragile.”
(A/65/PV.17)
Peace and stability, economic growth and poverty
reduction and justice and the promotion of human
rights are therefore the main tenets of this current
phase of Timor-Leste’s nation-building agenda. We
need to consolidate gains and further improve
opportunities.
As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the situation in Timor-Leste has remained
calm, including in the 10 districts where the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has resumed
executive policing responsibilities. This is due to the
increasing capacities of the PNTL, the continued police
presence of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the assistance provided by
the international security forces of Australia and New
Zealand. The Government is committed to continuing
momentum in the resumption process, while adhering
to the mutually agreed criteria and timeline.
In that regard, the Secretary of State for Security
is committed to resolving, in a timely manner, the
remaining cases of uncertified PNTL officers. My
Government is also committed to providing the
necessary planning and budgetary support to ensure
that PNTL logistical and capacity needs are met in
accordance with our means.
We are now looking beyond the resumption
process to a new stage in the strengthening of the
PNTL, with intensified efforts to develop a sustainable
national capacity and institutional development. This
will be greatly facilitated by a continuing UNMIT
police presence in all districts and units in sufficient
numbers to provide further training, mentoring and
advice to the PNTL. We also strongly support the
addition of 19 civilian UNMIT posts to provide further
opportunities for the development of PNTL capacities.
In this regard, it is important that the recruitment
process for these posts be expedited to ensure early
deployment and that, in the selection process, the best
skill sets are identified to suit the situation on the
ground.

10-59199

S/PV.6405

As a result of the increased stability and strong
partnerships with the international community, the
Government has been able to deliver on its
commitment to ensuring socio-economic development
and reducing poverty. Moreover, the Government is
committed to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals.
In this connection, we are pleased to note that a
number of socio-economic indicators demonstrate that
our commitment to development is indeed producing
results through the prioritization of expenditure in
public infrastructure projects in an effort to stimulate
the economy while reducing poverty and improving the
lives of the people. For example, poverty throughout
Timor-Leste has been reduced by 9 per cent. Also, a
recent study has concluded that that there has been a
drop in the fertility rate from 7.8 to 5.7, in the infant
mortality rate from 60 to 44 per 1,000, and in the
under-five mortality rate from 83 to 64 per 1,000.
Timor-Leste has one of the youngest populations
in the world, with nearly 60 per cent of the population
under 25 years of age. To comprehensively address this
issue, the Government is developing policies and
programmes to generate jobs. As we are all aware, high
levels of youth unemployment in post-conflict settings
has posed and continues to pose challenges in the
peacebuilding context. My delegation is mindful of this
and acknowledges that our young people are among the
most disaffected and disadvantaged group in our
society. They have yet to reap the dividends of our
hard-won freedom, which they eagerly expected and
fought for. They need to be integrated through stronger
participation in our nation-building efforts. In this
regard, it is critical that the Government be proactive
in the pursuit of appropriate, creative and innovative
solutions to address this.
The Government is also committed to promoting
and protecting human rights. Recent developments that
have led to a strengthening of the justice sector include
Government-provided
training,
workshops
and
mentoring for the Office of the Provedor. All these
measures have increased accountability and access to
justice in rural and urban areas alike. Similarly, we
look forward to working closely with UNMIT and the
United Nations agencies in implementing our Justice
Sector Strategic Plan, based on the recommendations
of the independent comprehensive needs assessment of
the justice sector. This includes ensuring adequate legal
protection of women and children. As part of our

10-59199

commitment to implementing gender responsive
policies, my Government, through the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality, is making
concerted efforts to ensure that such policies are
mainstreamed across all line ministries through the
establishment of gender focal points. The adoption of
the law against domestic violence is also testament to
this commitment to advancing the rights of women.
We are also very proud to have recently had
Ms. Maria Helena Pires elected to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and
we are confident of the mutual benefits to be gained
both in Timor-Leste and in the work of the Committee
during her tenure there.
I would like to emphasize that the progress that
has been made and the development objectives to
which we have committed ourselves would not have
been possible without the continuing solidarity and
support of the international community. We are
committed to working in close collaboration with all
relevant United Nations agencies and the international
community on efforts to address longer-term
challenges facing Timor-Leste, including the
implementation of the Strategic Development Plan.
The National Strategic Development Plan provides the
blueprint for the next 20 years for the Government and
will enable development partners to align their
programmes with the identified national priorities to
ensure the efficient and effective delivery of resources.
The Government is committed to working closely
with UNMIT through the joint mechanism that has
been established to guide the Mission’s transition
planning. We look forward to engaging with all
stakeholders and note the importance of national
ownership in this dialogue process. It is only through a
consultative and coordinated mechanism, taking into
account the identified national priorities, that we can
ensure sustainability of the process and outcomes.
I wish to emphasize the importance we place on
relations with our friends and partners in the region,
where we have taken a pragmatic and proactive
approach of engagement to confront issues of common
interest. The recent visit to Dili by His Excellency
Mr. Marty Natalegawa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, to attend a ceremony to inaugurate a new
cross-border card system aimed at facilitating travel
between communities along our common border,
family visits, and access to traditional markets, is

7

S/PV.6405

testimony to the strength of and importance both
countries place on our bilateral relations. And our
relations with Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal on issues of security and economic
development, including in the petroleum sector, remain
strong.

General for Security Sector Support and Rule of Law
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT). We are determined to extend the same
level of support to his successor, Mr. Shigeru Mochida,
in carrying out his duties in Timor-Leste at this critical
juncture.

Before closing, I would like to take this
opportunity to emphasize that we Timorese remain
optimistic and positive about our future. We cherish the
progress made over the past decade in terms of
institution-building, the provision of at least basic
education and social services to an increasing number
of our citizens, and the creation of economic
opportunities outside the rural areas. At the same time,
we are acutely aware of the many steep challenges
ahead of us and the work that remains. We will be able
to do this only in partnership with our friends in the
region and with the members of the Security Council
and the United Nations. Allow me therefore to express,
on behalf of the Government and the people of TimorLeste, our sincere gratitude for the continued and
steadfast support of the United Nations and our
international partners.

It should be noted that the most difficult phase
still awaits us in completing the resumption process. It
is quite regrettable that there remain many uncertified
police officers in Dili district, which stands as one of
the biggest obstacles to the efforts of the PNTL to
assume primary policing responsibility in Dili. While
reaffirming the importance of the mutually agreed
criteria-based approach to the resumption process,
Japan encourages the Government of Timor-Leste to
address this issue as early as possible.

It is with this in mind that we ask the members of
the Council and the international community to
continue their engagement and to provide the necessary
assistance in building a stable and prosperous TimorLeste — a predictable partner in international relations,
firmly embedded in the partnerships in its region, and a
beacon of human rights at peace with itself.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like first of all to
thank Special Representative Haq for her very
comprehensive and encouraging briefing today. I
would also like to thank the representative of the
Government of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Borges, for
her statement.

At the same time, Japan would like to reiterate
the importance of community policing, as referred to in
Council resolution 1912 (2010). Based on our own
experience, we believe that local security is best
sustained through cooperation and trust between the
local populace and police. Adequate logistics and
management capability are indispensable for the police
to work efficiently and effectively. Attention should
also be paid to current gaps in the Mission’s activities.
In that regard, Japan plans to take up this issue in its
capacity as chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations at its meeting on
22 October, with the participation of various troopcontributing countries, police-contributing countries
and other stakeholders, such as major financial
contributors and members of the international core
group for Timor-Leste.

Over the past year, we have seen positive
developments in Timor-Leste. The resumption of
policing responsibility has been successfully concluded
in 10 of 13 districts. In the districts where the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has assumed policing
duties, the situation remains calm and stable.

It is very gratifying to see that UNMIT enjoys a
reputation as one of the most successful United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Japan is honoured to
have dispatched two officials to Timor-Leste as
military liaison officers in support of UNMIT. Japan
commends the variety of services that UNMIT and the
International Stabilisation Force now provide, which
range from security responsibilities to emergency
helicopter transportation. At the same time, such
services will not be extended indefinitely. It is not too
early to discuss who will provide such services after
UNMIT’s scheduled withdrawal in 2012.

In this regard, allow me to recall the dedicated
work of the late Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, former
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-

In this connection it is encouraging that Ms. Haq
has agreed with the President of Timor-Leste to
establish a high-level forum involving the United

8

10-59199

S/PV.6405

Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste to discuss
at regular intervals plans for the Mission’s withdrawal.
Japan will support this forum and is ready to contribute
to the process at any time.
In that respect, Japan considers that discussion of
the next extension of UNMIT’s mandate in February
will be of utmost importance. In that connection, we
believe that the Security Council mission to TimorLeste planned for the end of November will provide a
good basis, not only for the members of the Council,
but also for UNMIT and the Timor-Leste Government
as well, to consider the Mission’s exit strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan’s
continued commitment to support post-conflict efforts
in Timor-Leste. Japan has continued to stand by the
Timorese people since the outset of their nationbuilding endeavour, and I promise that we will
continue to do so.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Thank
you, Ambassador Haq, for your briefing on the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2010/522).
Let me also thank you for your dedicated leadership
and your commitment to solidifying peace in TimorLeste.
My Government welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNMIT’s important work. The
United Nations and the international community as a
whole played a critical role in Timor-Leste’s
independence. Sustained international support will be
critical to ensuring this young country’s success. The
interim report provides an important opportunity to
think about Timor-Leste’s needs and begin long-term
planning for future United Nations engagement there.
Today let me focus on five key points. First, the
United States is encouraged that Timor-Leste’s security
situation remains stable. We are further encouraged
that this stability has continued despite a slight
reduction in UNMIT’s force size. We continue to
support the roles of the United Nations and the
development partners in assisting the Government of
Timor-Leste as it further solidifies peace and security
throughout the country. As Timor-Leste continues on
the path from conflict to stability we are heartened to
see that it can look at long-term challenges and plan for
a peaceful, prosperous future.

Secondly, the transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese national
police is critical to further cementing the country’s
stability. Building local capacity is the key to
peacekeeping mission success and we commend
UNMIT, the National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and bilateral donors for their hard work in this
area.
For peacekeeping missions to succeed, their
mandates must match their capabilities, and we
strongly support UNMIT’s efforts to ensure that its
police component has the appropriate specialized skills
to emphasize skills-building and institutional
development. But the excessive use of force and lack
of accountability continue to be of concern for the
PNTL. We urge the PNTL with UNMIT’s support, to
establish mechanisms to address these challenges.
We recognize the improved professionalism of
the Timorese police and military, and we note TimorLeste’s progress in developing a national security
policy. The United States is pleased to help facilitate
that process through our multi-stakeholder national
security workshops, hosted by the Asia-Pacific Center
for Security Studies in Honolulu.
The United States is also pleased to note that, in
order to help facilitate the full resumption of national
policing, we will be increasing our bilateral assistance
to further strengthen the PNTL over the coming years,
including in the areas of community policing, criminal
investigations and border and maritime policing.
Developing competent and professional security
institutions, police and military will be critical to
Timor-Leste’s long-term success. It is critical that the
Government of Timor-Leste develop clear lines of
authority and areas of responsibility for its military and
police.
Thirdly, we are pleased by the progress that has
been made towards implementing the recommendations
of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. We are also encouraged by the launch of
the Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste.
These advances are critical to ensuring that the
Timorese have faith in the justice sector, in continuing
this act of dialogue and in furthering the national
reconciliation progress.
But the commutations of the sentences of those
convicted in the February 2008 attacks against the

10-59199

9

S/PV.6405

President and Prime Minister contribute to our
continuing concern about the danger of creating a
culture of impunity. We urge the Government of TimorLeste to address impunity and to hold individuals
accountable for their actions.
We also note the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission; an environment of
transparency and accountability is essential to
sustainable development. The United States looks
forward to working with the Government of TimorLeste through our Millennium Challenge Corporation’s
new threshold programme.
Fourthly, let me congratulate UNMIT on the
absence of reported cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse during the reporting period. We were also
pleased to note UNMIT’s work with the PNTL to
create and implement a training course on
investigations of gender-based violence. We commend
UNMIT for giving high priority to the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as for
its emphasis on training its personnel.
Finally, we are pleased to note that planning has
begun for the transition process for UNMIT’s
departure. We have seen significant progress over the
last reporting period, but UNMIT continues to play a
vital role. UNMIT must continue to stress local
capacity-building, and the Government of Timor-Leste
must continue to strengthen institutions for peace and
stability, so that they can take firm root throughout the
country. We encourage UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue their efforts and to create a
gradual, methodical and thoughtful transition plan.
In closing, let me again thank the peacekeepers of
UNMIT, as well as their Timorese partners on the
ground and their international supporters, for the
continued dedication to peace and security in TimorLeste. The Timorese have made great strides towards
peace and stability and we hope and trust that they will
continue to do so with the presence and commitment of
strong international partners.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/522) and also his Special Representative,
Ameerah Haq, for her briefing today and thanking her
and her colleagues in the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their dedicated
service. The United Kingdom aligns itself with the

10

statement to be given later this morning by the
European Union delegation.
Like others, the United Kingdom is encouraged
by the continuing stability in Timor-Leste. The security
situation is calm and has shown clear and steady
improvement since 2006. Once again, it is particularly
pleasing to note that there has been no increase in
crime or disorder following the gradual transfer of
policing responsibilities back to the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL). We are encouraged by the
continued progress towards the full handover of
policing responsibilities. We note that there are still
challenges to overcome in some parts of the country
and, as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral noted, there have been difficulties with the
certification of some serving PNTL officers. We
therefore call on the Government of Timor-Leste to
give priority to resolving those outstanding issues. It
was good to hear what the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste had to say on that score. In parallel, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) should continue to build the capacity of the
PNTL and focus on providing a high standard of
training, mentoring and support.
In addition, the United Kingdom looks forward to
a clear, phased timetable for the withdrawal of the
United Nations police (UNPOL) officers. UNPOL
personnel should already be drawing down in districts
where they have successfully handed over to the
PNTL. A sudden withdrawal in 2012 would be more
destabilizing than starting the phased reduction now,
which would in itself demonstrate the Council’s belief
in the PNTL’s ability to re-establish itself. The
Government of Timor-Leste can play an important role
in this regard by ensuring that the police have
sufficient equipment and logistical support.
We continue to highlight the importance of
tackling impunity and bringing perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide to
justice. We particularly welcome the news on the
progress of the follow-up to the Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and hope that Parliament
will prioritize its consideration of the draft laws. We
welcome the recent messages from Parliament and the
Prosecutor-General speaking out against impunity, but
like my United States colleague, I note with concern
that the recent commutations of some sentences may
send out a negative message on the robustness of
Timorese justice and accountability.

10-59199

S/PV.6405

The wider United Nations system must now work
towards addressing the nation’s longer-term needs in
close collaboration with the Government of TimorLeste. In this regard, we are encouraged that the United
Nations is actively thinking about how it can best
continue to support Timor-Leste, once UNMIT has left.
Detailed recommendations should be developed and
shared with Security Council members in due course.
The 2012 elections are, of course, the most
significant milestone on the horizon. The United
Kingdom will continue to support UNMIT and the
people of Timor-Leste throughout this transitional
period. Our hope is that, once credible and peaceful
elections have taken place, Timor-Leste will have a
safe and secure future.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and I commend her for the work
done in Timor-Leste. I welcome Ambassador Sofia
Borges, Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, and
thank her for her remarks.
Brazil attaches great importance to the stability
and development of Timor-Leste. We maintain strong
ties of friendship and cooperation with this fellow
Portuguese-speaking country. Bilateral cooperation
currently covers a wide range of areas, including
education, vocational training, agriculture, reform of
the justice sector, military and police training and
elections.
We welcome the substantial progress Timor-Leste
has made in the past years. The overall political and
security situation is stable and a solid basis for
socio-economic development is being laid down. It is
also true that, “[f]urther efforts are required to
overcome
the
political,
institutional
and
socio-economic weaknesses that contributed to the
events of 2006”, as the Secretary-General reminds us
in his latest report (S/2010/522). Keeping that in mind,
Brazil will continue to assist the Timorese Government
and people as best we can. We call upon the
international community to also continue to provide its
support.
Four issues deserve our particular attention today:
security, elections, development and the future of
UNMIT. First, with respect to the security situation, I
cannot but commend the progress Timor-Leste has

10-59199

achieved and the indispensable support provided by
UNMIT and bilateral partners. It is not a small feat
that, since we last met here in February, the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has resumed primary
policing responsibilities in almost all districts and in
six specialized units. More importantly, the Timorese
police have been discharging their functions
appropriately and efficiently. It is not a coincidence
that there has been neither an increase in the crime rate
nor in the number of major security incidents in
districts where the PNTL has resumed primary policing
activities.
Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the
important role UNMIT must still play in providing
security in Timor-Leste. The three important districts
where the United Nations police (UNPOL) has retained
policing responsibilities are rather sensitive: two of
them are located on the border and the third one, Dili,
is not only the most populated, but also the political
heart of the country. The strategy for a successful
transition in these districts is twofold: enhanced
security and job creation, especially for the youth.
Handing over responsibilities to the PNTL must be
conducted with special prudence and rigour. We are
fully confident in UNMIT’s leadership and judgment
on how and when to further transfer responsibility to
the Timorese police.
The most important political test that Timor-Leste
will face in the near future will certainly be the
national elections of 2012. We all expect the voting to
be conducted in such a way as to solidify democratic
values and strengthen Timor-Leste’s institutions and
stability. UNMIT must be ready to provide the support
and assistance that the Timorese Government may
require. Brazil praises all political parties in the
country for their continued engagement in the
democratic debate, especially in Parliament, and
encourages them to continue on that path, in particular
during the electoral period.
The third issue on which I wish to comment
briefly is social and economic development. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the advances that
have taken place in Timor-Leste in this regard. We
commend the Timorese Government for having
selected basic infrastructure and energy, rural
development and human resources as the national
priorities for 2011, and we urge donors and partners to
align their assistance behind those priorities. We also
praise Timor-Leste for managing to reconcile strong

11

S/PV.6405

economic growth with low inflation. We welcome the
steep reduction in poverty levels and the progress made
towards meeting key Millennium Development Goals,
including the decrease in infant mortality rates. The
efforts on the part of the Timorese authorities to ensure
food security and prevent and combat diseases are also
noteworthy. However, more international assistance
will be required to assist Timor-Leste, expand food
production and improve access to health and education.
My fourth and last point regards the future of
UNMIT, to which Brazil has significantly increased its
contribution by sending several senior police officers.
In a few months, we will be discussing the Mission’s
mandate, which is due to expire in February 2011. That
will be the time to assess the progress made, in
particular in the security situation. At the same time, it
will be important to consider the configuration of a
peacekeeping presence that is commensurate with the
remaining challenges, especially the forthcoming
national elections. Brazil agrees with the careful
approach taken by the Secretary-General. We should
continue to draw lessons from the events of 2006,
while recognizing and promoting progress on the
ground. This should be coupled with a continued focus
on training the PNTL, so that it can further strengthen
its capacity.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
political and socio-economic progress made by the
Timorese and the smooth resumption of policing
responsibilities by the PNTL so far show that we are
getting closer to turning UNMIT into a full success
story. We must now stay the course, with prudence and
determination. Completing the good work in a
sustainable manner should be our collective goal. We
must also renew our support to the Timorese, acting
both as an Organization and as individual States. Brazil
will continue to do its part.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I first wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for her informative and important
briefing and her excellent work at the head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). Let me also welcome Her Excellency the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador
Borges, at this table and thank her for her important
contribution to today’s debate. Austria aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the European Union later in the day.

12

We welcome the positive developments in
UNMIT’s mandated priority areas since the last debate
of the Security Council on the situation in Timor-Leste
eight months ago (see S/PV.6276). The closure of the
last transitional shelter for internally displaced persons
is a welcome development and an indicator of
increasing stability in the country.
The draft National Strategic Development Plan
can play an important role in making returns and
reintegration sustainable through economic and social
development. We welcome the inclusive approach
taken in the elaboration of the Plan and the efforts
made to ensure that it will deliver results for the rural
population. It is our expectation that the draft Strategic
Development Plan will also allow for more effective
international support and increased national ownership
in that area. We hope that its implementation will
contribute to reducing unemployment, especially
among young people.
Recent achievements in the field of governance,
such as the establishment of the national Anti-Corruption
Commission, are also to be commended. We hope that
the Commission, once fully operational, will contribute
to fostering the rule of law and the confidence of the
Timorese people in State structures and institutions.
We welcome the fact that the recently launched
Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste takes into
account most recommendations of the independent
comprehensive needs assessment. We look forward to
the effective implementation of that Plan. It is our hope
and expectation that it will further strengthen the
formal justice sector and also contribute to improved
protection of women’s and children’s rights. The
recruitment of women into the judiciary and the
provision of training to police and justice personnel
will be important measures for coping with such
challenges.
The establishment of the National Commission
on the Rights of the Child and the adoption of new
legislation relating to witness protection and to
domestic violence are further significant developments
in that regard. Full enforcement of the new laws will be
critical, in particular in view of the high number of
reported incidents of gender-based violence and human
rights violations committed by members of the security
services, and the difficulties encountered by victims in
obtaining justice. We welcome UNMIT’s support for
the implementation of the new law against domestic

10-59199

S/PV.6405

violence, as well as on human rights more broadly, as
set out in the most recent UNMIT periodic report on
human rights developments in Timor-Leste.
It is encouraging to see that certain steps have
been taken towards accountability for crimes
committed during the 2006 crisis, as recommended by
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry (see
S/2006/628, para. 24). At the same time, the SecretaryGeneral has referred to the limited number of cases
brought to trial and the number of acquittals due to
lack of evidence. We therefore share his view that
further work is needed on the remaining challenges.
Accountability for the gross human rights
violations committed during and prior to 1999 also
remains an area of concern. We therefore encourage the
Serious Crimes Investigation Team of UNMIT to
continue its important work. We very much welcome
the ongoing efforts to create an institution to take
forward the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and those of the
Commission of Truth and Friendship. It is good to see
that Parliament has undertaken wide consultations in
that context. We hope that, on that basis, discussions on
the relevant draft laws will soon be resumed and
concluded.
In the security sector, further progress has been
made in the handover of primary policing
responsibilities to the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and its registration, screening and certification
process. It is also encouraging to see that the
resumption process has proceeded so well in line with
the mutually agreed criteria. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s view that the reconfiguration of
the UNMIT police should be approached cautiously
and that continued capacity-building through UNMIT
and an increased focus on training and institutional
development will be critical. We also believe that the
accountability mechanisms of the PNTL, such as the
enforcement of effective internal disciplinary
measures, need to be further strengthened and
monitored.
It is particularly encouraging that progress has
also been made in creating an overall framework for
security coordination. We hope that this will lead to
comprehensive security sector reform, which will lead
to further clarification of the respective roles and tasks
of the police and the defence forces, especially in order
to offer the latter a new and meaningful role in a

10-59199

peacetime setting, including through increasing
participation in international peacekeeping efforts.
In closing, I wish to commend the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste for the remarkable
progress that their country has made. UNMIT is doing
important work in support of Timor-Leste’s future
under the able leadership of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and will continue to do so as
Timor-Leste approaches the next national elections in
2012.
Looking further into the future, we must build on
what has been achieved so far and carefully plan the
transition to a longer-term United Nations engagement
that helps to consolidate and build upon what has been
achieved to date. Capacity-building should be at the
centre of international efforts to further increase
national ownership and ensure the long-term stability
and prosperity of the Timorese nation.
We therefore welcome the recent establishment of
a jointly owned mechanism to plan and implement the
transition, and look forward to regular updates on that
work. The planned Security Council mission to TimorLeste in late November will provide the Council with a
welcome opportunity to enhance its understanding of
Timor-Leste’s needs and aspirations in that regard. My
country looks forward to participating in that mission.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing today and for her commitment to
fulfilling her mandate. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Borges, Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste, for her contribution.
I believe that we all agree and are pleased to see
that Timor-Leste has continued to enjoy an
environment of security and stability, including during
the current transfer responsibilities, under which the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste is gradually taking on
the duties that to date have been carried out by the
police component of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
With the reconfiguration of UNMIT’s mandate
and the current gradual drawdown of the Mission’s
police, expected to conclude in 2012, it is important to
point out that this time frame must remain flexible,
depending on the capacities of the national police and
the security situation on the ground. The commitment

13

S/PV.6405

shown by the country’s primary political actors and the
efforts of the Governments of Indonesia and of TimorLeste to strengthen a relationship of cooperation have
contributed significantly to the stability in the country.
The coming two years will be key for TimorLeste. Without disregarding the security aspect, the
reconfiguration of UNMIT must involve greater
support for developing national capacities, povertyreduction policies, economic growth and rural
development. The strategic plan for the use of natural
resources and attracting foreign investment will also
play a key role in the socio-economic stability of the
country.
All these efforts, with the assistance of the
international community, must focus on job creation,
particularly for young people, who will ultimately steer
the country’s development. Similarly, it is important to
consolidate the institutional capacities of the country’s
electoral bodies in order to ensure that the national
elections to be held in 2012 will be carried out with the
necessary transparency and credibility.
Another component essential to solidifying
stability in the country is the promotion of national
reconciliation and lasting peace. We reiterate that this
is necessary in order to resolve the crimes committed
during the crises of 1999 and 2006, in accordance with
resolutions 1704 (2006), 1745 (2007) and 1802 (2008).
Let us remember that the position of the United
Nations is that amnesty and impunity are not an option
for war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
We applaud the measures the Government of TimorLeste has adopted to strengthen the judicial system,
guarantee full accountability, put an end to impunity
and compensate the victims of serious violations of
human rights in the country. In that context, we
welcome the draft bill now being discussed in
Parliament on the establishment of an institution to
take over from and implement the recommendations of
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship.
Finally, we would like to recognize the work of
the countries contributing to UNMIT and to stress the
need to continue to plan for the transition in 2012,
based on the country’s national priorities and taking
into account the gradual involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in support of international
aid to the country and its national programmes.

14

Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mrs. Ameerah Haq, for her
briefing and her efforts as head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to
strengthen peace, security and stability and to assist the
Government and people of Timor-Leste in building
their national institutions. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for her
statement.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/522)
reflects recent positive developments in Timor-Leste
that are the result of the sincere desire of all political
parties, in the Government and in opposition, to steer
their country towards stability and prosperity after long
years of suffering. There is no doubt that UNMIT,
which was established after the events of 2006, has
been a success story for the international community. It
has contributed, along with other United Nations
entities, to strengthening the democratic process and
building the State’s institutions.
There are still a number of challenges, however,
requiring a two-track approach. The first is to
consolidate the important achievements that have been
made so far in the areas of political stability and
security, completing the building of security
institutions and the judicial sector, strengthening the
rule of law and inculcating a democratic culture. The
second track is to work for socio-economic
development in a manner consonant with the
Millennium Development Goals, in order to remove
Timor-Leste from the list of the world’s least
developed countries and onto that of middle-income
States.
Lebanon reaffirms its full support for UNMIT in
its work to fulfil its four major responsibilities:
reviewing and reforming the security sector,
strengthening
the
rule
of
law,
achieving
socio-economic development, and consolidating a
culture of dialogue and democratic rule. In this regard,
I wish to make the following remarks.
First, building security institutions is a
prerequisite for lasting peace, and we commend the
role that UNMIT police have played in training and
supporting the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste to
assume responsibility for security throughout TimorLeste. In that regard, we welcome the assessment
contained in the Secretary-General’s report that the

10-59199

S/PV.6405

security situation remains stable, with no serious
incidents or increase in violent crime reported.

We believe that it is high time for this nascent State to
play a larger role in its region.

Secondly, we welcome the fact that President
Ramos-Horta has issued regulations and instructions
regarding the security sector, in addition to a
comprehensive strategy for judicial reform.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2010/522). In
addition, we extend our thanks to Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, and express our appreciation for her
important contribution and tireless work. We would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste and thank her for her contribution to this
debate.

Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law and
accountability and combating impunity is fundamental
to lasting security and an issue of principle for my
delegation. We support President Ramos-Horta’s
initiative aimed establishing peace and national unity
and at inculcating a culture of dialogue and democracy
in all sectors of society. In that context, we welcome
the closing of the last remaining transitional shelter for
internally displaced persons.
In the area of socio-economic development, we
welcome the positive economic statistics included in
the report, which indicate that the country’s economic
growth is projected to exceed 10 per cent in 2010. We
believe, however, that the steep growth in the
unemployment rate, especially among young people, is
a potential social time-bomb that may lead to serious
security problems in future if it is not addressed. This
is particularly true given that more than 60 per cent of
the population is under 25, as noted by the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste. In this regard, we
welcome the technical assistance that the International
Labour Organization is providing to the Secretariat of
State for Vocational Training and Employment.
Fourthly, the elections to be held in 2012 will be
an important milestone in the democratic approach
taken by Timor-Leste, and we urge all political parties
to participate actively in preparing for them. We also
call on the international community to provide the
Government of Timor-Leste with all necessary
assistance in this area. We welcome Ms. Haq’s mention
of the initiative to establish a joint high-level
mechanism between UNMIT and the Timor-Leste
authorities during the transitional period. We
encourage all parties concerned to take maximum
advantage of UNMIT’s expertise, and on that basis to
continue the cooperation between the United Nations
and Timor-Leste’s Government.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize the need for
the international community to continue to provide
support to Timor-Leste. We welcome the improvement
in the country’s relations with its neighbouring States.

10-59199

In addition, we commend the crucial role that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
plays in support of Timor-Leste’s efforts to achieve
progress in many different areas, including in the
security, political, institutional and socio-economic
fields. Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the Timorese people, Government and
political parties, as the overall situation during the
reporting period remained calm and stable.
We are encouraged to learn that President RamosHorta has continued his dialogue initiative on the
theme “Road to peace and national unity”, thus
supporting reconciliation and peace initiatives in urban
and rural communities. We believe that such efforts
may serve as an important step, which we hope will
have a positive impact on the lives of many in TimorLeste.
Strengthening security-sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. While
we welcome the resumption by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary responsibilities for
police operations in several districts since May 2009,
we are also hopeful that the process will be finalized
by the end of this year in all districts and all units. In
order to achieve this goal, further institutional
development and capacity-building within the PNTL
are of particular importance. There must be a clear
delineation of responsibility between the PNTL and the
Falintil Forças de Defesa de Timor-Leste. A
comprehensive reform process for both should be
carefully developed and completed.
As stated by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Timorese authorities have taken significant steps to
strengthen national capacities and to enhance the
effectiveness of the justice sector. We therefore

15

S/PV.6405

particularly welcome the launch of the Justice Sector
Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste.

also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste for her statement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly believes that the
reintegration of internally displaced persons is
inextricably linked with both achieving and
maintaining
lasting
peace
and
strengthening
democratic institutions and processes. In that context,
we warmly welcome the closure of the last transitional
shelter for internally displaced persons.

We are pleased to see that, as a result of the
efforts of the Government and the people of TimorLeste and the vigorous support of the international
community, the overall situation in Timor-Leste over
the past year has remained stable. President RamosHorta has continued with his dialogue initiative
entitled “Road to peace and national unity”, and
various parties have maintained the momentum of
political dialogue.

We firmly believe that only truth and justice can
lead the country towards full reconciliation and
prosperity. In that regard, we commend the submission
of draft laws on the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship to the President of the Timorese Parliament.
The more successful the fight against impunity is, the
better the prospects for true reconciliation and national
unity.
Socio-economic problems must be addressed in
an effective and coordinated manner, with all
stakeholders onboard, including the private sector, civil
society and foreign donors. Infrastructure projects,
foreign investment and improvements in youth
employment will contribute to poverty reduction and
promote sustainable economic growth.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the opinion that the
general elections to be organized in 2012 will be of
critical importance and a true test of Timorese
democratic progress. We welcome the role of UNMIT
and the United Nations Development Programme in
assisting electoral management bodies to consolidate
institutional capacities in order to enable them to
conduct the upcoming elections with limited
international support.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
continued and steady progress Timor-Leste is making
on its path to a stable, secure and democratic society
while simultaneously strengthening both its economic
and developmental capacities. Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the efforts of the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste and encourages them to proceed with
the same determination towards a better future — a
future of peace, security and prosperity.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq for her comprehensive briefing
on the recent developments in Timor-Leste. I would

16

The Government has formulated its National
Strategic Development Plan for the economic
development of the country in the next 20 years. The
increase in input by the Government in the areas of
health and education has played a positive role in
improving people’s lives. The Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has started to gradually take over
policing responsibilities and to increase its law
enforcement capacity. At the same time, we should also
realize that Timor-Leste still faces many challenges to
develop the economy, improve people’s lives and
maintain stability. In that connection, I wish to make
three comments.
First, to realize long-term peace and security in
Timor-Leste, various political factions should continue
to seek to resolve their differences through democratic
dialogue. In order to effectively respond to the various
challenges Timor-Leste faces, it is crucial for the
various parties, especially the Government and the
Frente Revolucionária do Timor-Leste, to put aside
their differences and engage in full cooperation.
We appreciate the efforts by President RamosHorta and Special Representative Haq to promote
dialogue among various parties. We call on the
country’s stakeholders to make the interests of the
nation and the people the top priority, seize the current
favourable opportunity to restore peace and achieve
development and lead the people of Timor-Leste in
focusing on promoting the national process of peace
and reconstruction.
Secondly, in order to achieve long-term peace and
security in Timor-Leste, it is necessary to constantly
improve the country’s own capacity to maintain
security and stability. We support the PNTL in
continuing to take over policing responsibilities. At the
same time, in the course of its drawdown and
reconfiguration, the United Nations Integrated Mission

10-59199

S/PV.6405

in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) should also give full attention
to policing needs in various parts of the country. While
ensuring the security and stability of the country,
UNMIT should, in accordance with the local situation
and the views of various parties, focus on helping the
PNTL to enhance its own law enforcement capacity
and expand training for Timor-Leste police.
Thirdly, to achieve long-term peace and security
in Timor-Leste, it is necessary to make great efforts to
develop the economy and improve people’s lives. We
support the Government in continuing to strengthen
social stability while also focusing on its development
efforts on infrastructure and human resources capacitybuilding and working to develop the economy and
improve the employment rate of the population, so as
to fundamentally eliminate factors that cause social
instability. The international community should
continue to provide various forms of assistance in line
with the development strategy of the country in order
to speed up the country’s process of peaceful
reconstruction.
China appreciates the work done by Special
Representative Haq and UNMIT and supports the
Mission in continuing its hard work in accordance with
the mandate given to it by the Council. We hope to see
the final smooth withdrawal by UNMIT from TimorLeste, which will set an example for United Nations
peacekeeping
operations
in
formulating
and
implementing exit strategies. After the withdrawal of
UNMIT in the future, the United Nations should
continue to provide assistance to Timor-Leste in line
with the wishes of the Government.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2010/522).
We thank Mrs. Sofia Borges, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for her substantive
statement. We are pleased with the stabilization of the
military and political situation in Timor-Leste and the
progress made in key areas of country’s development.
Undeniable credit for this situation goes to the
leadership of Timor-Leste and of the United Nations
Mission. The political forces of Timor-Leste
demonstrate responsibility and commitment to the
process of national dialogue and reconciliation, based

10-59199

on democratic principles. Further constructive
development of the political dialogue — and of the
political process in general — is paramount,
particularly in the context of the general elections
slated for 2012.
The relatively stable situation is making it
possible to address long-term challenges. Nevertheless,
the progress made needs to be further consolidated.
The institutions of governance of this young nation are
being formed, and there are still serious socioeconomic
problems. Given the range of problems, the country
continues to need the support of the international
community.
In that context, strengthening the national
security forces is paramount for the restoration of
stability and is an important indicator of how
independent the country is. We are closely following
the process of the transfer of responsibilities for the
maintenance of law and order from the United Nations
Mission to the police force of Timor-Leste. We note
that there has been considerable progress in this area.
However, consolidation of this progress requires the
intensification of efforts to build the capacities of the
police and to provide appropriate training and logistic
support. In that connection it is important that the
timetable for the transfer of responsibilities be based
on criteria worked out with the leadership of the
country as determined by the preparedness of the
police units, rather than on an artificially set schedule.
We support the intent of the Secretary-General to
begin discussions with the leadership of Timor-Leste
on issues related to the future activities of the United
Nations Mission and its parameters. We look forward
to further recommendations on reconfiguring the
United Nations presence, which will need to take into
account the realities in the country. Our position is that
the upcoming Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
in November will allow us to further gauge the
situation and gather first-hand information on the
specific challenges and needs of the country that are
relevant today.
In conclusion, we would like to express to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the entire staff of the Mission our gratitude for their
professionalism. Russia is providing assistance to the
United Nations activities in that country —
specifically, Russian police officers continue to serve
in the Mission.

17

S/PV.6405

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for her briefing, which has
given us an overview of what has taken place since
2006 and the creation of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). The representative
of the European Union will shortly make a statement,
and France associates itself with that statement.
I wish to make a few comments. I am pleased to
note that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/522)
and the statement by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General have characterized the situation in
Timor-Leste as calm. The political and security
stability in the country is a result of the responsible
positions taken by the elected officials in the
Government and the opposition. What better proof can
there be of the political maturity gained by the
Timorese and of the solidity of their young institutions.
As we progress beyond tensions and violence we
must keep in mind the goal of peacebuilding in TimorLeste. From that standpoint we can only be encouraged
by the controlled transfer of the duties with regard to
law and order to the national police force in TimorLeste. The transfer has been carried out in 10 out of the
13 districts without seeing an increase in incidents in
those areas. The remaining transfers in Dili and in the
border districts must not be carried out in haste. They
must be done based on criteria established by local
authorities and the United Nations.
This process is accompanied by a progressive
reduction in the number of United Nations police
officers deployed individually and that reduction is to
be pursued in 2011. The drawdown should be
supported through technical assistance and training.
Strengthening police capacity is a priority but we must
not lose sight of the fact that in the medium term all
security sectors must benefit from these efforts.
Peace will only take root if the Timorese have
faith in their justice system. In particular, fighting
impunity for crimes carried out in the past is an
essential condition for lasting reconciliation. The
certification process of Timorese police officers is
incomplete, and there are some 200 cases still pending.
Moreover, the Secretary-General’s report points out
that there has been little progress in trying those
individuals responsible for crimes and human rights
violations committed during the incidents of 2006. We
hope that those efforts will be pursued in line with the

18

Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We have taken note, as have others, of the decision by
the President of Timor-Leste to commute the sentences
of some individuals who are responsible for political
violence. Although that decision is constitutional, it
does not send a good signal. We therefore encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
remain actively involved in this matter, in accordance
with the mandate entrusted to her by the Security
Council.
We have also noted the economic forecasts
contained in the report. They show that there is
impressive growth of 10.4 per cent, and a drop in the
poverty level as well. It is encouraging that in this
context the Timorese authorities have set their
long-term priorities within a national development
strategic plan, which is now, thanks to the Prime
Minister himself, under consideration throughout the
country.
The year 2012 will see the end of the UNMIT
mandate in its present configuration and it will also see
general elections. The United Nations must be able to
have on site the material and human resources required
to facilitate the holding of the elections. They must
take account of that important deadline in their security
transfer strategy. The renewal of the UNMIT mandate
in February 2011 should also lead us to reflect on the
future presence of the United Nations. We are open to
the modalities that must reflect the progressive
assumption by the Timorese of the tasks now being
carried out by UNMIT and the objective of lasting
peacebuilding.
The upcoming Security Council visit to Dili, in
which we will participate, will be another opportunity
for us to see how much has been done and to reflect on
the future relationship between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming France’s
support for UNMIT and for Special Representative.
Ms. Haq had just assumed her responsibilities in
February 2010. Since then she has shown how skilled
she is and she has met all our expectations. We need
her skill and good will, because the months to come
will be crucial for the future of Timor-Leste and also
for the United Nations and its capacity to bring a
country to peace and stability.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I also would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

10-59199

S/PV.6405

General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
statement and her invaluable contribution to the peace
process in Timor-Leste.
I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences
for the demise of Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, Deputy
Special Representative for Security Sector Support and
Rule of Law. I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, Mrs. Sofia Borges, and thank her for
her presentation. I would like to limit my remarks to
the issues of political development, humanitarian and
social development and the security and judicial
system.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/522) and the climate of calm and stability in
Timor-Leste during the reporting period. That situation
has undoubtedly facilitated the focused implementation
of the Government’s National Strategic Development
Plan. The continuous operationalization of the Plan —
and its transformation into a series of medium-term
development plans within an agreed time frame — is
highly commended. We urge donors to provide the
assistance required to cover the deficit in the Strategic
Plan and also to provide long-term predictable support.
Investments in the three economic pillars
identified by the Government, namely, agriculture,
natural resources and tourism, if properly harnessed,
will engender economic growth and accelerate the pace
of development in the country. Indeed, the prospects of
transforming Timor-Leste from its present status as a
low-income country to high-income status in the next
20 years is realizable if the Government steadily
implements the Plan.
The constructive interaction between the various
political parties and major stakeholders in guaranteeing
peace, harmony and continuity in governance is
commended. We note in particular the Government’s
“Road to peace and national unity” initiative, which
has helped to foster dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties. We welcome the pronouncements of the
United Nations Secretary-General and the President of
the
Frente
Revolucionária
do
Timor-Leste
Independente (Fretilin) urging the parties to approach
the future with renewed determination to achieve
peace, stability and development. The parties should be
guided by those pronouncements while undertaking the
review of the voter registration process and
strengthening the electoral bodies for the 2012
elections.

10-59199

We also welcome the resolve to assign a greater
role to women and youth in governance, as that will
allow for the incorporation of a balanced gender
perspective in the decision-making process. It will also
promote implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, as well as Council resolution 1325
(2000), the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child, and resolution 1704 (2006). The
Government’s two-year training initiative for members
of the Youth Parliament will equip young people with
the leadership and other skills needed to make
meaningful contributions on key policy issues. The
contributions of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste
(UNMIT),
the
United
Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United
Nations Development Programme and UNICEF in that
regard are appreciated.
On the humanitarian and social development
aspects, although Timor-Leste is no longer facing a
humanitarian crisis, the devastation caused by the
recent widespread flooding and landslides should be
given adequate attention. We commend the efforts of
UNMIT, the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme to provide food and
technical and logistic support to the Government and
people of Timor-Leste. The international community
should not let up in strengthening its response capacity
to address that natural disaster.
With regard to security, we welcome the stable
situation in the country and the increased policing
responsibilities of the national police (PNTL) in four
more districts. To achieve the timeline for the full
transfer of policing responsibilities to the PNTL,
especially in the remaining three districts, the capacity
needs of the force should be met through training,
mentoring and senior development. The PNTL should
continue to take measures to build trust and confidence
with the people.
Effective disarmament mechanisms, command
and control structures, weapon control mechanisms and
planning processes, as well as adequate logistic
support, are so critical for the creation of a strong and
effective PNTL. Human rights violations, impunity and
gender-based crimes by members of the security
services impinge on the credibility of the services and
should be addressed.
We note the Government’s anti-corruption efforts,
including the Anti-Corruption Commission and the

19

S/PV.6405

appointment of an Anti-Corruption Commissioner and
two deputies. We commend UNMIT for posting
international and national advisers to the Commission
to bolster its efforts.
We support the ongoing gradual phased
drawdown of UNMIT police and look forward to the
next assessment, which will determine the final
drawdown phase. With the expiration of the
recruitment notices in September, the United Nations
must confront the challenges of recruiting qualified
United Nations police to advise and train PNTL
officers.
We also look forward to the Council’s upcoming
visit to Timor-Leste, which will provide an opportunity
for a comprehensive assessment of the challenges
facing UNMIT.
In concluding, we wish to comment UNMIT and
the United Nations country team for their continued
support to the people and Government of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/522)
and his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for
her comprehensive briefing to the Council. We support
her efforts and the key coordinating role of the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. We express our condolences at
the passing away of Mr. Takahisa Kawakami. We
welcome
Ambassador
Borges,
Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, and thank her for her
intervention.
Like others, we are very pleased to note that the
security situation has remained relatively calm and
stable. I want to commend that the Timorese people,
Government and political parties for showing restraint
and for their continued efforts at dialogue. The
Timorese have wisely used this considerable
stabilization by addressing long-term key issues, such
as the adoption of the National Strategic Development
Plan, the Justice Sector’s Strategic Plan for TimorLeste, and the creation of an Anti-Corruption
Commission.
In the same vein, it is praiseworthy that in 10 of
the 13 districts primary policing responsibilities have
been handed over by the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the Timorese
national police. We are also pleased to note that the
resumption of primary police responsibilities by the
national police (PNTL) has not led to an increase in

20

criminal activity. We welcome the further progress
achieved in the registration, screening and certification
programme for the PNTL. It seems, however, that there
are quite a few logistical and training requirements that
have to be met in order to complete the handover
process. We carefully note the drawdown foreseen for
the end of June next year, which will reduce the
UNMIT police by almost 20 per cent — from 1,023 to
around 800 officers.
As conditions improve and stability continues, it
is quite logical to start thinking about the transition
period and the eventual exit of UNMIT. However, we
believe that things should not be rushed and that
UNMIT’s mandate and force composition should not
be further altered, as the 2012 elections will be a
crucial test for the stability of the country. In that
regard, we believe that it is of the utmost importance
that the Timorese Government — but also the policecontributing countries and donors — focus their efforts
on building the capacity of the Timorese police force in
particular and of State institutions in general.
Likewise, we continue to concur with the
Secretary-General’s call for defining a meaningful role
for the Timorese army in a peacetime setting. In
February last year we suggested in the Council that the
army could be oriented and trained to contribute to
peacekeeping operations. Thus we are pleased to note
that the Government has embraced that idea and that
the UNMIT military liaison officers conducted a
mentoring programme for Timorese officers. We
believe that UNMIT and Timorese authorities should
continue to work along those lines.
Although the growth projected for Timor-Leste is
impressive, the Government and the parties should be
aware that further efforts are needed to overcome the
political, economic and social challenges that
contributed to the 2006 crisis. In particular, the high
rate of unemployment among the youth is not only
worrisome for the economic development of the
country but continues to pose a possible risk to the
country’s security.
Given the progress achieved so far, we are
confident that Timor-Leste will eventually overcome
all the challenges. However, that requires continued
national dialogue and unity. We also believes that
Timor-Leste requires ongoing support from the
international community in its quest for peace, stability
and prosperity. We thus encourage an assessment of the

10-59199

S/PV.6405

situation in the transitional period until the 2012
elections in order to define the best format for the
United Nations presence after the completion of
UNMIT’s mandate. In that regard, the Security Council
visit to Timor-Leste next month will surely be useful,
and we look forward to participating.
On the other hand, it goes without saying that we
should listen carefully to the views of the Timorese, as
this quest for stability is a nationally owned process.
Turkey contributes police officers to UNMIT and will
continue to support the United Nations and TimorLeste.
I would like to conclude by wishing continued
success to the Timorese people and Government.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): My delegation thanks Ms. Ameerah Haq for
her briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integration Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) during
the period from 21 January to 20 September 2010. We
are also grateful to the representative of Timor-Leste
for her important statement.
My statement will primarily address the political,
security and development aspects of the situation.
With regard to the political situation, Gabon
renews its support to the Government of Timor-Leste
in its efforts to safeguard national unity through
dialogue and consultation. We encourage the parties to
continue their collaboration with the Government in
the context of the “Road to peace and national unity”
initiative. I take this opportunity to welcome the
ongoing cooperation of the Alliance for a
Parliamentary Majority with other political parties with
a view to contributing to the establishment of a climate
of durable peace in Timor-Leste. The completion of
that dialogue will guarantee the long-term political and
institutional stability of the country.
Gabon welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to organize credible and
transparent elections. In that regard, we commend the
technical assistance provided to the Government
jointly by UNMIT and the United Nations
Development Programme in election organization and
institutional capacity-building.
With regard to security, we would like first to
welcome the peaceful climate prevailing in the country.
The contribution made by civil society in that regard,
in particular religious organizations, is commendable.

10-59199

My delegation appreciates the measures taken by
the Government with a view to strengthening the legal
system and the capacities of the national police force.
We welcome the role of UNMIT police in the process
of transferring policing responsibilities to the Timorese
police. We appeal for adequate financial resources
from the donor community to support the training
programmes for the Timorese police and to equip them
with appropriate operational resources.
We also support the partnership between UNMIT
police and the national police in the context of the
transition. In the same vein, it is important that the
Government define the areas of jurisdiction of the
army and the police in order to improve relations
between those two entities.
Given the important role that the Strategic
Development Plan will play in the future of the
country, we wish to commend the efforts of the Prime
Minister to take into account the aspirations of
communities throughout the country. My delegation
encourages the Government to continue in those efforts
of good governance, in particular with regard to the use
of income from the petroleum sector. We urge it too to
continue investing in human resources, which are so
necessary for its development.
I could not conclude my remarks without praising
the good-neighbourly relations that exist between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which are proof of the will
of the Timorese Government to work in close
cooperation with the countries of the region. We would
also like to reiterate our support of the Timorese
Government and people in their commitment to
stability and development of their young nation.
Likewise, we assure Ms. Haq of our full support, and
we wish to commend her vigorous leadership of
UNMIT.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Uganda.
I join Council members in thanking Special
Representative Ameerah Haq for her comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste and thank
her for her statement.
We commend the Government and people of
Timor-Leste for the steady progress being made in
advancing peace, stability and development, in spite of
the remaining challenges. The revitalization of the

21

S/PV.6405

economy, as evidenced by the projected economic
growth of 10.4 per cent in 2010, provides a sound basis
for socio-economic development. We note that the
Government, with the support of the International
Labour Organization, is taking steps to address the
challenges of high unemployment, especially among
young people, by providing skills development through
vocational training.
We welcome the continued strengthening of
Timorese institutions. The formulation of the National
Strategic Development Plan for the next 10 years is a
step in the right direction. It is encouraging that the
Plan is receiving feedback from the whole country,
reinforcing national ownership of the Plan.
The resumption of policing responsibilities by the
Timor-Leste national police is welcome. It is essential
that there be sustainable institutional development for
the national police through training and logistical
support. We welcome the measures taken by the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to
enhance police capacity. The ongoing recruitment of
19 civilian experts within UNMIT police to enhance
skills-building and institutional development in the
national police is also welcome. It is important that
that exercise be concluded in a timely manner.
Finally, we thank the Special Representative and
the UNMIT staff, as well as the country team, for their
good work.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, and Uganda for
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October 2010. We have no doubt that
under your able leadership, the Council will continue
to deliberate and take action on those most pressing
questions regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Malaysia has continued to follow with avid
interest the progress of our neighbour, Timor-Leste. We
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) (S/2010/522) and the briefing provided
by Ms. Ameera Haq, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

22

Malaysia is encouraged by the recent
improvement in the security situation, which augurs
well for the ongoing work on the resumption of
policing responsibilities by the national police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL). We are also encouraged by —
and congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste with
regard to — the recent report, which indicates that
Timor-Leste had made advances in strengthening the
security and justice sectors and enhancing human
rights by making the PNTL responsible and
accountable for all its actions.
I said to the Council in February 2010:
“adherence to the rule of law is crucial to
ensuring the respect of the people for its own
security forces. Accountability for criminal acts
must not only be seen to be paramount but must
also be so, as it is the cornerstone of trust in the
system.” (S/PV.6276, p. 22)
Malaysia is encouraged that the ongoing process
begun in May to help establish a professional and
credible police force in the country has been chalking
up success after success following the good work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNMIT. Today, we are witnessing the Timorese
national police force resume primary responsibility for
the nation’s Immigration Department, the Border Patrol
Unit and the Interpol Office from the United Nations as
the gradual transfer of security functions continues. We
are also aware that policing responsibilities have so far
been handed over to the PNTL FOR 10 districts,
leaving only three districts under United Nations
policing command. However, we urge the continued
presence of United Nations police in those districts
where the PNTL has resumed responsibilities to
monitor, advise and support the national force.
Following those achievements, Malaysia is of the
opinion that the Government of Timor-Leste should
focus more attention on the socio-economic
development of the country. We urge the Government
to invest in more infrastructure and facilities that could
create socio-economic activities and jobs, which would
benefit the local population, in particular young
people. In this regard, Malaysia will continue to
undertake to encourage its own businessmen and
investors to consider Timor-Leste as a viable business
partner.
Malaysia reaffirms its continued support and
cooperation to Timor-Leste at the multilateral level

10-59199

S/PV.6405

through UNMIT, where we have one formed police
unit and 90 police personnel serving in the United
Nations police. Bilaterally, we will continue to assist
Timor-Leste through our Technical Cooperation
Programme. We will also continue to provide training
to Timorese armed forces personnel through the
Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme. To date,
we have trained 24 of the Timorese personnel under
that programme.
In closing, Malaysia would like to put on record
our heartfelt condolences to the Government of Japan
and to the family of the late Mr. Takashisa Kawakami,
former Deputy Special Representative for Security
Sector Support and the Rule of Law for UNMIT. The
late Mr. Takashisa Kawakami contributed immensely to
progress in bringing about stability and changes for the
betterment of the Timorese nation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia keenly
appreciates the Council’s continued attention to the
situation in Timor-Leste and the opportunity to speak
in the debate. We are very pleased to see you presiding
over this meeting, Sir.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/522) and his Special Representative,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing this morning. We
equally welcome the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador Borges.
We recognize the continuing importance of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
very well led by Special Representative Haq. I would,
of course, also like to convey our condolences on the
death of Deputy Special Representative for Security
Sector Support and Rule of Law, Mr. Kawakami.
As the Secretary-General’s report outlines, the
Timorese Government has made very real progress in
addressing the many security and development
challenges that the country faces and — in particular —
in further consolidating the vital legislative and
institutional elements of the State. The level of
political maturity that has emerged is very welcome
and will continue, of course, to be decisive. In the past
year, poverty has decreased by 9 per cent and the
non-oil sector of the economy has averaged strong
annual growth since 2008.

10-59199

Despite those improvements, however, as we
know difficult challenges inevitably remain. Poverty is
high, the health of women and children is poor, and
there are limited jobs for a growing population. In
particular, youth unemployment is rising, risking
violence and social instability. As we said to the
Council in February (see S/PV.6276), youth
unemployment is a decisive issue. Also rising is the
level of urbanization, which is equally a potential
factor for social instability.
For these and other reasons, it remains critical, of
course, that the international community continue to
support capacity-building in Timor-Leste’s institutions,
particularly in the security sector and in regard to
governance. National elections, scheduled for 2012,
will be a key milestone, but may also prove to be a
challenge, as we know, for the developing institutions
in Timor-Leste. It is important, therefore, that UNMIT
drawdowns be conditions-based and take into account
prevailing capacities. It is also important to take a
long-term view of any proposals to change the UNMIT
mandate or budget. Planning for the long-term viability
of Timor-Leste should take precedence over short-term
budget considerations.
We welcome greater Timorese responsibility and
control over policing. The resumption of primary
policing responsibility by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in most districts and units
indicates that the PNTL is moving very much in the
right direction. Australia encourages the continued
handover of policing responsibility once the remaining
districts meet the agreed conditions.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
that the certification process for the PNTL is still not
concluded and needs to be addressed to enable the
handover process to be completed. We also join the call
for the Timorese Government to take into account
seriously, in its budgetary and planning processes, the
PNTL’s logistical needs.
Australia welcomes the United Nations efforts to
ensure that the skills of the United Nations police
deployed in Timor-Leste fit with the new
post-handover role, and also welcomes the additional
19 civilian posts that will help strengthen the PNTL as
an institution. We hope these positions will soon be
filled and on the ground, doing the job they have been
mandated to do. Likewise, it is important that the
United Nations police continue a mentoring role,

23

S/PV.6405

particularly to enhance the community policing aspect
of the PNTL. Any drawdown in United Nations police
numbers needs to reflect the security environment at
the time. Further reductions will reinforce the need for
United Nations personnel to have the necessary
technical and training skills for effective and
sustainable capacity-building.
Australia, through the International Stabilisation
Force (ISF) and our contribution to the United Nations
police, will of course continue to support the Timorese
Government and UNMIT in maintaining security. We
note that, since February 2008, there have been no
serious security incidents in Timor-Leste requiring
intervention by the ISF. With the support of the
Timorese Government, Australia and New Zealand
have drawn down their contributions to the ISF to
approximately 460 personnel. Australia continues to
review its contribution to the ISF, consistent with the
security environment. Future personnel reductions will
be made only in close consultation with the Timorese
Government, the United Nations and other
international partners.
Australia recognizes the importance of building
Timor-Leste’s capacity to provide for its future
security. We are working directly with Timor-Leste to
improve the capacity of its security forces through
substantial bilateral programmes to train the PNTL and
the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de Timor-Leste.
Aside from continued security, it is of course
vital to ensure continued economic development and
improvement occurs in the lives of ordinary Timorese.
Australia has heard the Timorese Government’s clear
message that the people of Timor-Leste must drive
their own development agenda. To this end, we
acknowledge and welcome the release of the draft
Strategic Development Plan. We especially recognize
the impressive process of consultation undertaken
personally by Prime Minister Gusmão in its
development.
As the largest donor in Timor-Leste, we stand
ready to support the Government’s efforts to secure a
stable and prosperous future. This year, we will deliver
over $100 million in aid to Timor-Leste. Our support
will help create employment by assisting Timor-Leste
to improve agricultural productivity, infrastructure,
vocational education, private sector development, and,
importantly, such labour intensive works as road
maintenance, which give jobs to young people. It will

24

also support the delivery of health and education
services, and the Government’s efforts to improve its
own accountability.
Australia welcomes Timor-Leste’s strengthening
of its regional relationships. Timor-Leste chaired the
recent
Australia-Indonesia-Timor-Leste
trilateral
meeting of foreign ministers during leaders’ week in
New York last month. Australia values highly the
regular trilateral dialogue, which reflects the strength
of our shared history and achievements and provides a
very genuine opportunity for strengthening our joint
cooperation.
We particularly welcome the proposed visit of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste. We are confident that
the Council and all of us will benefit from a
contemporary on-the-ground assessment. We also look
forward to updates from the Secretary-General on
UNMIT’s transition planning, and to working very
closely in its development with the Timorese
Government. The 2012 elections must be a key element
in our thinking about transition.
In conclusion, progress has been made and
continues to be made. More needs to be done, both for
economic development and security sector reform. As
we know, the elections in 2012 will be a crucial
marker. As the Secretary-General’s report notes, further
efforts are required to overcome the political,
institutional and socio-economic weaknesses that
contributed to the events of 2006. For its part, Australia
remains irrevocably committed to working for a
successful future for Timor-Leste and to our
partnership with the Government and people of TimorLeste to achieve this historic purpose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October, and to express my
appreciation to you and the other members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to address the
Council on issue of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in East Timor (UNMIT). I would also like to
express our appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and head of UNMIT, for her useful and timely
briefing. Allow me also to extend my appreciation to
Ambassador Sofia Borges, Permanent Representative

10-59199

S/PV.6405

of Timor-Leste, for her presence here and for the
statement she delivered earlier.
As an active member of the core group on TimorLeste, the Philippines welcomes the recent positive
developments emanating from that country. At present,
the Philippines contingent in UNMIT and United
Nations police has a total of 137 personnel serving in
the country, 14 of them women. As the drawdown plan
is carried out in the coming months, many of them will
of course look forward to successfully finishing their
tour of duty and leaving Timor-Leste and its people on
the path to peace and stability.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/522), the general political and security
situation in the country has improved substantially.
There is now intensified focus on measures and
initiatives needed to sustain stability, deepen
democracy and the rule of law, reduce poverty and
strengthen civic and judicial institutions. The Timorese
Government,
political
parties,
civil
society,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
have joined hands to address crucial development and
governance issues.
On the economic front, the news is upbeat.
Timor-Leste’s economy is bullish and projected to
grow by an impressive 10.4 per cent this year. That
will no doubt strengthen the foundations of the
country’s economic base.
There has been a slight decrease in the crime rate,
as compared to previous months. The Philippines is
pleased to note that the overall crime rate does not pose
a serious threat to the current law and order situation.
The situation in that regard has allowed UNMIT to
gradually reduce the number of its police officers,
thereby allowing the national police to take a more
active role and greater responsibility.
The Philippines welcomes the planned visit of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste, which is being
organized by Japan for November. The visit will no
doubt provide Security Council members with
first-hand information about the country. Their
presence there will further reinforce the commitment of
the United Nations to helping the country to achieve
peace, stability and progress.
While we are encouraged by the good and
encouraging news, the Philippines maintains guarded
optimism over the overall situation. Beneath the

10-59199

current situation there still lie certain concerns that
must be addressed with greater vigour and
determination in the short term. Foremost among these
is the ability of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to take over the role of UNMIT and the United
Nations police. Handing over primary policing
responsibilities to the PNTL will require sustained and
concentrated efforts to ensure that it will provide a
strong foundation for long-term institution- and
capacity-building. Strengthening civilian oversight and
management capacities over State security forces is
equally critical. In sum, there is still more work to do.
The
latest
positive
developments
have
emboldened UNMIT to implement a downsizing plan
throughout 2010, in close coordination with the
Government of Timor-Leste. As the situation continues
to improve and as we see the readiness of the Timorese
Government and people to take responsibility for their
own peace and security, what will remain for UNMIT
to do is to sketch an exit strategy that is realistic,
practical, transparent and cost-effective. As we clearly
saw in 2006, the premature disengagement of UNMIT
could produce catastrophic consequences for TimorLeste. Even closer coordination among UNMIT, the
Timorese Government and all stakeholders is needed as
the UNMIT mandate expires.
At this point, I wish to assure you, Mr. President,
and all of our partners in the United Nations, especially
the core group on Timor-Leste, that the Philippines
stands ready to do its part to contribute to the success
of UNMIT and to the ongoing and future peacebuilding
efforts in Timor-Leste.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank Ambassador
Borges and Special Representative Haq for their
presentations, and the Secretary-General for his
encouraging but balanced report (S/2010/522) on the
situation in Timor-Leste.
I also wish to convey New Zealand’s condolences
to the Government and people of Japan and to the
family of former Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kawakami on his untimely passing.
On this occasion, I am accompanied by His
Excellency Mr. Tim McIvor, New Zealand’s
Ambassador to Timor-Leste.

25

S/PV.6405

Timor-Leste faces a critical period of transition
from a situation of fragility and instability to one
focused on long-term development and the challenges
of the future. The choices and investments that are
made over the next 18 months will determine whether
the nation-building of recent years will be sustained
and have an impact on Timor-Leste’s future political,
economic and international outlook. In short, the
coming 18 months present a challenge to which we
must collectively respond, and an opportunity that
must not be squandered.
The Secretary-General’s report evidences the
considerable progress of the past six months across all
areas of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). The security
situation has remained calm, enabling a drawdown in
the International Stabilisation Force. There has been
real progress towards the full transfer of executive
policing authority to the Policia Nacional de TimorLeste (PNTL). Double-digit growth has continued,
enabling progress in addressing poverty, and there have
been further advances in building the capacity and
effectiveness of core State institutions. We now see an
increasingly confident country determined to chart its
own future course. That is nowhere more evident than
in the drafting of the National Strategic Development
Plan, which includes a programme of nation-wide
consultations personally led by the Prime Minister.
All of that is cause for optimism, but over the
next 18 months we must preserve those gains and
deliver further progress in key areas. We must ensure
that the coming election consolidates the stable
democratic political culture that has emerged in recent
years, and that the institutions established to support
effective public management and guard against
corruption have sufficient resources and political
support to execute their duties effectively and
impartially. Timor-Leste will increasingly take the lead
in addressing those challenges, with support from the
international community. We need to give careful
thought as to how best we can support those efforts.
Planning for a post-UNMIT Timor-Leste must
begin now, because UNMIT’s mandate for 2011 must
reflect key aspects of the transition. We are therefore
pleased that discussions have begun with the
Government for the joint management of that
transition, including the establishment of a high-level
steering group. We stress the importance of drawing in
other international partners, in due course, to ensure

26

the effective coordination of international support in
this critical period.
Transition management will be particularly
crucial in the security sector. Over the past year,
considerable progress has been made in building the
capacity of the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de TimorLeste (F-FDTL) and the PNTL, and in establishing the
legislative, policy and operational frameworks for
defence and security.
We can now with some confidence envisage a
time when Timor-Leste will be able to provide for its
own security without a United Nations police or
international security forces presence. We do not know
exactly when that will be, but we do know that UNMIT
and the International Stabilisation Force will be there
to provide support through to the 2012 elections.
Whether they have a role beyond that must be decided
by the Government in consultation with the
international community. It is vital that serious
planning begin now to ensure a smooth transition and a
withdrawal that does not negatively affect the security
or economic situation. In this regard, completion of the
transfer of executive policing authority to the PNTL
will be crucial. Impressive progress has been made
over the past year, with district-by-district handovers
moving much more smoothly than was expected, but
challenges remain, particularly in Dili.
Significant issues remain to be resolved. In
particular, we urge an early resolution to the status of
uncertified officers who have been accused of serious
crimes. New Zealand fully shares the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns in that regard. It is important that
this be resolved, not only for transferring police
authority, but also for maintaining the longer-term
integrity, reputation and effectiveness of the PNTL.
The requirement to build the operational
capabilities of the PNTL in key areas is also important.
This needs enhanced investment by the PNTL in
developing those capabilities, and careful planning to
ensure they are sustainable. The United Nations can
make an important contribution here, particularly in
deciding how to dispose of its assets during the
drawdown process. Its planning must be carefully
coordinated with the PNTL and the donor community,
and provision must be made for the long-term
maintenance and use of transferred equipment.
One practical contribution the United Nations
could consider would be to train mechanics to maintain

10-59199

S/PV.6405

and repair motor vehicles. In fact, the United Nations
should consider transferring the UNMIT transport and
workshop facility in Dili to the PNTL.
With the transfer of executive policing authority,
the role, size and composition of United Nations police
must also change, as must its relationship with the
PNTL. Deploying experts will be crucial, so we urge
the early deployment of the 19 additional civilian
advisers who were approved in the most recent budget.
As this transition unfolds, it will be important that
Mission planners retain flexibility to ensure that
UNMIT adapts to the changing environment and that,
once policing has been transferred, the PNTL is seen to
be exercising the authority it has received with support
and assistance from the Mission.
New Zealand is playing its part in supporting the
development of the PNTL. For some years, our police
have successfully worked with their PNTL counterparts
to build an understanding of community policing.
Integrating police into their communities and building
trust between communities and police are essential to
building an effective modern police force — so much
so that the Timorese Government has highlighted
assistance on community policing as a priority on a
bilateral basis.
Over the past year, there has been significant
progress with key security sector reforms. The
Government has approved new defence and security
laws; a draft national security policy is now with the
Council of Ministers; and there are signs of clearer
demarcation of the roles of the PNTL and F-FDTL.
With the Government having articulated its vision
for the security sector, the focus of the Mission and
other international partners should now shift to
capacity-building, assistance and support. The United
Nations is providing advisers in the defence and
security administrations — assistance that will remain
necessary for some time yet. But international
personnel, in our view, should be working to make
their presence unnecessary, rather than becoming
entrenched in line positions.
Bilateral partners will also have a role to play in
the next phase of international assistance to TimorLeste, and we urge those partners to work closely with
the Timorese Government in that regard. As assistance
shifts from security to other priorities, New Zealand is
committed to aligning its support with Timor-Leste’s

10-59199

national development priorities,
Millennium Development Goals.

including

the

New Zealand believes that the United Nations
can be rightly proud of its contribution to Timor-Leste,
but must now look to manage the transition in a
manner that honours that contribution, and must plan
for a post-UNMIT future where its support is focused
on Timor-Leste’s priorities and where the United
Nations can best add value.
New Zealand again assures the Council of its
ongoing commitment to Timor-Leste, its people and its
leaders, as well as to Ameerah Haq and to UNMIT, as
they face this exciting and challenging transition. They
all have our support.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, head of the delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the floor to the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration.
I want to start by greeting the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Sofia Borges, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ameerah Haq, and by expressing gratitude for their
insightful briefings on the situation in Timor-Leste — a
situation that, as we can also read in the excellent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/522) before us,
has continued to improve steadily in many ways.
During the reporting period, we saw yet another
milestone: the closure of the last transitional shelter for
internally displaced persons. With the humanitarian
phase brought to a close, the country is now able to
fully focus on consolidating peace and justice and on
eradicating poverty. It will find the European Union
not on the sidelines, but by its side. Timor-Leste can
count on our assistance in the future.
I will structure my remarks on current and future
challenges according to the four priority areas of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), the well-led Mission that is supporting
Timor-Leste. These are review and reform of the

27

S/PV.6405

security sector, strengthening the rule of law, economic
and social development, and promoting a culture of
democratic governance and dialogue.
First and foremost, on security, the importance of
a professional, impartial and accountable national
police service cannot be stressed enough. Although
there is still a premium on prudence, the handovers to
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) have so
far been encouraging, with crime rates roughly at the
same levels as before. UNMIT capacity-building of the
PNTL remains crucial if such progress is to take hold
over the long term. Of course, there is more to security
than policing. The important comprehensive security
sector reform involves not just security and defence
forces, but also border control, customs and the justice
sector.
That brings me to the second priority: the rule of
law. The increased budget allocation and the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan show the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to this crucial sector. The
performance of the justice sector has improved and
accountability is on the rise. Nevertheless, impunity
remains an issue. Causes for concern are ongoing
human rights abuses by the security forces themselves
and the high number of reported incidents of genderbased violence.
While clamping down on today’s violations, we
should never lose sight of what happened yesterday.
Redressing past human rights abuses helps to
re-establish and reinforce the rule of law and should
therefore remain a priority. We welcome and encourage
the ongoing efforts to create an institution that would
take forward the recommendations of the Commission
for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, as well as
those of the Commission of Truth and Friendship. It is
our hope that the Timor-Leste Parliament will soon
resume and wrap up discussions on the relevant draft
laws.
Third, on socio-economic development, TimorLeste is recovering from the economic setbacks of the
past, with poverty having dropped by an estimated
9 per cent in the past three years. The careful
management of oil revenues and the new National
Strategic Development Plan could together serve to
jumpstart economic growth and poverty reduction. The
Government is to be commended for conducting such
wide-ranging consultations on the plan. We are looking
forward to receiving the final version, so that we can

28

align our assistance with it. These are the issues that
we believe the plan should prioritize: fostering
long-term rural development, reducing unemployment,
especially among young people, and improving social
services, especially health and education.
Fourthly, on governance, the Government of
Timor-Leste has made great strides. Public finance
management has been reformed, leaving the State more
transparent and more accountable. A Civil Service
Commission and an Anti-Corruption Commission were
put in place. The Anti-Corruption Commission must
now become truly operational. The establishment of an
independent technical secretariat, an independent
procurement commission and the Audit Court also
constitute important future steps.
In closing, the general election scheduled for
2012 will be an important milestone for Timor-Leste’s
democracy. In our view, the presence of UNMIT in the
country should be maintained at an appropriate level
during the critical election year. In the meantime, we
believe the preparation of an operational strategy to
transform UNMIT from a peacekeeping into a
peacebuilding mission deserves special attention, with
the exact details to be worked out between, of course,
the Timor-Leste Government and the United Nations.
That is why we commend them for creating a joint
committee to execute the mission’s transformation with
care. And that will entail taking into account the reality
on the ground, as well as potentially negative effects
on the local economy. We look forward to receiving
regular updates on the committee’s work.
Beyond 2012, the international community’s
commitment to Timor-Leste needs to be different, but
no less strong. The European Union will continue to be
guided by a proverb from Timor-Leste: “Solidariedade
nos bons e maus momentos”, or in other words,
solidarity in the good and bad moments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Dye (South Africa): I would like to convey
my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for providing my
delegation with the opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the Secretary-General’s report on
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). As a member of the core group on TimorLeste, South Africa remains very interested in
developments in that country. We thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for her statement and

10-59199

S/PV.6405

join other speakers in honouring the memory of the
Deputy Special Representative Kawakami. We convey
South Africa’s support to his successor, Mr. Mochida.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
activities of UNMIT contained in document
S/2010/522.
South Africa also welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative to Timor-Leste,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, and thanks her for her briefing in
the Council this morning. We are particularly pleased
with the Special Representative’s continued interaction
with a broad range of stakeholders aimed at
encouraging a sustained consultative and democratic
decision-making process in Timor-Leste. It is our view
that political dialogue among all the parties is the only
way by which Timor-Leste can continue to strengthen
its political institutions and processes aimed at making
its statehood strong and sustainable.
Our delegation has noted all of the areas
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report, but it
also wishes to emphasize two priority areas, namely,
good governance and the transition from UNMIT’s
mandate. South Africa is pleased to see that the overall
situation in the reporting period was calm and that it
provided an “enabling environment” for the Timorese
Government to give renewed attention to the
challenges facing that country. The Government of
Timor-Leste should redouble its efforts to strengthen
State institutions. We also encourage the Timorese
Government to strengthen its relationship with the
Timorese people, in order to respond effectively to the
needs of its population.
South Africa believes that there is a direct link
between development and security and that these are
mutually reinforcing. In that regard we welcome the
finalization of the Prime Minister’s draft strategic
development plan for 2011-2030, which identifies
strategic areas of growth in the Timorese economy with
the goal of transforming the economy from low income
to upper middle income by 2030. Especially
encouraging are the intensive direct consultations the
Prime Minister undertook with the population of
Timor-Leste to ensure support for the project and that
the plan addresses the needs of the people of TimorLeste. For peace, security and development to be
sustainable, it is essential that local communities
participate in the country’s development and benefit
directly. We encourage the Prime Minister to work

10-59199

towards the earliest possible implementation of this
plan.
My delegation also welcomes the President’s
continued dialogue initiative on the theme “Road to
peace and national unity” as an important step towards
the strengthening of peace and reconciliation efforts
throughout the country. This effort to promote dialogue
and mutual respect is effective and should be sustained.
As a result of that initiative, we have noted, for
example, that the main opposition party, the Frente
Revolucionária do Timor-Leste Independente (Fretilin),
respects the current political institutions and processes
in spite of having denied the legitimacy of the current
Government. Stable political societies allow for the
existence of opposition groups and provide channels
for those groups to freely express their concerns. This
is an encouraging development, and we reiterate our
support for the further development of political
institutions in Timor-Leste. We call on all political
parties to continue to actively demonstrate their
commitment to the democratic processes in TimorLeste, especially during the forthcoming election
period. It is essential that the elections take place in an
atmosphere of mutual respect.
With regard to UNMIT’s mandate, South Africa
welcomes the progress made in the resumption of
primary policing responsibilities by the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL). It is encouraging that
only a small number policing districts remain to be
handed over. However, we have noted that almost all of
them are located in the Dili area and that significant
challenges remain with regard to certifying police
officers in those districts. We are also concerned about
the significant logistical challenges that face police
stations. It is essential for UNMIT to hand over
primary policing responsibilities, but it can only do so
if the process is credible and sustainable.
In addition, policing authorities in any country
must be viewed as legitimate in the eyes of their
communities. It is therefore essential to further
enhance effective disciplinary mechanisms, command
and control structures and weapons control
mechanisms. We reiterate our call for increased gender
sensitivity in the execution of police duties, as a high
percentage of crimes result from gender-based
violence.
We welcome the promulgation by President
Ramos-Horta of the national security legislative

29

S/PV.6405

package, which is specifically aimed at strengthening
the security and justice sectors. We have noted the
Secretary-General’s call for this development to be
operationalized through subsidiary legislation that will,
among others, provide greater clarity on the delineation
between the responsibilities of the military and civilian
police.
With regard to UNMIT specifically, our
delegation supports the view that the reconfiguration of
UNMIT should be approached in a sensitive manner,
with specific focus on the need to provide sufficient
support to the PNTL in terms of training, capacitybuilding, advising, mentoring and institutional
development. Moreover, every effort should be made to
complete the drawdown and handover by the deadlines
determined by Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1912 (2010) adopted in February. We
encourage UNMIT to continue its consultations with
the Government on the transition planning. In this
regard, we welcome the establishment of an oversight
mechanism between the Government and UNMIT.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
positive developments in Timor-Leste during the
reporting period and stands ready to support the
processes ahead as a member of the core group. We
remain committed to the vision of a stable and strong
Timor-Leste that can use its peace dividend for the
prosperity of all of its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you for
giving me the floor, Sir, and I wish to congratulate you
on your presidency of the Security Council. We believe
that it is particularly important that the Security
Council stay actively engaged with Timor-Leste. In this
context we welcome the visit scheduled for November.
I also wish to thank our dear colleague Ambassador
Sofia Borges and Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for their presentations, as well as the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and valuable report
(S/2010/522).
Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
But, as a representative of a country that has a long,
shared history with Timor-Leste and as an active
member of the core group, I would like to underline
some specific points.

30

Portugal praises the encouraging achievements in
Timor-Leste during this reporting period and the
continuing stable environment, as a credit to TimorLeste’s determination to long-term peace, stability and
development. In assessing these achievements, it is
important to acknowledge how far Timor-Leste has
come in the few short years since its independence, but
it is equally important not to lose sight of the
significant challenges that lie ahead. Elections
scheduled to take place in 2012 will test the capacity
and resilience of Timor-Leste’s national institutions
and the progress made towards a stable democratic
political environment and culture.
We are aware of the profound social and
economic challenges still faced by Timor-Leste in
terms of fighting poverty, building an economy that
extends beyond oil, and ensuring that the young
Timorese will have the skills, training and
opportunities that they need to take charge of their
future. Problems such as slow agricultural
development, youth underemployment and lack of
human resources are hampering the recovery and
reconstruction process and having a fundamental
repercussion on the social cohesion of Timor-Leste.
These issues must be taken very seriously in the near
future.
On the other hand, it is encouraging that
continued advances were made in all four of the
mandated areas of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), including dialogue
initiatives on critical national issues, the achievements
on the resumption of primary policing responsibilities
by the national police, the promulgation of the national
security legislative package, the adoption of the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan and, last but not least, the
presentation of the National Strategic Development
Plan.
Further efforts are, however, required to
overcome
the
political,
institutional
and
socio-economic weaknesses that contributed to the
events of 2006. The continued good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will be
crucial to facilitating the political dialogue with
national political actors as Timor-Leste approaches the
next general elections, which will be held by 2012.
Long-term security and stability will also depend
on the capacity of the Timorese institutions to function
in an effective, responsible and accountable way, with

10-59199

S/PV.6405

due respect for the rule of law and benefiting from
public confidence and support. To facilitate full and
effective progress towards the full reconstitution of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), a
reinvigorated partnership between the PNTL and the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) is required. A clear vision of the relationship
between the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de Timor-Leste
and the National Police, as well as of their respective
tasks, is also crucial. In this context, we reiterate that
additional steps should be taken to facilitate the closest
possible coordination of the support of the
international community and bilateral donors.
However, no true progress will be achievable if
the sustainable socio-economic development of the
country is not made a priority. We support the
Government of Timor-Leste in its continuing efforts to
increase input into infrastructure development,
education and vocational training, and we call on the
international community to provide more assistance to
the Government and Timorese people in those relevant
fields.
We are aware that a number of fundamental
issues will require sustained, long-term attention well
beyond the date of 2012. For this purpose, Portugal
welcomes the preparation of a strategy to guide
UNMIT’s transition beyond 2012. The consolidation of
those goals will require the sustained engagement and
support of the international community, in full respect
for the Timorese people’s own choices regarding their
country.
Portugal remains fully engaged in supporting
Timor-Leste and remains a major bilateral donor in a
wide spectrum of areas, including governance and
public administration, justice, education and security
sector reform, and by contributing over 200 police and
military liaison officers to UNMIT and fully supporting
all areas under the responsibility of the Mission.
The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
shown their resolve to build a peaceful, democratic and
stable society. To that end, we will maintain our
engagement and solidarity with the Timorese, and we
encourage and support Ameerah Haq and the entire
team of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
carrying out their invaluable work.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste.

10-59199

Ms. Haq: First of all, I want to thank and convey
my sincere appreciation to all the members of the
Council for all their expressions of support for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), for acknowledging the work done by
UNMIT, and for their strong words in support of the
continued progress of the people of Timor-Leste
towards peace and stability. I specifically would like to
thank members of the Council who expressed their
agreement concerning the jointly owned planning and
implementation mechanism, and I fully acknowledge
the strong emphasis that was made by some members
of the Council that it must be established jointly, with a
strong emphasis on the national ownership of this
process. We feel that an effective transition strategy
will lay the foundations necessary to ensure the success
of post-peacekeeping efforts as Timor-Leste moves
into the peacebuilding arena.
I would also like to take note of all the
observations that were made with respect to the
reconfiguration of UNMIT police, the expressions of
caution taken against hasty handovers, which we fully
appreciate, and the need for a sufficient presence in all
the districts and units to emphasize monitoring,
training and mentoring and the continued need for
capacity-building. In this context, many representatives
particularly mentioned the 2012 elections as the test of
the stability and effectiveness of the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL).
While everyone, I think, commented very
favourably on the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, we also take note of some the concerns
expressed with respect to the preparation of the PNTL
in laying the groundwork for longer-term development.
I can assure the Council that we will continue to work
with the authorities in Timor-Leste in a concerted
manner on the remaining units and districts.
There was also a reference to the delineation of
roles between the military and the police. This kind of
sector-wide reform is a complex process. It takes up a
lot of time; it does not really have an end-point, but I
think that the commitment to the current and ensuing
legislation from the national security package must
continue. We will obviously address the continuing
needs of this operationalization of the laws and the
issues of delineation contained therein.
Many speakers raised concerns about impunity
and, as we have indicated, we certainly share this

31

S/PV.6405

concern. Primarily, as many have said, perceptions of
impunity can undermine public confidence in the rule
of law. I should point out that this can happen because
of institutional or individual capacity challenges — for
example, the difficulties that citizens have in accessing
justice because of linguistic difficulties, the need for
more trained court actors and the lack of infrastructure.
Again, we must address this comprehensively.
Many members of the Council have spoken about
socio-economic development, emphasizing the need for
employment and taking into account the social
instability that can be caused by large numbers of
unemployed young people.
I also note with gratitude the continued strong
indications of future bilateral support to Timor-Leste.
That is crucial as we enter the transitional phase and
we will continue to consult closely, obviously, and
coordinate closely with the bilateral partners.
Finally, much emphasis has been placed on the
continued culture of dialogue and reconciliation, and I
can assure members of the Council that that part of the
Mission’s mandate will remain very much at the
forefront.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for your continued support and

32

guidance. I think that this keen interest will be evident
on the ground in the Council’s upcoming visit. We
welcome that visit, and we would like to thank the
Government of Japan for its role in organizing it.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Japan for its role as Chair of the core group. I would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Portugal and South Africa, two very active members of
the core group, on their election to the Security
Council. We certainly know that Timor-Leste will
benefit from that important membership.
Finally, let me thank you very much,
Mr. President, for your leadership and for the
tremendous support that you have brought to bear on
the work that UNMIT continues to do in Timor-Leste.
We continue to appreciate and seek the wise counsel
and guidance of this body.
The President: I thank Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

10-59199
