S/PV.9070

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9070th meeting

Tuesday, 21 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Alolama
Mr. Eckersley
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39266 (E)
*2239266*

S/PV.9070

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to bring to the attention of the Council
the following points from the Panel’s report.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing by
His Excellency Mr. Harold Adlai Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of Ghana, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Agyeman.
Mr. Agyeman: In accordance with paragraph 3 (a)
(iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the honour to brief
the Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, on the period from 29 March
to today.
During the reporting period, the Committee met
once in informal consultations and received the first
quarterly update of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan.
On 8 April, the Committee had a briefing by the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan on its programme of
work for the period 2022 to 2023. The Coordinator
provided the Committee with an overview of the
Panel’s intended areas of investigation and monitoring
in accordance with the mandates, as extended until
12 March 2023 by resolution 2620 (2022). On 14 April,
the Committee issued a press release (SC/14863)
regarding that briefing.
On 3 June, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
submitted its first quarterly update to the Committee.
The Panel updated us on the pace of the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement, regional dynamics, the
status of the armed groups in the region, intercommunal
violence and reported violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
2/6

21/06/2022

The Panel reported that the significant development
in the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement was
the ongoing training of approximately 2,000 members
of the signatory armed movements in El Fasher, which
would form part of the security-keeping force established
in accordance with the Juba Peace Agreement. The
Panel informed the Committee on the security situation
in Darfur, including on the intercommunal violence and
the situation in West Darfur, where some elements of
the Juba Peace Agreement clashed in March and April.
In terms of regional dynamics, the Panel reported
that the regional context remained largely favourable to
the peace process in Darfur and that all the neighbouring
States continue to support the Juba Peace Agreement
and its implementation.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the sanctions regime was established for
the sole purpose of helping to bring peace to Darfur. Its
purpose is not to punish the Sudan but to support the
attainment of sustainable peace.
In resolution 2620 (2022), the Council expresses its
intention to consider, by 31 August 2022, establishing
clear, well-identified and realistic key benchmarks,
with readiness to consider adjusting relevant measures
to respond to the situation in Darfur in the light of the
evolving situation on the ground.
The 1591 Committee reiterates its commitment to
working together with the Sudan and all the relevant
stakeholders to make that a reality.
The President: I thank Ambassador Agyeman for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We took note of the report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan covering the past 90 days, which
was presented by Mr. Harold Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of Ghana. We welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan in
this meeting.
The sanctions against the Sudan were imposed by
the Security Council to peacefully resolve the armed
conflict in Darfur. The Security Council thereby sought
22-39266

21/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to compel the Darfur insurgents and the Government of
the Sudan to fully implement their obligations under the
agreements reached in Ndjamena, Abuja and Nairobi in
2004 and 2005.
The situation in the country and Darfur has
changed significantly since the adoption, 17 years
ago, of resolution 1591 (2005), partly thanks to the
work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur from 2007 to 2021. Following the
conclusion of the Juba Peace Agreement, which was
initialled in August 2020, State-building and the social
and economic development of Darfur have become the
priorities. The establishment of a joint security force,
composed of members of the groups that signed the
agreement, is intended to bring lasting stability to the
region, strengthen the rule of law and curb outbreaks of
violence there.
Against that backdrop, the Security Council
sanctions have lost their purpose and no longer serve
the political process. The sanctions are also hampering
the Sudanese Government’s efforts in the region and
preventing it from supplying the security force that
is being established with the necessary weapons and
equipment. It is no coincidence that the Government
of the Sudan has repeatedly raised the issue of lifting
the arms embargo against its country, but the Security
Council has not responded to those appeals.
The continuation of the sanctions measures
against the Sudan and attempts to undermine the
previous decisions of the Security Council regarding
the benchmarks for reviewing the arms embargo
strengthen our conviction that that is done in order to
exert political pressure, regardless of the consequences
for ordinary Sudanese people.
The adoption of resolution 2620 (2022) on
15 February established a new deadline of 31 August of
this year for formulating clear and realistic benchmarks
with the aim of reviewing the measures regarding the
Sudan. We hope that, in the course of the process and
through constructive dialogue, the Security Council
will make it possible to fulfil that task.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China): (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Ambassador Agyeman of Ghana, the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the
Sudan, for his briefing and welcomes the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.

S/PV.9070

The Darfur region of the Sudan is at a critical stage
of transitioning from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Its
security situation is largely stable but remains fragile,
with some violent incidents, including occasional
intercommunal clashes. China applauds the efforts
of the Sovereignty Council for maintaining stability
in Darfur.
After the withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Government
of the Sudan has assumed the primary responsibility
for protection of civilians. The Council should make
timely adjustments to the sanctions on the Sudan in the
light of the evolving situation and create conditions that
will enable the Government to strengthen its capacity
to protect civilians. Resolution 2620 (2022) calls for
the establishment of clear, well-defined and realistic
benchmarks for adjusting the sanctions on the Sudan
by 31 August, and China hopes that those requirements
can be implemented in a timely manner.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): I want to
thank Ambassador Agyeman for his useful quarterly
update on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan.
The United States would like to reiterate its full
support for the Sudanese-led political process to resolve
the crisis that followed the October 2021 military
takeover. We fully endorse the facilitation of that
process by the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the
African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to resolve the crisis.
The United States stands with the Sudanese people
in their pursuit of a democratic and prosperous Sudan
that fully respects human rights. Progress in Darfur is
inextricably linked to the re-establishment of a civilianled transitional Government, but the situation in Darfur
remains volatile and dangerous. The increasing violence
has exacerbated the dire humanitarian situation on the
ground and endangers the potential of the Juba Peace
Agreement to contribute effectively to a sustainable
peace in Darfur. Concrete steps are also needed to
ensure justice and accountability for the victims in
Darfur and the Two Areas.
Transparent and inclusive transitional justice
processes are essential components of any durable
peace in Darfur. We condemn the increased violence
and its impact on civilians, including the most recent

22-392663/6

S/PV.9070

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence in West Darfur, which led to the displacement
of an estimated 125,000 people. That is simply
unacceptable. An urgent investigation must identify
and hold accountable those responsible. Those troubling
events demonstrate the urgent need for the protection
of civilians, inclusive security-sector reform and the
establishment of robust international monitoring and
reporting mechanisms. The Sudanese authorities are
responsible for civilian security in the region and must
address the root causes of violence.
Unfortunately, the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement is significantly behind schedule.
We note the modest progress made so far, including in
operationalizing the Permanent Ceasefire Committee,
as well as the ongoing steps to deploy the joint securitykeeping forces in Darfur. Delays in implementing the
Juba Peace Agreement contribute to insecurity. We
therefore call on the Sudanese authorities and the
armed movement signatories to redouble their efforts.
The Juba Peace Agreement signatories must bring back
their fighters from abroad and engage in the Sudan’s
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process.
The United States supports the recommendation
of the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committee
that the Sudanese Government should establish the
DDR Commission with branch offices in the five
states of Darfur and provide it with adequate capacity
and resources. We are committed to continuing
close collaboration within the Security Council with
UNITAMS, the AU and other key stakeholders to
promote peace and security in Darfur.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking Ambassador Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of Ghana, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for his
briefing on the Committee’s activities.
It has been 17 years since a drastic sanctions regime
was imposed on the Sudan, restricting the capacity of
the national security forces at a time when the country
has been facing the hordes of armed groups, most
of them equipped from the Libyan arsenal, that are
plaguing the entire Sahel-Saharan region. I believe it
is high time and crucial that the Council’s actions align
with the aspirations of the Sudanese people and their
desire to live in full security.
4/6

21/06/2022

On the political front, the Council meeting dedicated
to the Sudan and South Sudan held on 28 March
(see S/PV.9006) highlighted the lack of significant
progress made in the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement of 3 October 2020, as stated in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/172). However, one
notable event was the training of approximately 2,000
members of signatory armed movements in El Fasher.
Those elements should join the security-keeping
forces in line with article 29 of chapter 8 of the Juba
Peace Agreement.
The effective implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement, which the international community has
called for in the light of its real prospects of achieving
comprehensive peace in the Sudan, and which is
considered an essential step towards a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous future for the country, is
being hindered by both internal and external factors.
Among the obstacles standing in the way of the Juba
Peace Agreement’s implementation in the Sudan is the
fact that a number of regional and international partners
have made no financial contributions. Nor should we
omit to mention the issue of intercommunal violence,
particularly in Darfur, as well as other areas of the
country. The fact is that the security situation in the
Sudan today continues to be very worrying, and we must
therefore continue to urge the international community
to provide support to the Sudanese Government in
order to accelerate the process of implementing the
Juba Peace Agreement, as well as the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians.
Besides that, the implementation of a number
of aspects of the Juba Peace Agreement, particularly
those relating to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, requires the provision of substantial
organizational, logistic and financial resources. That is
why we are urging the international community to help
realize that effort in a spirit of solidarity. That support
would undoubtedly help to restore peace in the Sudan,
as well as guaranteeing stability in the region. It is
important to recognize that despite the intercommunal
clashes I mentioned, which have led to violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, hope
continues to prevail across large swathes of the country.
The fact is that we are seeing a genuine peace in much
of the country, where the clashes between the Sudanese
armed forces and the armed groups that are not party to
the Peace Agreement have ceased.
22-39266

21/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We should also emphasize that the sanctions regime,
which was established to help the Sudan, cannot and
must not become a cure that is worse than the disease.
The Council must fully appreciate the genuine value of
the positive progress that has been made while bearing
in mind the need to assess and adjust the measures in
place in line with developments in the situation on the
ground, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution
2620 (2022).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country, Madam
President, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June, and to express
our appreciation to the United States for presiding over
the Security Council last month. I also want to thank the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the
Sudan for his briefing on the quarterly report on the
work of the Sanctions Committee.
For the past few years, the Sudan has always
asserted its firm position on the sanctions imposed
on it under resolution 1591 (2005) and subsequent
Security Council resolutions. Our position is that those
sanctions no longer reflect the situation on the ground
in Darfur as compared with 2005, when they were first
imposed, at a time when there was a different regime
in power, with different policies and directives. Darfur
was ultimately able to deal with the war, as well as its
previous political and security challenges, which was
why the Council took the decision to end the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in 2020. UNAMID’s mandate was
to protect civilians. The few intercommunal clashes
that continue in Darfur do not undermine the fact that
the overall situation in Darfur continues to improve
and that the Government is determined to resolve any
remaining social and security challenges, such as the
intermittent intercommunal clashes. Clashes of that
kind could occur in any country, regardless of its status
or location.
I would like to state here that the Government of the
Sudan is fully coordinating its efforts with its partners
in the peace process to implement the provisions
of the Juba Peace Agreement, in spite of our limited
national resources. In that regard, the training of the
first group of forces of movements that are parties to

S/PV.9070

the Agreement is under way. Some 2,000 troops of
those armed groups are now being trained. They will
make up the first group of the security force protecting
civilians in Darfur and will be the first set of troops
of the joint force responsible for maintaining security
in Darfur. There will be 12,000 of them, distributed
evenly between Government forces and the forces of
groups that are parties to the Peace Agreement.
The training of that first group is an essential step
in implementing the security arrangements, which were
previously delayed because of a lack of international
funding and donors who did not keep their promises.
However, the armed factions responded positively to
the decisions taken at the meeting of the Joint Supreme
Council for Security Arrangements held in El Fasher
in March, including on issues relating to weapons
collection in the towns and major cities of states, as
well as on bringing together the forces of armed groups
in areas outside cities.
I should clarify here that according to the provisions
of the Juba Peace Agreement, the Government is
facilitating the work in Darfur of the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee, chaired by the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS). It is important to note that the
Government is committed to upholding the ceasefire
and silencing the guns even with parties that are not
signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, with a view
to building trust and encouraging them to join a lasting
and comprehensive peace process. We underscore that
the transitional Government has demonstrated its firm
political will to implement the provisions of the Juba
Peace Agreement regarding security arrangements and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, as well as establishing and deploying a
joint force for the protection of civilians. The goal is to
strengthen and promote security in Darfur.
We should stress in that regard that these are
difficult and complex tasks, and the Government of
the Sudan will be unable to achieve them alone. We
therefore call on the international community to share
that burden by providing us with the necessary financial
and technical assistance. UNITAMS has also a major
role in that regard. The Sudan is determined to continue
its efforts to improve the security situation in Darfur by
implementing the Juba Peace Agreement and collecting
unauthorized weapons. It will also do so by improving
accountability and justice and implementing a national
plan for the protection of civilians, with the participation

22-392665/6

S/PV.9070

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the parties to the Juba Peace Agreement. And we
will work to negotiate with the Abdul Wahid Mohamed
Al-Nour movement to advance the peace process.
The situation in Darfur has changed. We have
moved from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. It is a
transition in which we hope to receive the support of
the international community so that the transitional
Government can restore peace, security and stability
to the region. The lifting of the sanctions imposed
under resolution 1591 (2005) and the related resolutions
will enable the Sudanese Government to rebuild the
capacity of its security forces and law-enforcement
agencies to maintain and promote peace not only in
Darfur but the entire region. It is a vast region, with
long borders where transnational organized crime
groups are pursuing activities that include trafficking
in persons and weapons and other transnational crimes.
Sanctions have a direct and negative impact on
the stabilization process. That is why we believe
that it is crucial to lift the sanctions immediately.
Comprehensive studies conducted in 2013 showed that
targeted sanctions regimes failed to make a difference
for the targeted populations. Their success rate does
not exceed 10 per cent, with a ceiling of 28 per cent
when it comes to changing negative behaviour. Where
support for the international normative frameworks
is concerned, sanctions have a success rate of only
27 per cent. We also want to stress that the Sudanese
Government has not breached the arms embargo,
despite the impact that it had on our national security.
The situation in the Sudan in 2005 was considered a
threat to international peace and security and therefore
required subsequent extensions of the sanctions
resolution. The current situation is no longer a cause for
international concern, and the incidents that occur in
Darfur require post-conflict management and sustained
peacebuilding. In the wake of the glorious revolution of
December 2018, the fact that UNAMID’s mandate was
terminated is evidence that there is no longer a need for
a United Nations mission to protect civilians in Darfur.

6/6

21/06/2022

The Sudan has expressed its official desire to end the
sanctions. It has conveyed that message to all the Heads
of Delegations at the United Nations and international
envoys who have visited us since the 2018 revolution.
Mike Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States in
the Trump Administration, expressed the readiness of
the United States to put an end to the sanctions regime.
The Sudan submitted a national plan for the protection
of civilians to the Security Council. The priority now is
to implement the Juba Peace Agreement.
We would like to underscore that our Government
is making comprehensive efforts to address the root
causes of intercommunal clashes in Darfur. Achieving
security and stability there is a priority for us. That is
why we sent a high-level delegation to West Darfur
state after the events in Kerenik, Jebel Moon and
Kulbus in order to assess the situation on the ground
and submit recommendations to the Defence Council
and the Sovereignty Council on taking urgent measures,
bringing justice for the victims and prosecuting
those responsible. In order to support peace, the
Vice-President of the Sovereignty Council is currently
visiting the city of El Geneina with representatives of
the parties to the Juba Peace Agreement to check on the
areas affected and determine the best way to restore
law and order and the rule of law. The Council knows
that resolution 1591 (2005) does not allow the State
to send military forces or transfer weapons to Darfur.
At the same time, however, the Government is being
criticized when sporadic violence occurs in the region.
In conclusion, after the end of the war and hostilities,
and after the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement with
the majority of the armed movements participating in
the present Government, the situation in Darfur no
longer poses a threat to international peace and security,
as was the case in 2005 when resolution 1591 (2005)
was adopted and followed by subsequent resolutions.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

22-39266
