TWENTY-TH

RD YEAR

MEETING:

21 MAY 1968

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1426)

. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . , . ,. . , . .. . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . ,. .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . .. . . .. . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
ful Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan
* addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(bl Report
of the Secretary-General
under General Assembly
resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146)
.. , . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . .
t¶3

SIPV. 1426

’
1

!

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security ‘Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 21 May 1968, at 4 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON

(United Kingdom

4. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): At the 1425th meeting of the
Security Council, held yesterday, the Pakistan delegation
had the honour to introduce, on behalf of the delegation of
Senegal and itself,, the draft resolution contained in
document S/8590. As a result of further consultations held
today, a revised version of that draft resolution has been
circulated as document S/8590/Rev.2. I shall read out the
text of the revised draft resolution.
,

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia. France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“The Security Council,

Provisional agenda (WAgendaD426)

1. Adoption

“Recalling General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V)
of 4 July 1967 and 2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967,

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
/al Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressedto the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8 146).

“Having considered the letter of the Permanent Representative of Jordan on the situation in Jerusalem
(S/8560) and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/8146),
“Having heard the statements made before the Council,
“Noting that since the adoption of the abovementioned resolutions Israel has taken further measures
and actions in contravention of those resolutions,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

“Bearing in mind the need to work for a just and lasting
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(f~) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem

peace,

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.

“2. Considers that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of land and properties thereon, which tend to
change the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and
cannot change that status;

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

“3. Urgently calls upon Israel to rescind all such
measures already taken and to desist forthwith from
taking any further action which tends to change the
status of Jerusalem;

‘Reaffirming that acquisition of territory by military
conquest is inadmissible,

“1. Deplores the failure of Israel to comply with the
General Assembly resolutions mentioned above;

(S/8146).

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it.

“4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution.”

3. I invite the attention of the Council to the fact that
since our meeting yesterday a revised text of the draft
resolution sponsored by Pakistan and Senegal has been
submitted. This revised text is before us in document
S/8590/Rev.2.

5. The changes which are included in the revised draft
resolution will be apparent from a comparison of the two
texts. The co-sponsors and the other Asian, African and
1

apart from other aspects of the situation in the Middle East
with which resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 is
concerned; nor do we believe that Jerusalem can be
excluded from the scope of the resolution of 22 November.
Rather we consider it essential that a peaceful and accepted
settlement, in conformity with the resolution of 22
November, encompass all aspects of the Middle East
problem including Jerusalem. We have sensed general
agreement with this view among the members of the
Council.

Latin American delegations which jointly evolved the
earlier text are grateful for the suggestions made during the
consultations, These suggestions have resulted in a revision
of the text which, besides accommodating some important
viewpoints, hasant it great precision.
6. In my statement yesterday I made it clear that the legal
measures and administrative actions which the draft resolution seeks to invalidate and forbid are those measures and
actions which have already been taken or are contemplated
by Israel in an attempt to change the status of Jerusalem.
The revised version of operative paragraphs 2 and 3 brings
out this intent with greater clarity. It is the belief of the
seven African, Asian and Latin American delegations that
the revised version of the draft resolution will command the
Council’s support.

13. Nevertheless, in our view, the draft resolution
presented and to be voted on this afternoon, would
unfortunately work in the direction of separating out and
dealing in isolation with one particular aspect of the Middle
East situation, the question of Jerusalem. This is not the
course envisaged in resolution 242 (1967) of last November, a resolution which we beiicve must remain the
touchstone of all steps towards a desirable settlement in the
Middle East. It is not, accordingly, a course which my
Government favours with regard to Jerusalem or any other
of the many specific problems which must be resolved to
arrive at the peaceful and accepted settlement called for in
resolution 242 (1967).

7. Considering the urgency of the issue, and also the
Council’s preoccupation with other pressing business, my
delegation would greatly appreciate it if the Council, after
having heard all the representatives who wish to make
statements this afternoon, would proceed to vote on the
revised draft resolution.
8. Mr. ‘GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States had strongly hoped that in dealing with the
question of Jerusalem it would have been possible for this
Council to act with the same unanimous agreement that has
characterized the handling of every facet of the Middle East
situation which has come before the Council since the
Middle East war erupted last June. We backed up that hope
with intensive consultations to formulate the elements of a
draft resolution which could command unanimous support.
We greatly regret that these efforts were not successful and
that our hope was not fulfilled.

14. As I stated to the Council on 9 May 1968, at the
1424th meeting, the United States believes that one of the
most constructive contributions that this Council could
make at this juncture of the difficult search for a Middle
East settlement would be an explicit expression of its
support for the peace-making efforts in which Mr. Jarring,
at the unanimous behest of this Council, has been and
remains engaged. The absence of this element from the
draft resolution, and indeed the notable absence of expressed recognition of the resolution of 22 November, is a
further reason why my Government cannot support this
draft resolution. Further, the United States is not in a
position to vote favourably on a text which contains
specific and selective reference to two General Assembly
resolutions among many on which we previously abstained
for reasons explained at the time of their adoption.

9. While sharing many of the concerns which have
motivated members of the Council who have supported the
draft resolution submitted by Pakistan and Senegal, the
United States finds it impossible to lend its support to that
draft resolution. I wish to use this oCcasion to explain
briefly the reasons why we have come to this conclusion.

15. Every member of this Council, as well as the parties
concerned, knows that the United States has made a
maximum effort to build upon the basis which exists for
unanimity in this Council’s settlement of the question
immediately before 11s ir this dnbate. We hhv: bten
prepared, to declare, as everyone knows, that unilateral
actions and measures by Israel cannot be accepted and are
not recognized as altering or prejudging the status of
Jerusalem, and we have been ready to call upon Israel to
refrain from such actions. At the same time, we have
regarded it as essential that the Council should call upon all
parties to avoid all acts that might prejudice efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace in the area and that it
should express its support for Mr. Jarring’s efforts under
resolution 242 (1967).

10. Fundamental to our position have been two convictions: first, that this Council should encourage and support
the peace-making process which we initiated in November
.1967 in Security Council resolution 242 (1967); second,
that this Council, and indeed all concerned, should avoid
any action that might prejudice the efforts to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the area, including actions or measures
purporting to alter the status of Jerusalem. We find the
draft resolution placed before us seriously deficient on
these two counts.
Il. Our own view has been and remains that the future of
Jerusalem is a problem which falls within the purview of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and of Mr, Jarring’s
mission and mandate.

16. It is simply incomprehensible to the United States that
such a reference should not be included in this draft
resolution, For the members of the Council, the search for
a peaceful and accepted settlement is not only an opportunity; it is a responsibility, and it is one which all members

12. I wish to reaffirm the view of the United States
Government that the United States, while agreeing that
Jerusalem is a most important issue, does not believe that
the problem of Jerusalem can be dealt with realistically
2

of this Council assumed when they empowered the Secretary-General’s representative to promote agreement and
assist efforts to achieve such a settlement.

provisions laid down in resolution 242 (1967). They pose a
threat to the continued validity of that resolution and
indeed to the search for a peaceful settlement.

17. I very much regret that it has not been possible today
to preserve the unanimity which has characterized the
Council’s work since the tragic conflict of last June,
because it is upon unanimity, and not merely the words of
a resolution, that a peaceful settlement in the final analysis
will largely depend. It is nevertheless my profound hope
that it will be possible to return to unanimity in the coming
days and weeks.

22. It is in the light of these considerations that Canada
has examined carefully the issues relating to Jerusalem
placed before us at our current series of meetings. The
Canadian position on Jerusalem has been made amply clear
both in our statements and in our votes in the General
Assembly and in the Security CounciI. We stand by those
statements and we stand by those votes. In our view,
however, the status of Jerusalem and the Holy Places
cannot, in practical terms, be considered or resolved as an
isolated issue. We are opposed to any unilateral actions
which would be prejudicial to the le’gitimate international
concern about that city, to the preservation of the special
spiritual and religious interests there, or to the peaceful and
accepted settlement being sought under the auspices of this
Organization. Such actions are neither helpful nor acceptable, and we cannot condone any steps which would
either alter or attempt to alter unilaterally the status of
Jerusalem or endanger the prospects for a settlement.

18. Mr. President, if you will pardon a personal note:
having participated all through this past year in the
strenuous efforts of the Security Council concerning the
Middle East, I find that my dominent impression is
connected not with any expressions of hostility or bitterness-which
are unfortunate but perhaps inevitable-but
with those few decisive moments in which fifteen nations,
representing all the diverse interests and cultures of the
world, were able to rise above their particular predilectiom
and unite on the necessity that is common to all of us in
this world in which survival still remains an open question,
the necessity to live together in peace and tolerance.

23. The actions of the Council and the statements made in
the Council during the past month have shown that there is
a consensus on those points; in this instance also it should
have been possible, in my judgement, to reach agreement
on such a basis. The Council, I am confident, remains
united in its support of Mr. Jarring’s important mission. I
believe, too, that it remains united on the principle that
nothing should be done to disturb his mission and that it
should receive the fullest support of all concerned.

19. From those decisive moments-especially that moment
last 22 November which will certainly live in United
Nations history-I do not derive any false comfort, for hard
tasks lie ahead; but I do derive much hope from this record
because it moves what we can do together at our best when
we are united in a common dedication to a common cause.
I pray that in future days this Council will perform at its
best again and again until it has overcome even the most
stubborn difficulties on the road towards peace in that area
which, above all, needs a permanent, just and lasting peace.

24. If that assessment is correct, I believe we must all ask
ourselves a question. Will we in fact be assisting Mr. Jarring
in his task if we press the resolution before us to a vote? It
has been clear from the start that the type of resolution on
which we are now expected to vote would not command
unanimous consent in the Council-and the statement to
which we have just listened confirms that judgement. This
draft resolution, if adopted, will be the first resolution
adopted without unanimity since 22 November last, when
we in this Council, by the passage of resolution 242 (1967),
established the basis for the Special Representative’s efforts
to work towards a political solution of the outstanding
problems in the Middle East.

20. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): At the Council’s 1417th
meeting on 27 April, I emphasized the concern of the
Canadian delegation that nothing should be done that
would upset or make more difficult efforts to achieve “a
peaceful and accepted settlement” in accordance with the
unanimously adopted resolution of 22 November last. It is
of course equally important that everything possible should
be done to support and advance the mission undertaken by
the Secretary-General’s representative, Mr. Jarring, under
the terms of resolution 242 (1967). These two principles
reflect my Government’s primary concern in this matter:
the furtherance of progress towards “a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East”.

25. In these circumstances we believe that dividing the
Council to pass a resolution that deals with only one of the
problems covered by resolution 242 (1967) cannot be
helpful and indeed will be self-defeating. The Canadian
delegation will, therefore, abstain from this vote. In our
view, the members of the Council have a special obligation
to try to help find solutions within the primary responsibility of this Council for international peace and security.
That obligation particularly falls on the permament members-and it is well known that this text will not command
the support of all the permanent members. Particularly as
we have proceeded by unanimity in the Council since
November last, it is regrettable that this divisive resolution
should be pressed to a vote.

21. It follows that any step should be avoided which
would weaken the guidelines for a settlement provided in
resolution 242 (1967) or disturb the equitable balance of
obligations laid down in that resolution. That resolution
and the mission of Mr. Jarring which it authorized still
represent our best hope for peace in the Middle East. The
integrity of the resolution, and hence of Mr. Jarring’s
mandate, must be maintained. We must stand by that basic
jurisdiction in this Council. That will only be’ possible,
however, if the parties refrain from actions which tend to
foreclose or predetermine the terms of an agreed settlement. Such actions in effect challenge the principles and

26. To adopt the draft resolution submitted yesterday by
the representative of Pakistan, despite the amendments to
3

which he alluded today, also means, asthe representative of
the Soviet ,Union reminded us at our last meeting, starting
on the road towards the application of sanctions to Israel in
the event that the rescinding required by this resolution is
not complied with. Is that the road we want to follow? Is
it either wise or practical for the Council to pursue the
course of sanctions when it is fully committed to a
diplomatic approach? What will be left of Mr. Jarring’s
mandate if the Council by action on this particular issue
undermines the fine balance of rights and obligations
embodied in resolution 242 (1967) as the basis for an
accepted settlement?
27. The timing of the present move is particularly unfortunate. It is especially regrettable that the Council should
be divided just when Mr. Jarring, who has been entrusted
with an important mission under resolution 242 (1967), has
returned to New York to enter on a new and delicate phase
of his work with far-reaching implications for the prospects
of peace in the Middle East. This is surely a time for unity,
not for division. We should not now divide over one
problem but unite in full support of Mr. Jarring’s important
mission for peace in all its aspects,with the goal of finding
an accepted settlement of the many outstanding problems
in the Middle East.
28. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to express the satisfaction of the Brazilian
delegation at seeing you preside over the deliberations of
this Council. Allow me also to thank Mr. Malik of the
Soviet Union for discharging in such a competent and
skilful manner during April the heavy duties that now
devolve upon you.
29. At this stage of the current Security Council debate on
the question of Jerusalem, I wish to state briefly the
position of my delegation in regard to this problem.
30. As Brazil is one of the founding Members of the
United Nations, this question is not new to us. Twenty
years ago Brazil voted for General Assembly resolution
181 (II), adopted on 29 November’1947, which created
independent Jewish and Arab States in Palestine and
established a special international regime for the city of
Jerusalem under which that city would be considered a
corpus sepuratum to be administered by the Trusteeship
Council on behalf of the United Nations. Brazil also voted
for General Assembly resolution 303 (IV), adopted on
9 December 1949, which inter aZia restated the Assembly’s
intention “that Jerusalem should be placed under a
permanent international r&lme, which should envisage
appropriate guarantees for the protection of the Holy
Places, both within and outside Jerusalem”. At the time of
the adoption of resolution 303 (IV) the Brazilian representative expressed in the General Assembly the firm,hope of
his
Government that Israel and Jordan, notwithstanding the
difficulties that were certain to arise, would co-operate
loyally to abide by the Assembly’s decisiori and faithfully
carry out the plan endorsed by that organ.
3 1. Those high hopes remained unfulfilled asthe situation
in the Middle East deteriorated steadily in the wake of the
armed conflicts of 1949, 1956 and ‘1967. During the fifth

emergency special session of the General Assembly m)
country once again had the opportunity of upholding those
United Nations principles on Jerusalem. Brazil then pro.
posed the placing of Jerusalem under permanent international administration, with special guarantees for the
protection of the Holy Places within a corpus sepurahtm, in
full support of the suggestion made by His Holiness Pope
Paul VI. Speaking before the General Assembly on 28 June
1967, the Foreign Minister of Brazil clearly expressed the
deepest feelings of the Brazilian Government and people on
the subject when he pointed out: “Jerusalem, symbol of
love and hope, cannot continue being a source of hate and
despair. It must be restored to its status as the City of
God.“’ In keeping with those feelings, Brazil co-sponsored,
during the same session, the so-called “Latin American
draft resolution”, which referred in its operative paragraph 4 to “the desirability of establishing an international
regime for the city of Jerusalem”.2 Also during the fifth
emergency special session Brazil gave its full support to
resolutions 2253 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967 and 2254 (ES-V) of
14 July 1967.
32. It was in view of its consistent support of General
Assembly decisions on the status of Jerusalem that my
delegation voted for Security Council resolution
250 (1968) which called upon Israel “to refrain from
holding the military parade in Jerusalem”, held on 2 May
1968 in flagrant violation of a unanimous decision of the
Council.
33. In giving the members of the Security Council this
summary of the Brazilian position on the question of
Jerusalem, my intention has been to emphasize the con.
sistency with which my country has followed that pbsition
since the very first days of this Organization. In the course
of the last twenty years Brazil has not accepted any
unilateral action tending to alter the international statusof
Jerusalem and has not recognized any changesin this status
as a result of unilateral actions by the Governments
concerned, be it the Government of Jordan or the
Government of Israel. For us, the problem of Jerusalem is
not one of political accommodation or bargaining. It is a
matter of principle, for it involves the religious feelings of
Brazil’s Arab and Jewish communities ‘asit also involves the
interests of its overwhelmingly Christian population. We
deplored the violation by Jordan of the international status
of Jerusalem as we now deplore the current violation
committed by Israel. We will maintain this impartial
position until the day comes when Jerusalem is fully
restored to its status as the spiritual centre of three great
world religions and of three great world civilizations.
34. As one of the sponsors of the Latin American draft
resolution of the fifth emergency special session and as a
member of this Council, Brazil made its contribution to the
adoption of Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which
established the guidelines for an organic settlement of the
question of the Middle East. We believe that the problem of
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1540th meeting, para.6,

principle 6.

2 Ibid., Fifth Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agendaitenl5,

documentA/L:523/Rev.l.
4

patiently to numerous statements by the representative of
Israel, who has tried to divert the Security Council’s
attention from the question under discussion, namely, the
arbitrary and illegal activities of the Israel occupation
authorities in the Arab sector of Jerusalem. The Security
Council, however, has rejected these unsuccessful attempts
and adopted two resolutions [250 (1968) and 251(1968/j
which in substance condemn the unlawful, annexationist
actions of the Israel invaders in Jerusalem, particularly in
connexion with the military parade held on 2 May.

Jerusalem should be solved in the context of this organic
settlement, and we are very much encouraged by the recent
news that we have had on the prospects of the Jarring
mission.
35. This does not mean, however, that the Council should
desist now from any action. Nor does it mean that any
action we take here on permanent principles will necessarily
prejudice the work being done by Mr. Jarring. On the
contrary, my delegation believes that in the meantime the
Security Council must make it clear, as the General
Assembly has already done, that it rejects any measures
taken by Israel which tend to alter the international status
of Jerusalem and that it will not recognize any changes in
that status resulting from such measures.

42. Analysing the course of the debate on this agenda
item, we cannot avoid the conclusion that two fundamentally different lines have clearly emerged. The’ first,
which is followed by the majority of the members of the
Security Council, including the Soviet Union, is based on an
evaluation of the activities of the Israel occupation authorities in the Arab sector of Jerusalem in the light of the
fundamental principles of international law, and particularly of the principle whereby the appropriation of foreign
territory by means of military conquest is unlawful,
inadmissible and a contravention of the United Nations
Charter. The majority of the members of the Council,
including the Soviet Union, consider that Israel, by its
annexationist activities in the Arab sector of Jerusalem, has
flagrantly violated these principles, just as it has violated
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. On this premise, and being deeply
concerned about the dangerous consequences of such
actions on the part of Israel, most members of the Security
Council, in strict observanceof the United Nations Charter
and of the provisions of the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, have demanded that Israel should
rescind the measures already taken to annex the Arab
sector of Jerusalem and refrain from such unlawful actions
in the future.

36. It is in the light of these considerations that the
Brazilian delegation will vote for the revised draft resolution [S/8.590/Rev.2] submitted by Pakistan and Senegal.
37. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Brazil
for his kind reference to myself.
38. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): At yesterday’s meeting of the
Security Council the Soviet delegation expressed its views
on the draft resolution on the situation in Jerusalem
submitted by the delegations of Pakistan and Senegal
fS/&590/. The changes which the co-sponsors have made
today in the draft resolution do not change the substance
of the text. The Soviet delegation therefore supports this
draft resolution and will vote in its favour, although, as I
said yesterday, it considers that the draft should condemn
in more decisive terms Israel’s unlawful ,expansionist activities in the Arab sector of the city of Jerusalem.
39. Despite the importance and urgency of the question
now under discussion here, it has, as was noted yesterday,
already been on the Council’s agenda for nearly a month,
and the Council has so far taken no effective steps to
compel Israel to implement the well-known resolutions
adopted by the fifth emergency special session and by the
Security Council regarding Jerusalem, resolutions which
called upon Israel to rescind the measures already taken to
annex the Arab sector of the city and not to undertake any
further unlawful measures in that city.

43. The second line emerging from the discussions,
apparent in the statements of only one or two representatives, notably the United States representative, can be
summarized as follows: although these representatives
cannot bring themselves openly to recognize as legal the
annexationist activities of the Israel authorities in Jerusalem, they are attempting to persuade the Security Council
to de facto acceptance of those activities as some kind of
“temporary measures”. Attempts have been made to
represent the situation in such a way that the Security
Council need not demand that the measures should be
rescinded since, it is said, they are of a temporary nature
and therefore have no effect on the status of Jerusalem
either now or in the future. But how can such annexationist
activities fail to affect the status of Jerusalem, when it is
precisely by such measuresthat Israel is changing the status
of the Arab sector of Jerusalem by illegally including it
within the territory of Israel and Israelizing a city that does
not belong to it? This position, as many members of the
Security Council have pointed out, is in direct contravention of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly on 4 and 14 July 1967 [2253(ES-V) and
2254 f&Y-V)l and of the Security Council decision of 22
November 1967 (resolution 242 (1967/l. It is clear to all
that attempts to conceal these illegal activities of the
aggressorare tantamount to encouraging further aggression.

40. We cannot but ask how Israel’s continued disregard of
these United Nations resolutions can be explained and why
the Security Council has been quite unjustifiably dilatory in
enforcing the implementation of the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to
the illegal measures undertaken by the Israel occupation
authorities in Jerusalem. The Soviet delegation would like
to express its views on these matters.
41. At a number of meetings the Security Council has
considered a letter from the representative of Jordan
[S/8.560] and the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Jerusalem /S/8146]. The Council has also
listened to statements by the representative of Jordan, the
Mayor of Arab Jerusalem and the representatives of most
member States of the Security Council, It has also listened
5

48. The next move must be madeby Israel and, of course,
alongwith Israel by its protectors and supporters. So far
the Government of Israel has continued to put obstaclesin
the way of a political settlement in the Middle East andhas
done its utmost to hinder the implementation of the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967. The
statements recently made by the Prime Minister, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Defence Minister of
Israel reaffirm the Government of Israel’s determination
virtually to disregardthe Security Council resolution of 22
November and even, in reality, the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations,Mr. Jarring. The other day Defence Minister Dayan
wrote a newspaperarticle full of threats againstthe Arab
Statesand madeit clear that Israelintends to disregardthe
decisionsof the Security Council and the United Nations
on the Middle East. He said in particular that Israel cannot
be forced to withdraw to its former frontiers. The Israel
Government’sexpansionistpolicy towards the Arab States
is clearly expressedin this article. Threatening the Arabs
Dayan declaredthat Israel “must be ready for a renewalof
hostilities”. Israel’sthreats against the Arab countries are
supportedby systematicacts of armed provocation against
its Arab neighbours.

This cannot but hinder not only the normalization of the
situation in Jerusalem, but also the solution of the whole
problem of a political settlement in the Middle East,
44. Two fundamentally different approaches to the question of the situation in Jerusalem have emerged clearly also
at today’s meeting of the Security Council. At the time of
the preparation and submission of the draft resolution, the
representatives of a number of countries are stubbornly
attempting to advance their own policy of protecting and
consequently encouraging the aggressor. The aim of this
policy is to prevent the Security Council from taking an
effective decision on the situation in Jerusalem. We hear it
said that the adoption of a resolution condemning Israel’s
activities might complicate the whole Middle East question
and jeopardize the success of the Jarring mission. Such
arguments are fallacious; the facts tell another story. If we
assess the situation in the Middle East objectively, we
cannot fail to see that the only obstacle to a political
settlement is the policy pursued by Israel and those who
protect it.
45. There are no grouilds whatsoever for failing to assess
the annexationist activities of the Israeli occupiers as they
should be assessed, condemning them and demanding that
they cease and that the illegal steps already taken in regard
to the Arab sector of Jerusalem be rescinded,

49. Every memberof the Security Council knows that the
LebaneseGovernmenthasjust senta letter [S/8591] to the
Presidentof the Council <protesting against Israel’s aggression againstLebanon. The letter stressedthat the Isract
atithorities bore the full responsibility for the dangerous
military incidents which took place on 12 May on the
southern frontier of Lebanon, when armed Israel forces
fired on a peacefulLebanesevillage.

46. The general situation which has arisen in the Middle
East as the result of Israel’s aggression continues to be
extremely tense and to threaten the peace and security of
the pkoples in that region, The eyes of the world, are
focused on that situation. Recently the Teheran International Conference on Human Rights adopted a resolution3 in ahich it expressed its grave concern for the
violation of human rights by the Israel authorities in the
territories of the Arab States occupied by Israel. The
Conference particularly called on the Government of Israel
to stop exercising tyranny and violence against the Arab
population in these territories, to stop destroying the
honies of the Arab pbpulation in the occupied regions and
to implement the resolutions adopted at the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly and the
Security Council resolution. This resolution adopted by the
International Conference on Human Rights reflects a
realization on the part of the vast majority of States of the
need for greater urgency in abolishing the consequences of
Israel’s aggression.

50. In connexion with this new act of hostility againstthe
Arab side, the Tel Aviv radio broadcast a statement
threatening to invade Lebaneseterritory and to annex the
southernpart of that country.
51. It is obvious that there can be no political settlement
in the Middle East so long as Israel maintains such an
aggressivelyobstructionist attitude, It is the duty of the
Security Council to take all steps to achieve a political
settlementin that region. Every State, and particularly the
permanentmembersof the Security Council, must take
every available opportunity to ensure that Israel implementsthe resolution adopted by the Security Council on
22 November 1967 and that it withdraws its troops from
the occupiedArab territories to the positions from which
they begantheir attack pn the neighbouring Arab countries.
Otherwise,the prestigeof the Security Council, and indeed
of the United Nations as a whole, will be dealt a serious
blow. The peoplesof the world will begin to lose faith in
the ability of the United Nations to guaranteeinternational
peaceand security.

47. In this connexion it should be noted that the Arab
States have taken new constructive steps to create the most
favourable situation for the implementation of the Security
Council’s resdlution of 22 November 1967. As you know,
they have not only expressed their readiness to implement
that resolution and to co-operate with the Special Repres&+,ativ6 of the Sebretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Jarring, but have also hroposed that a time-table be
worked out for implementing the 22 November resolution,
We must take advantage of this new initiative on the part of
the Arab countiies;

52. The Soviet delegation wishes to stressthat there
shouldbe no doubt in anyone’s mind about the determi.
nation of the Soviet Union to bring about, together with
other peace-lovingStates, an end to Israel’s aggression
againstthe Arab States, the abolition of all the come*
quences of that aggression,the return to their Iawful
ownersof all the Arab territories seized as a resuIt of the

3 See Final Act bf the International Conference on Human Rights
(UnitedNationspublication,
gales
No.: E.68.XIV.2),p, 5.

6

aggression and the achievement of a political settlement in
the Middle East on the basis of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967.

resolution that has just been adopted contributes td the
preservation of that international status. This being the
case, all legislative and administrative measures taken by
Israel that might change that international status are
without validity, in our eyes, and will inevitably remain so.

53, The PRESIDENT: As there are no other representatives wishing to speak before the vote, I propose to put to
the vote the revised draft resolution before US contained in
document S]859O/Rev.2.

58. These are the reasons for my delegation’s favourable
vote.

A vote was taken by showof hands.

59. Before concluding my statement, I would like to
express my delegation’s gratitude to the sponsors of the
draft resolution for taking account of our comments on the
original text we discussedand for agreging not only to the
amendments we suggested to that text but also to certain
deletions we asked them to make. We are also particularly
grateful to you, Mr. President, for your valuable suggestions
today which resulted in the second, revised version of the
draft text we have just transformed into a resolution.

In favour: Algeria, Brazil, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Canada, United States of America.

60. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution on Jerusalem, now adopted
by this Council. Having done so, I wish to stressthat we
deeply deplore the fact that the genuine efforts made
during recent weekswith a view to producing a compromise
text which would gather the unanimous support of the
Council did not succeed. Already, this lack of unanimity in
itself leads us to doubt the political expediency of adopting
that resolution, and my country voted in favour of it only
because, in consequence of the position taken by my
country previously in the General Assembly, we could not
in principle disagree with its contents. Nor do we believe
that the adoption of such resolutions on isolated questions
is the proper means by which to bring closer a solution of
the Middle East problem. That solution must be a comprehensive one, on the basis of the endeavours of Mr. Jarring
and in accordance with Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The resolution, therefore, in our view, ought to have had a reference to
resolution 242 (1967), and we find it not only deplorable
but also surprising that such a reference could not be made.

The revised draft resolution wasadopted by 13 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions.4

54. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of their votes after
the vote.
55. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translaied from
Spanish): The Council has just reached a decision on the
draft resolution submitted by Pakistan and Senegal
/S/8590/Aev.2].
I would like briefly to explain the reasons
which led my delegation to vote in favour of it.
56. At the Council’s 1417th meeting, on 27 April, I made
the following statement:
“Over the many years during which the Middle East
question has been discussed in the United Nations,
Paraguay has always considered that Jerusalem should be
under an international regime, in conformity with United
Nations decisions for which we voted.

61. In conclusion, I wish to express our strong hope that
all concerned, including the parties and all members of this
Council, will whole-heartedly and with energy and goodwill
support Mr. Jarring’s mission and work for a peaceful and
accepted settlement in the Middle East in accordance with
the provisions and principles of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

“TO cite a further example, this position was recently
confirmed by the inclusion of a special operative paragraph in the draft resolution which my delegation,
together with other Latin American delegations, submitted at the fifth emergency special session of the
General Assembly. During that same session, prompted
likewise by its concern to preserve the international status
of Jerusalem, my delegation supported resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V).

62. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

(‘It1 the general context of the Middle East problem,
this is my country’s attitude towards the specific question
of Jerusalem.” [See 1417th meeting,paras.57 to 59.1

63. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): My delegation expressesits
satisfaction at the adoption of the resolution concerning
the illegal measures adopted by the Israelis in Jerusalem.
This resolution reaffirms the two resolutions adopted by
the Assembly in July and deplores the failure of Israel to
comply with them. It reaffirms the established international
principle that the acquisition of territory by military
conquest is inadmissible and therefore emphasizes the
validity of the concept of territorial integrity whereby no
territorial acquisition or any advantages may be obtained
by force or by any other coercion, Thus the resolution

57. As far as my delegation is concerned, the preservation
of the international status of Jerusalem in accordance with
the decisions of the General Assembly is of prime importance. We consider that, despite the de facto situation,
those provisions are still legally valid and we feel that the
4 See resolution

I call on the representative of

252 (1968).

7

bers reach such unanimity without endangering our legal
rights. Unanimous action may enhance the prestige of the
Security Council and may also help small members like my
country-the more so when just resolutions and decisions
are coupled with unanimity. I am sure most of us agreethat
unanimity Cannot
precede jUSt solutions on the ladder of
priorities or else the cost will be higher than the mtums,
and the means become the ends in themselves. The cost will
be to forego principles and rights that this Council is here
to defend and cannot afford to sacrifice. The principles of
conciliation and compromise, which may yield some results
in disputable issues,cannot but endanger a casewhere there
is an aggressoron one side and a victim on the other. Under
no circumstances should this Council, if it is to ire
consistent with itself and its duties, or any Member State in
this Council, equate the aggressor with the victim. Those
who drafted the Charter and created this main organ of the
United Nations never intended it to function through
unanimity when the price of this wasthe very values which
this organ is intended to protect.

categorically considers that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel which tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot change
thaTstatus. Furthermore, it called upon Israel in clear terms
to rescind all measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any further actions or measures of
that nature. The Security Council also decided to remain
seized of the matter and to consider the question further in
the light of the Secretary-General’s report on the effective
implementation of the resolution.
64. We pay a tribute to the Security Council for taking
this firm and urgent action. My delegation would like to
thank all members which sponsored the resolution and
those which worked and voted for it. A special tribute
should be paid to Member States of the Latin American,
African and Asian groups which worked diligently to
protect the principles enshrined in our Charter and to
safeguard the integrity of one of the main organs of the
United Nations, namely;the General Assembly.

73. The situation in Jerusalem is a very clear case of
aggression and a deliberate attempt by one Member to
annex the territories of another Member against the
overwhelming will of the Member States of the United
Nations. Jordan, the victim, cannot yield to coercion OF to
pressure. Jordan does not stand alone in this respect. It has
the Charter and the majority of Member States in the
Assembly and the Security Council behind it.

65. The seven Latin American, African and Asian members of the Security Council represent the three major
continents. They also represent a new and vital force-a
force for justice, equity and peace. This group of nations
has already shown its,effectiveness as a voice for morality
and for upholding the great values enshrined in our Charter.
66. I should like to be quite candid and mention specifically the great contribution and constructive efforts of
Ambassador Sette Camara of Brazil, who unfortunately will
be bidding us farewell soon. His work in the United Nations
will always stand out as a shining example of courage and
senseof justice.

74. I have already reminded the Council that fourteen
members of this body supported the Assembly injunction
against Israel last July on the Jerusalem situation; only one
Council member was among the delegations that abstained
in the Assembly. I have referred to this in the past. By
“only one member” I meant one member around this table:
only one Council member was among the delegations that
abstained in the Assembly. At least that member, for
whatever unknown reason it may have, continued to be
consistent in its stand. But we cannot but express regret
about another abstention. Nothing has changed since the
adoption of the two Assembly resolutions-I say, nothing,
other than further illegal measures and continued defiances
by the authorities of Tel Aviv. This makes it more
imperative to reaffirm the previous stand. This body is the
law-enforcing organ of the United Nations; there is no room
for abstention in the face of reCkleSS aCtS of lawlessness.

67. I should like to thank Paraguay and its distinguished
representative, Ambassador Solano Lopez for the part they
played in reaching this just and fair conclusion,
68. Ambassador Ibrahima Boye of Senegal was most
instrumental in putting the situation in Jerusalem most
brilliantly before the Security Council. His statesmanship
shows itself very well in the paragraphs of the resolution
that wasjust adopted.
69. The continuous stand for justice shown by India and
Pakistan has been quite self-evident throughout this unfortunate crisis. We are most grateful to them for their
continued and firm support.

75. We agree that the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council should have been a unanimous resolution.
That is the minimum expected from the Council by Jordan,
and particularly by the people of Jerusalem. In fact, this
measure should have been taken a long time ago, and the
same Powers that spoke to us this afternoon about being
wise, being realistic, being practical, being peace-loving am
the very same Powers responsible for the split in the
Council. The argument is an old one; it has a background
going back to last August. It is only fair, since this question
of being realistic and wise and practical was raised, to
acquaint the Council with the background. We wanted to
come to the Council for action in August last year-1%7but the so-called friends of Jordan asked us to wait. ‘l’he~
said: “Let the capitals have a chance to consider the JelY

70. It has been shown here today that Jerusalem has many
friends. The positions of France, Ethiopia, Denmark, the
United Kingdom and China are shining evidence of this. My
delegation expressesits deepest gratitude to both the Soviet
Union and Hungary which consistently and without reservation supported our just cause.
71. On behalf of my Government and my people, including those in Jerusalem, and the elected Mayor of
Jerusalem, I should like to thank all those who consistently
stood up for justice, freedom and the rights of man.
72. Many attempts were made to reach unanimity-and
my delegation exerted every possible
effort to help memI
8

resolutions; let them ponder, exchange views, and digest
what happened; do not push them to hasty debate in the
Security CounciI; give your friends a change to help you; let
quiet diplomacy, not public debate, play its part; you need
your friends.”

82. Instead of my question being answered,Mr. Jarring’s
mission was raised asan excuse;attempts weremade to put
Mr. Jarring in the picture, although we are here seeking and
requesting an interim measure, not a solution. Jerusalem is
part and parcel of the territories on which a resolution was
taken calling for the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from territories occupied in the recent conflict. I have come
here only for an interim measure. Voices wereheard saying
that Mr. Jarring is coming. We have seen members showing
grave concern and deep interest in helping Mr. Jarring,
telling us that any action to be taken by the Council will
affect the mission of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.

76. It is true that Jordan badly needs friends. We therefore
waited. Vye said: “Those are our friends; they mean well;
they want to help; let us give them a chance; let us not
antagonize them; they can make our task in the Council
difficult.”
77. Therefore, we did not seek an urgent meeting in
August 1967; we waited. We simply kept the Council
informed of every Israeli violation. We sent one letter after
another, citing legislative and administrative measures and
other Israeli violations, referring to the bulldozing of Arab
lands and property, the destruction of Arab dwellings and
trespassing on Arab lands, and referring also to the
expulsion of Arab leaders and people.

83. I have inquired whether or not Mr. Jarring expressed
or implied, by cable or by letter, or by any other means of
communication, any concern about whether what was
going on in the Council would affect his mission. I wastold
that at no stage of our deliberations did Mr. Jarring express
any concern or apprehension about any possible adverse
effect on his mission of the debates and of the measures
contemplated. If that is the case, do those who express
concern about Mr. Jarring really and genuinely and sincerely contribute to the successof his mission?

78. The delegations of the Arab States also sent a joint
complaint on Jerusalem. Later, to our disappointment, no
quiet diplomacy, no action, no real and genuine help was
rendered to the victim, Jordan. Instead, we discovered that
the inaction on the part of the Council encouraged more
Israeli violations, So on 27 April 1968 we came to the
Security Council, only to hear again that we werenot being
realistic, not being wise, not being practical. Now our
friends tell us again: “Why rescind what has happened? Let
us just call on Israel to refrain from committing such acts;
be wise and practical and realistic and accept this; this is
enough.”

84. Do not all these attempts encourage the Israeli
authorities to continue their arrogance and to continue
their violations and defiance of United Nations will, instead
of helping the Council to put an end to Israeli violations? I
refuse to believe that the rescinding of invalid measures, in
conformity with the injunction endorsed by ninety-nine
Members of the United Nations, is harmful to Mr, Jarring’s
mission, I refuse to believe that a decision deploring the
continued failure of Israel to show any regard for the two
General Assembly resolutions is not helpful to Mr. Jarring’s
mission. I refuse to believe that deploring this failure does
not strengthen Mr. Jarring’s hand.

79. TO this we said: “What if Israel continues: would the
Security Council then rescind the violations? ” To this we
received no satisfactory answer. We repeated the question
time and again: “What if we come back next month, saying
Israel is continuing: would you then rescind the violations? ” To that we received no answer. Instead, we heard
the statement this afternoon that we should call upon all
the parties concerned to refrain from such actions and
measu+es.

8.5. It is not Jordan, it is the Israeli authorities which are
actively attempting to weaken the mission of a man who is
genuinely endeavouring to bring peace to our troubled area.
We certainly want Mr. Jarring’s mission to succeed. Wehave
done everything possible to help Mr. Jarring, but should his
mission fail, it will not be Jordan which will be responsible
for that failure. The responsibility for failure should rest
squarely on those who pay lip service to peace. Indeed, the
same Powers that show concern in the Council about
Mr. Jarring’s mission have not uttered a word in the Council
against the party really responsible for obstructing the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, and it is this inaction which encouraged Israel to
continue its violations.

80. I know of only two parties-Jordan and Israel. One is
the complainant and the other is the party against which
Jordan is complaining; and the essenceof the problem-the
whole complaint-is
Jerusalem. What are we doing in
Jerusalem? Who are the parties? Is there not one single
victim of the aggression, and one committing the violation?
SO to hear all parties is a clear attempt to serve another,
irrelevant purpose-something that has nothing to do with
Jerusalem.

86. All the members will recall that at the meeting of this
Council held on 23 March 1968, in answer to a question
put by me, Mr. Tekoah said:

81. Again

we heard something about resolution
242 (1967) as the touchstone for the settlement of all
phases of the problem. I have not come here for a
settlement of any problem now. in this complaint: I have
come here to beg the Council for action to stop violations
and to rescind violations in order to help the man working
for a solution to work properly and in order to contribute
to the success of his mission.

“ * . . we do accept the goal of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 to establish a just and
lasting peace by agreement . , .” [1406th meeting,
para. 521.
9

security will guide us with regard to the resolution adopted
today by the Security Council. The resolution is neither
practical
nor reasonable. It ignores reality and disregards
Israel’s basic rights. It seeks to violate the natural unity of
Jerusalem and to overlook the interests of Jerusalem’s
inhabitants and their welfare. It advocates the return to the
nightmare of separation and religious discrimination. It
does not contribute to the attainment of peace. On rare!
contrary it is designed to serve as a weapon in rht
puisuance of Arab belligerency against Israel. It does nor
bring closer the prospects of understanding between the
parties but further deepens the abyss between them.

87. Later, at the 1418th meeting on 1 May 1968, answering another question, Mr. Tekoah said:
“ . . . my Government has indicated its acceptance of
the Security Council resolution for the promotion of
agreement on the establishment of a just and durable
peace. I am also authorized to reaffirm that we are willing
to seek agreement with each Arab State on all the matters
included in that resolution.”
(1418th meeting,
para. 111.1
88. According to The New York Times of today:
“Israel declared again today that she would not retreat
from any occupied territory until a peace treaty had been
signed with the Arabs after direct talks. The Government
warned that it was ready to fight to defend the new
frontiers,”

94. When, in 1948, the Arab States took up arms in
defiance of the United Nations and launched their aggres.
sive attack against Israel and Jerusalem, little international
concern was expressed; when Jerusalem was shelled and
bombarded and its population brought to starvation, th
Security Council remained silent. When for twenty years.
there existed an occupation by Jordan resulting from
aggression, when for twenty years access to the Western
Wall was barred, when ancient synagogues were deliberate!)
destroyed by the Jordanian Government, when any ideaof
agreement with world religious interests was rejected by (hc
occupying Power, the Security Council remained silent.

89. What would those who raised Mr. Jarring’s mission as
one of their excuses say to this Israeli policy based on
misrepresentation and deceit.7 I have not heard them say a
word about this, Why do they not raise their voices in this
Council to save Mr, Jarring’s mission when this serious
threat can be seen so clearly? Why this manoeuvring in the
Council when the issue is very clear? Why is there a lack of
unanimity on a resolution which is the result of hard word
and a real desire on the part of all who drafted it to reach
unanimity? We are not creating difficulties for the Council
or for Mr. Jarring. We are simply reacting to Israeli actions,
Israeli violations and Israeli defiance, and it is our earnest
hope that this Council in the future will be able to reach
unanimity on measures to be taken if Israeli violations
continue. If the Israelis make it imperative that further
action should be taken in this respect, including the
measures prescribed in Article 41 of the Charter, we hope
that through the determination of the friends of Jerusalem
such action will be taken.

95. Where was the Security Council in those hours of grid
and agony? Where was the Security Council when Jo&n
again launched an onslaught against Jerusalem last June‘?
Where was it when Jordan refused to make peace? WIterr
was the Security Council when Jordan openly declared [be
intention to continue its warfare against Israel by raid and
terror?
96. Now, a whole year after the barriers ell in Jerusalem,
now when Jews and Arabs live side by side in peace and
work together in coexistence, when ‘reconstruction and
restoration are well on their way, and above all, when, ii?r
the first time in twenty years, access to the Holy Places is
universal and complete, guaranteed by law and open ti>
constructive dialogue with the universal religious intcrerfs
involved, the Security Council hastens to evince concern.

90, The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Israel.
91. A! r. TEKOAH (Israel): The Security Council has ended
its deliberations on Jerusalem. Through the murass of
acrimony and abuse, the truth about Jerusalem emerges
more clearly than ever. Jerusalem faithful to its history,
Jerusalem at peace at last, reunited again, Jerusalem where
Christian, Moslem and Jew live side by side, work together
and create together. Jerusalem of the Holy Places, venerated and secure, beckc!!ing to worshippers and pilgrims of
all faiths, from all parts of the world. Jerusalem the
workshop of understanding and coexistence between Israeli
and Arab. Nothing can tarnish the truth about Jerusalem.
Nothing can change its reality. Nothing can overshadow its
glory.

97. To be of any consequence, a resolution must first r?f
all be realistic and equitable. Is the world really to beliebr:
that there is an international principle whereby Jerusakrn
must be divided against the wishes of its citizens, its Jcua
and Arabs separated, access to some of the Holy Plasei
denied? The resolution would have us reinstall the bar&d
wire and minefields which have been removed and rcscia3
measures which have brought normalcy and peace to a tit>
artificially bisected for nineteen years.

92. Fully conscious of its international obligatigns,
respectful of the universal interests in the city, hspked
by
Jerusalem’s rejuvenation, the Government of Israel will do
all in its power to ensure the welfare of the city and the
happiness of its people.

98. It is, of course, regrettable that some still find r!
possible to support the revival of military confrontatiitn
and chaos in Jerusalem. The people of Jerusalem, howcv?:,
cannot be expected to welcome the weird idea that the)
should be amputated and sacrificed on the altar uf
belligerency. To suggest this to them would be contrary 1-2
all the principles of international law, of morality ~zI;J
justice.

93. The principles of the Charter, the precept of equality
of all Member States, the fundamental right to peace and

99. At this poivt I should like to reiterate Israel’%
intention to ensure fully the universal character of the Ho!;
10

Places themselves, Christian as well as Moslem, and to seek
arrangements to this effect with the authoritative representatives of the faiths concerned. This policy has been
repeatedly enunciated by Israel and is being pursued
constantly in practice.

106. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel.
,,”
/l”dj. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I .do not think that it .
‘is necessary to go beyond the report read out by the
representative of Jordan to prove how really normal and
peaceful life can be in Jerusalem and on the west bank if
people are free to speak their minds, and I hope that at
some future point this will be the situation as far as the
Jewish population of the Arab States is concerned.

100. We appreciate the attitude of the Member States that
have dissociated themselves from the resolution.
101. In the past I have had occasion to draw attention to
the disabilities of the Security Council when it comes to
deal with questions of the twenty-year Arab war against
Israel. The resolution now adopted does not change or add
to the known pattern of Security Council resolutions on
the Middle East situation. It adds, however, to the
determination of the people of Israel to gird themselves
with even greater fortitude for the defence of their rights
and the pursuit of peace and security, despite the malice of
those who have injured us and despite injustice born in
error.

log. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

109. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Since the question is one
of freedom and of will, the will of the people as expressed
here is to get rid of the occupier and to ask the conqueror
to move out. So, if there is this kind of willingness on the
part of the Israelis to give them the right to express their
will, this is their will, and the Israelis should show their
desire to heed the will of the people and get out of the
occupied area. The answer to occupation is going to be
liberation, unless the methods of peace are really used
effectively by every member at this table.

102. After twenty years of war it is evident beyond any
doubt that peaceful and accepted settlement rather than
Security Council resolutions will resolve the Israel-Arab
conflict. Indeed, the choice lies once again with the Arab
States: the choice between continued acrimony and the
110. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers in
search for understanding; between contests of public debate
our debate, but before I adjourn the meeting I would
and quiet constructive effort; between warfare by terror,
exercise my own right to speak, not as President but on
threat, inequitable resolutions on the one hand and
behalf of the UNITED KINGDOM.
agreement on the other; the choice between impasse and
solution. We hope to be able to make progress towards
111. Nearly a month ago I restated in this Council the
agreement and peace. We still await, however, an indication -,,,attitude and policy of my Government at this critical stage
from the Arab States that they too are ready_ to _ioin in a 8. in our efforts to promote a just and. lasting peace in tlhe
- _
common effort in this direction.
tJ”
Middle East.
e
103. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan in exercise of his right of reply,

112. I said first that my Government stands firmly by the
statements we have made and the votes we have cast both
in the Assembly and in this Council on the question of the
future of Jerusalem. I said that all that has since taken place
has reinforced the views which we have publicly and clearly
and repeatedly stated. By the vote I cast today we have
confirmed and reaffirmed the policy which we have
throughout maintained.

104. Mr. EL-FARRA
(Jordan): On the question of
normalcy and peace in Jerusalem, I would simply like to
read to the Council a piece of information which has just
come from Jerusalem. It states:
“A delegation of six well-known Palestinian Arabs of
the old city of Jerusalem yesterday sent a new petition to
General Odd Bull, the representative of U Thant for
supervising the cease-fire, in which they support the
initiatives taken by the Arab States at the UniteC PI&ions
regarding the status of Jerusalem.

113. But at the same time I emphasized, as all the time I
have tried to cmphasize, that there should be one overriding
aim, an aim which transcends all others. I said then that I
trusted that from now on the whole weight of the Council
would again be thrown into an effort to turn from
recrimination to a renewed productive and constructive
advance towards the settlement to which we are all publicly
committed, and which all the peoples of the Middle East so
desperately need.

“This petition, signed in particular by the Arab Mayors
of Nablus, Jennin and Tulkarim, as well as by other
well& own Palestinian intellectuals and businessmen, has
in addition been countersigned by hundreds of inhabitants of Jerusalem and the west bank of Jordan.

114. In the past four weeks I have consequently directed
every effort of argument and persuasion to a single, simple
proposition. That proposition is that what we need to do
now is to proceed together in full unity on the common
ground of general agreement. I have argued for that
proposition as representative of my country and as President of this Council. I was convinced that common ground
existed-limited,
it is true, but certain and firm. We all
know from our long consultations the extent of the area of

YIhis delegation of distinguished people has asked
General Odd Bull to transmit the text of their petition to
Thant and Jarring. Copies have been sent to all foreign
consulates in Jerusalem.”
105. This is an answer to the additional fabrication which
we heard this afternoon to the effect that everything was
normal and peaceful.
1

Secretary-General. What we need now is not the basis for a
settlement. We have it already. We do not need a new
method of working towards a settlement. We have that
already too. What we need now is not further debate in this
Council. To come back to the Council repeatedly in a spirit
of renewed dispute and piecemeal pugnacity can only do
harm. We should strongly disapprove of that.

agreement. We could have advanced confidently and unanimously on that basis. I dearly hoped that we should all see
the need, at this time more than ever, not to dispute and
divide but to advance together and so give maximum weight
to the authority of the Council asan instrument for peace.
I greatly regret that my appeal has not.been successful.I am
bound to say that I have felt at times in our long
consultations that not all of us have put first the pursuit of
the search for successin an ultimate settIement. Nevertheless I trust that we can now turn once again to our main
aim in an atmosphere not of rancour but of reason.

118. Now that this debate is finished, it is the most
earnest wish of my Government, as I believe it is the wish
of us all, that we should all support and encourage and
facilitate the efforts to put agreed provisions and principles
into practical effect. Let us put behind us wrangles on
wording and exercises in animosity and diversions in
disagreement. We should be partisans only for peace. We
should show that we have the goodwill and the good sense
to put everything aside except further effort finally to
achieve a just peace.

115. In this long-drawn-out tragedy of the Middle East,
the search for common ground was undertaken last year.
We succeeded on 22 November. Moreover, our efforts to
provide the structure of a settlement have not been
repudiated. They have not even been questioned. On the
contrary, they have been increasingly accepted. There has
been a growing realization, a steadily mounting certainty,
that only by proceeding along the road we took last
November can disaster be averted,
,

119. As we have continued our consultations and our
debate we have heard daily of acts of violence and
declarations of hostility. We think of the thousands of
innocent people who suffer in want and hardship and fear.
Surely we must all recognize the urgency of pressing on
with the work, for the purpose stated in our unanimous
resolution of last November and repeated in the resolution
we have just passed. It is a just and lastink peace we work
for. Nothing else and nothing less must be our urgent
concern and our overriding preoccupation.

116. Our confidence in the Secretary-General’s representative, Mr. Gunnar Jarring, has not been diminished. His
patient and persistent endeavours have reinforced the
admiration we all feel for a statesman of such skill and such
discretion and such courageousperseverance,
117. In many of the disputes and conflicts of the world
we grope for some basis, for some beginning, for some
method of making a start towards a settlement. In the
Middle East we are past that stage, We know what the basis
of the solution must be, We have all agreed on the
principles to be applied, Moreover, we have agreed on how
we should proceed to put those principles into effect. We
all welcomed the appointment of Mr. Jarring by the

120. As our proceedings have been concluded, I shall bring
our debate to an end. Unless there is some objection, I
propose to adjourn the meeting.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

12

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtoined
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der Notions
Unies
sent
d6posifaires
du monde entier,
Informer-vow
Notions
Unies, Section des ventes, New York

HAK IlOJlY’iMTb

#SfiAHHR

OPTAHM3AUMH

~h~tlllllll
Op~llllll:llll[Illl
bh~,~llllClllllKi
i1I‘CIITI'TIIPS 110 PI'PS ~l;lilOll~X
>lllplL
HBTB:IllIIC
11.111 l.llllUllTC
If0 IlJlW~:
UpO;laXiC
Il:I~lllllll"l,
IIhrO-flOllli
ll.lll
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DES NATIONS

in United

Nations,

New York

06bEAMHEHHblX

et

les

ogencer

q dressez-vous

6:

!iAI~Ufi

Ihl[llii
~~llIlO~llTC

~IOilillO lQ'l.lIITb II lillll~lilll~lX
~1&rll31111FIX
II
Ml[WMill
06 ll:l~lllllltlX
I3 IllllllP?d
lillllilillOY
Oprannaaqi~~
~~~~~IIII~IIIIIJ~
lIn1~11k
CC~IIH
uo
&llClllL.
DE LAS NACIONES

Las public&ones
de lar Naciones
Unidar
est6n
en todar partes del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroirier
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ov
ou Gen&ve.

UNIDAS

en vcnto en librerias
o dirijose
(I: Nacioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cosos distribuidorar
Unidos,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

35719-September

1972-2,100
