III.

Recalling that, in paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,39 it decided that, at the earliest appropriate
time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and with adequate
preparation,
1. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference;
2. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States
possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their attitudes, as well as with all
other States, and to consider any relevant comments
and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind paragraph 122 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/70.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be attained in the prohibition
or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of
specific conventional weapons, including any which
may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve, in addition,
as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 32/152 of 19 December
1977, in which it decided to convene in 1979 a
United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects,
Reiterating the task entrusted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session to the Conference,
namely, that it should consider specific categories of
such weapons, including those which had been the
subject-matter of previously conducted discussions, as
well as the appeal addressed by the Assembly at its
special session to all States to contribute towards
carrying out this task, 40
Recalling its decision to convene a Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference with
the task of establishing the best possible substantive
basis for the achievement at the United Nations Conference of agreements on prohibitions or restrictions
39 Resolution

S-10/2.
40 Ibid., paras. 86 and 87.

47

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

of use of certain conventional weapons and of considering organizational matters relating to the holding
of the United Nations Conference,41
1. Takes note of the report of the Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference on
Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects42 on its first session and of the progress made
with regard to organizational aspects;
2. Notes that a number of proposals on the
substantive work of the United Nations Conference
were introduced and views exchanged on them;
3. Reaffirms its belief that the United Nations
Conference should strive to reach agreement on specific instruments in the field of certain conventional
weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects;
4. Endorses the decision of the Preparatory Conference to hold another session from 19 March to 12
April 1979 with a view to continuing its preparatory
work in respect of both the organizational and the
substantive aspects of the United Nations Conference;
5. Reaffirms its decision that the United Nations
Conference should be held in 1979 and endorses the
recommendation of the Preparatory Conference that
it should be held at Geneva from 10 to 28 September
1979;

6. Invites States to participate actively in the
further work of the Preparatory Conference and in
the United Nations Conference itself and to be represented, in so far as possible, by the required legal,
military and medical expertise;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide continued assistance to the Preparatory Conference in its
work and to undertake the necessary preparations for
the holding of the United Nations Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "United
Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions
of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects: report of the Conference".

84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/71.

Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted
by the General Assembly at its tenth
special session
A

MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH ISRAEL

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the continued and rapid
Israeli military build-up,
Alarmed by the increasing evidence regarding Israeli attempts to acquire nuclear weapons,
Expressing its alarm over the use by Israel of
cluster bombs against refugee camps and civilian
targets in southern Lebanon,
4 1 Resolution

32/152, paras. 3 and 4.

42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third

Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/33/44).
