S/PV.7265

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7265th meeting

Monday, 15 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

14-53466 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1453466*

S/PV.7265

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent Representative
of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution, which
is of course on the Iran sanctions regime. The present
report covers the period from 25 June to 12 September,
during which time the Committee conducted its work
using the standard no-objection procedure envisaged in
paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the conduct of the
Committee’s work.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its consideration of the final report of the
Panel of Experts, in particular in view of any followup action by the Committee. Taking into account the
report’s conclusions, the Committee intends to continue
its deliberations on the recommendations of the report,
which have not yet been concluded.
The Committee continued to consider its response
to the Panel of Experts’ report (S/2014/394, annex)
concerning the interdiction in the Red Sea by a Member
State on 31 March of a cargo of conventional arms that
was allegedly loaded onto a vessel in the Iranian port of
Bandar Abbas. Following the Panel’s clear conclusions,
the Committee wrote to Iran on 9 July in relation to
that incident, seeking its comments. Iran has not yet
provided a response.
During the reporting period, the Committee
considered requests for guidance from Member States
covering a range of issues, including notification

2/10

15/09/2014

requirements and proposals for possible cooperation
with Iranian companies in the field of mine action and a
request for the delisting of an entity that is currently on
the consolidated list of designated individuals, entities
and good to which the sanctions apply.
The Committee also provided a response to
an international organization, clarifying whether
its proposal for technical assistance to Iran was in
compliance with the sanctions regime, and is currently
working with the organization on a similar request.
The Committee welcomes such engagement on matters
of implementation and compliance, and encourages
Member States to seek guidance from the Committee
on the application of the Council’s measures to support
their implementation.
The Committee received a communication from a
Member State during the reporting period relating to
actions it had taken to implement the relevant Security
Council measures. The Committee encourages
Member States that have not yet submitted reports to
do so as soon as possible, in recognition that national
implementation reports are an important means of
enhancing implementation of the sanctions measures.
In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
pleased to report that, following the Council’s decision
in resolution 2159 (2014) of 9 June to extend the Panel’s
mandate to 9 July 2015, the Secretariat has finalized
the administrative steps related to the experts’
appointment. On 1 August, the Panel submitted its
programme of work for the new mandate, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of the same resolution. On behalf of
the Committee, I would like to recognize the efforts of
the Panel in assisting the Committee’s work, and we
look forward to further close and fruitful collaboration
with the Panel under its new mandate.
During the reporting period, the Panel continued
its important outreach work by visiting a Member State
at its invitation, from 29 June to 2 July, to discuss the
measures taken by the particular State to implement
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010). The Panel of Experts and its individual
members also participated in relevant international
meetings and conferences, including the third plenary
meeting of the Financial Action Task Force and working
group meetings, the European Union Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament Conference, and a symposium on
managing sanctions risks in the maritime transportation
sector, hosted by the Governments of Australia and
Singapore last week in Singapore, on 12 September.
14-53466

15/09/2014

Non-proliferation

Finally, the Committee remains fully committed to
Member State implementation of all relevant obligations
as the P5+1 negotiations continue.
The President: I thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Ambassador Gary Quinlan, for his presentation
of the 90-day report of the Committee.
We note that the Committee has continued its
consideration of the reported case of the interdiction
in the Red Sea of a vessel carrying conventional arms
allegedly loaded in Iran. We would like to encourage
Iran to respond to the Committee’s request for comments
on the issue in order to facilitate its work.
We are pleased to note that member States continue
to seek guidance from the Committee on notification
requirements and proposals for possible cooperation
with Iranian companies, including the provision of
technical assistance to Iran. That shows a willingness
on the part of member States to comply with the
sanctions regime.
Finally, we commend Ambassador Quinlan for
his astute leadership of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts for their hard work in the pursuit of their
mandate.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council’s resolutions on Iran.
Negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran on a
comprehensive agreement regarding Iran’s nuclear
programme are reaching a decisive moment. The
E3+3 remain strongly committed to agreement of a
comprehensive settlement before 24 November, and
talks will continue here in New York over the coming
days. Some progress has ben made and we believe
that a deal is possible, but it is now imperative that
Iran show greater flexibility on the future scope of its
nuclear programme, in particular on enrichment. Iran
must also engage more actively with the International
Atomic Energy Agency to address concerns over the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear activities.

S/PV.7265

In parallel, the United States and the European
Union have continued to deliver the sanctions relief set
out in the joint plan of action. But while negotiations
continue, we should be clear. The bulk of sanctions,
including all United Nations sanctions and the
obligations on United Nations Member States that arise
from the relevant Security Council resolutions, remain
in place and must continue to be enforced in full. That
acts as an incentive for Iran to negotiate seriously
towards a comprehensive agreement. We must continue
to implement and enforce those sanctions robustly.
Turning to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), we remain concerned
by Iran’s clear breaches of its international obligations,
as well as its continued failure to respond to the
concerns of the international community represented
by the Committee. The interdiction on 31 March
of a vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms in
the Red Sea remains a matter of concern. The Panel
of Experts, after a thorough investigation, concluded
that the shipment was “a violation of Iran’s obligations
under paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007)”. We urge
Iran to reply to the Committee’s 9 July letter seeking
comments on the incident.
We also note Iran’s continued failure to respond
to previous requests for information on the carbon
fibre interdiction, ballistic missile launches and an
intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. We call on Iran to
engage with the Committee in earnest on such incidents.
The Committee must remain active and diligent in its
work to enforce the sanctions on Iran. We therefore
welcome the Committee’s provision of guidance to
Member States and international organizations on the
current sanctions regime and the outreach work carried
out by the Panel.
The United Kingdom is committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the Iran nuclear
issue. The ongoing discussions on a comprehensive
agreement are the best opportunity in recent years to
achieve that. We will continue to make every effort to
find a comprehensive agreement, and we look to Iran
to do the same.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Permanent Representative of Australia, Ambassador
Quinlan, for his briefing and for his efforts to promote
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). China has always valued
the Committee’s work and will continue to actively
participate in it, and hopes that the Committee will

14-534663/10

S/PV.7265

Non-proliferation

continue to fulfil its mandate in a pragmatic, steady and
balanced manner.
China has consistently maintained that the relevant
Council resolutions should be fully and accurately
implemented. Sanctions are only a means and not the
end of resolutions, and do not constitute a criterion for
measuring the work of the Committee. In the current
circumstances, the work of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts should contribute to diplomatic efforts
to find a settlement to the issue.
We hope that the Committee will continue to
handle appropriately isolated cases of violation and that
it will strengthen the monitoring and instruction of the
Panel. The Panel should act in strict accordance with
the mandate of the resolution, fulfil its responsibilities
according to the principles of neutrality and objectivity,
and refrain from any measure that violates the spirit of
the resolution, thereby affecting the work of the Panel.
Since the beginning of the year, the Iranian nuclear
issue has enjoyed positive developments. In July, the
sixth round of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran
on a comprehensive agreement made some progress on
certain agenda items thanks to intense consultations.
There were also differences. The parties agreed to
extend the negotiations to 24 November. China supports
that decision. It will help the parties to move towards
a comprehensive, long-term and appropriate settlement
of the issue.
It is of vital importance that a comprehensive
agreement be reached on time at the next round of talks.
The six countries and Iran will hold a new round of
dialogue in New York this week. China hopes that the
parties concerned will intensify their diplomatic efforts
and that they will be flexible and pragmatic, stay the
course of consultations on an equal footing so as to
meet each other halfway, and work for a comprehensive
agreement that is equitable, balanced, mutually
beneficial and win-win. In the meantime, we hope that
the international Atomic Energy Agency and Iran will
continue to strengthen their cooperation.
The Iranian nuclear issue bears upon the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, as well
as on peace and stability in the Middle East. In the new
circumstances, China stands ready to work with all
parties to actively promote negotiations so as to make
an additional contribution to finding a comprehensive
resolution of the issue.

4/10

15/09/2014

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for his briefing covering the work undertaken during
the reporting period by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he chairs.
Given the extension of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts tasked with providing that subsidiary body
of the Security Council with qualified conclusions on
various aspects of the Iranian sanctions mechanism, we
wish to focus on two issues that we consider important.
First, all the experts’ activities, including their data
and analysis, are confidential. They cannot automatically
be included in documents of the Committee that are
meant for broad distribution. Secondly, the conclusions
reached by the independent experts reflect only their
own viewpoints and are not decisions of the Committee.
In particular, they are not guidelines for action, at least
not until the Committee has been able to come to a clear
decision on them. We hope that this understanding of
our work will be retained in the future.
We consider it necessary to address individually
several important elements of the Chair’s briefing.
First, while at our last time on this item (see S/PV.7211)
we discussed the incident of the interdiction in the Red
Sea of the closed vessel, we should like once again to
emphasize that we are not convinced by the experts’
allegations with respect to the direct involvement of
Iran in that incident. The accusations aimed at Tehran
are based on secondary, and not direct evidence. Even
if we could prove that there was a violation under
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), the nature of the
specific violation would not be clear.
Secondly, we agreed to retain in the last paragraph
of the report (S/2014/394) the issues highlighted by
our Western colleagues. We understand what they are
trying to say, but we do not share the concern that some
member States might interpret the decisions achieved
during the negotiation process on the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear programme as a signal of the weakening
of the Security Council sanctions regime towards Iran.
There is also another important aspect to the issue.
Some United Nations Members, wrongly interpreting
the Security Council agreed sanctions, have gone outside
that framework by instituting unilateral restrictions and
limitations that lack a basis in international law. They
are harming only themselves, creating complexities
that are impossible to resolve at the United Nations.
We also consider it important to note that, at the

14-53466

15/09/2014

Non-proliferation

current critical stage of the negotiating process on the
Iranian nuclear programme, any external activity of the
Committee — that is, acting outside of its mandate or
substituting real action with political statements of any
sort — is absolutely unacceptable. To us, this is not the
time for such behaviour.
We will do everything that falls to us to bring
the Iranian nuclear programme issue to a conclusion,
including lifting sanctions against Tehran pursuant to
resolutions of the Security Council. In that regard, we
welcome the holding of the next round of the negotiating
process, to take place from 18 to 26 September in New
York, and hope that it will reach a successful conclusion.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Australian Ambassador for his presentation of the
quarterly report of the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
for all the work he has accomplished with his team for
nearly two years.
The Iranian nuclear programme has for more than a
decade now been a serious threat to international peace
and security and a constant cause for concern for the
Security Council. Uncertainties about the exclusively
peaceful purpose of the programme and Iran’s yearslong refusal to engage in dialogue have led us to
develop a sanctions regime. However, the Council has
always been careful to keep the door to dialogue open.
On 24 November last year, Iran and the E3+3 reached
agreement on a Joint Plan of Action, providing for the
suspension by Iran of the most sensitive activities in
its nuclear programme for six months. The Plan has
allowed for the turning of a new page in the discussions
between the E3+3 and Iran with a view to finding a longterm solution. After six months of intense discussion,
the P5+1 and Iran were unfortunately unable to reach
an agreement; still, they have decided to extend the
deadline for discussions until next 24 November.
Significant differences remain between Iran
and the E3+3 with respect to several key aspects.
Negotiations will resume in a few days here in New
York on the sidelines of the general debate of the
General Assembly. We approach them with an open
mind, but we are not complacent. With our partners
in the P5+1, we are determined to achieve a long-term
solution that would allow us to establish and ensure in
the long term the exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran’s
nuclear programme. Iran must assume all the technical
consequences of its commitment to not developing

S/PV.7265

nuclear weapons, and it is only on that condition that
we can obtain an acceptable agreement.
It is also essential that the dialogue undertaken
by Iran with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) produce concrete results, particularly with
regard to the possible military dimension, past and
present, of its nuclear programme. It is with concern
that we read the latest report of the Director General
of the IAEA citing Iran’s lack of cooperation with the
Agency, including on issues related to the possible
military dimensions of the nuclear programme.
Mr. Amano reiterated his concerns today to the press
on the sidelines of a meeting of the Board of Governors.
We also note that this is the first time the Agency
has publicly reported a lack of economic cooperation
on the part of Iran since President Rohani’s assumption
of power. That is not a positive development. The
resolution of all issues related to the possible military
dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme is a key
element in restoring confidence and thus for the longterm agreement that we all seek.
Finally, I recall that the Security Council’s
resolutions on Iran remain fully in force pending a
comprehensive settlement of the proliferation crisis,
as the Joint Plan of Action explicitly sets forth. A
few months ago, we became aware of the disturbing
findings of the inquiry by the Committee’s Panel of
Experts on the interception of the vessel Klos C by
the Israeli authorities. The Experts’ report confirmed
that the cargo shipment of arms from Iran containing
rockets, mortar shells and ammunition was a violation
of the arms embargo decided by the Council. It is up to
the Sanctions Committee to take appropriate action to
respond to the incident.
In conclusion, we hope that the Committee will be
able to make rapid progress in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the final report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). They are simple
and operational and would allow for great improvement
in the implementation of the resolutions.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I join
those who have preceded me in thanking Ambassador
Gary Quinlan for his briefing and his efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I also would like to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1929 (2010) for the valuable support they
provide to the work of the Sanctions Committee.

14-534665/10

S/PV.7265

Non-proliferation

While it is true that sanctions are not an end in
themselves, it must also be remembered that they were
not imposed ​​w ithout justification. They are the response
of the international community to the fear generated by
the long-concealed development of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Fear is the direct opposite of trust.
The Joint Plan of Action agreed in Geneva on
24 November last year was a crucial milestone on a
path that must lead specifically to the re-establishment
of confidence in the exclusively peaceful purpose of the
Iranian nuclear programme. The great merit of the Plan
is to have revived the dynamics of dialogue between
the parties involved. In that regard, Luxembourg
welcomes the intense diplomatic engagement of the
E3+3, led by the High Representative of the European
Union, Catherine Ashton, with a view to negotiating
a comprehensive agreement that leads to a complete,
negotiated and lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue.
But pending the conclusion of such an agreement,
the sanctions regime established by the Security
Council remains fully applicable. Regarding the work
of the 1737 Committee, we continue to advocate for the
implementation of the recommendations of the final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). We
also consider it important to continue to examine the
case of Klos C on the seizure in March of a shipment
of arms from Iran, for which the Panel has found that
there had been a violation of the regime sanctions.
The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
5 September, notes that Iran continues to proceed
with the development of effective confidence-building
measures, suspending the most sensitive activities in its
nuclear programme, pursuant to the Joint Plan of Action.
That is certainly an encouraging sign. However, we
have not forgotten that the Iranian authorities must also
continue to cooperate with the IAEA on outstanding
issues related to possible military dimensions in their
nuclear programme. On that point, the IAEA report
finds it regrettable that there has been an unsatisfactory
level of commitment on the part of Iran. That attitude
is a cause for concern. It contrasts with the good faith
claimed by Iran as to the purpose of its intentions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Luxembourg’s
full support of current diplomatic efforts between
the E3+3 and Iran. Those efforts have now reached a
turning point. It is our hope that, despite the obstacles
that remain to be overcome, the round of talks to start
6/10

15/09/2014

this week here in New York will allow a decisive step to
be taken on the road towards the definitive resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to first thank the Permanent Representative of Australia
for his remarkable efforts at the helm of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I should
also like to thank the Panel of Experts for drafting
excellent reports replete with independent information.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of the Panel
of Experts and call for an inquiry into the violations
committed during the previous reporting period. We
should also see continued commitment to working with
the Iranian Government to obtain clarifications on the
violations that have been committed.
Many States Members of the United Nations have
not yet submitted their reports on the measures they
have taken to implement the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. We should underscore that the
success of the work of the Committee depends on those
reports. Member States must submit them. We urge the
countries in question to submit the reports as quickly
as possible in order to facilitate the work of the Panel of
Experts and the Committee.
Regarding the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2014/394, annex), Jordan calls on the Committee
to continue its deliberations on this matter, bearing in
mind all the recommendations of the Panel of Experts,
and likewise address the matter of companies producing
dual-use technology or items. Those concerned should
be encouraged to keep the Committee and the Panel
of Experts informed regarding those who are not
supporting such efforts.
We would also like to express our support for the
E3+3 negotiations. We encourage the Committee to
continue with the mission that it was charged with and
continue with its efforts in order to find a solution that
is compatible with Security Council resolutions.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his quarterly briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would
also like to commend the Panel of Experts for their
meticulous work.
Lithuania has long called for a comprehensive,
negotiated and long-term solution that would
strengthen international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, in full
14-53466

15/09/2014

Non-proliferation

compliance with its international obligations and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Lithuania notes
the progress achieved thus far in the implementation
of the 24 November 2013 Joint Plan of Action agreed
by the E3+3 and Iran. We reiterate our call on Iran to
demonstrate transparency, determination and political
will and to engage constructively with the E3+3 in
resolving all outstanding issues, including those related
to the possible undisclosed military dimension of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
We are closely following the continuing dialogue
and cooperation between Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency under the Framework for
Cooperation. The provision of all pertinent information
by the Islamic Republic of Iran and unimpeded access
to various facilities are key to achieving transparency
and enabling the Agency to have a clear understanding
of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Pending a comprehensive agreement, however, all
Security Council sanctions imposed on Iran remain in
effect. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Member States
and their nationals and entities are obliged to fully
implement the relevant Security Council measures. The
work of both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
in verifying compliance should remain unaffected. We
reiterate our appreciation for the final report of the Panel
(S/2014/394, annex) and underline the importance of
implementing its recommendations without any delay.
We are very concerned about the pattern of
conventional arms embargo violations, with persistent
reports of arms transfers from Iran to Syria and
elsewhere. The latest case involved the attempted
transfer from Iran of containers with concealed rockets,
mortars and related material on the Klos C vessel. It was
another clear violation of Iran’s obligations pursuant to
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Appropriate
and timely response by the Committee in addressing
such violations is critical.
Finally, let me reaffirm Lithuania’s support for
intensive diplomatic efforts by the E3+3 and Iran,
under the leadership of Catherine Ashton, to achieve a
comprehensive and final solution to Iran’s nuclear issue
and build a strong basis for mutual trust. We reiterate
our hope that Iran’s engagement in the E3+3 talks will
translate into cooperation with the 1737 Committee.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant

S/PV.7265

to resolution 1737 (2006). We appreciate his able
leadership and the robust work of the Panel of Experts
over the reporting period.
With the talks between the P5+1 and Iran set to
resume shortly, I reiterate the Republic of Korea’s firm
support for the ongoing diplomatic process to resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue. We hope that an agreement
will be reached within the extended time frame on a
joint comprehensive plan of action that fully addresses
all existing concerns. We urge Iran to cooperate fully
with the International Atomic Energy Agency to clarify
all present and past unresolved issues. We also believe
that, notwithstanding the diplomatic process, the
measures provided for by Security Council resolutions
on Iran remain fully in effect.
In that regard, the interdiction in the Red Sea
of conventional arms last March, which the 1737
Committee Chair mentioned in his briefing today, is
a reminder that we should remain vigilant against
Iran’s prohibited activities. The Committee needs to
actively follow up on the Panel report on that case and
take the necessary measures in response. On the same
note, it is important that the 1737 (2006) Committee
continue to discuss ways to effectively implement the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts’ final report
(S/2014/394, annex), such as on information-sharing for
cases of proliferation financing and alerting companies
of the risks of trading dual-use goods.
Finally, we are pleased to learn that the Secretariat
has completed the reappointment of the Panel following
the extension of its mandate until next year. We look
forward to continuing to work closely with the Panel.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the
quarterly report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We reiterate our appreciation for his able
leadership of the work of the Committee.
Chile is closely following the negotiations between
the permanent members of the Security Council plus
Germany and the European Union, on the one hand,
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, on the other. This is
an historic opportunity to demonstrate the effectiveness
of diplomacy as the primary tool in the conduct of
international relations.
Chile welcomes the report of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
5 September on the implementation of the Safeguards

14-534667/10

S/PV.7265

Non-proliferation

Agreement in connection with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the Islamic Republic
of Iran. In particular, we welcome the implementation
of three of the five measures agreed in the Framework
on Cooperation with the Agency, including two within
the deadline of 25 August. We note that the Islamic
Republic of Iran has begun discussions with the IAEA
on the implementation of the two remaining measures,
which are perhaps the most important, concerning the
delivery of information on the conduct of explosives
experimentation and neutron transport calculations. We
encourage the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure that
the commitment it has undertaken in the Framework of
Cooperation with the IAEA and the Joint Plan of Action
signed with the P5+1 countries plus the European Union
is reflected within the 1737 Committee, for example by
responding to letters addressed to the Committee. That
would be a good sign.
Chile understands that we do not work in a political
vacuum and that actions or measures that could be
negatively perceived by either party and affect the
climate of dialogue should be avoided. However, it
is important to remember that while a definitive and
satisfactory agreement that has been endorsed by the
Security Council does not exist, the measures imposed
by the United Nations with respect to Iran’s nuclear
programme will remain in force. Chile is confident
that the spirit of cooperation and commitment that has
been demonstrated by the Government in Tehran in its
dialogue with the P5+1 on its nuclear programme can
be reflected in other pressing issues in the Middle East.
Iran’s support in resolving such issues is needed.
In conclusion, and with respect to the Panel of
Experts, Chile notes the new configuration of that
group. We underscore the need for the Secretariat to be
guided by the principles of gender equality and equitable
geographical representation in the Committee and in
the other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Gary
Quinlan, for his quarterly report on the activities of the
Committee for the period of 25 June to 12 September.
Chad takes note of the quarterly report and
encourages the Committee to continue its work,
including the consideration of the recommendations
of the report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394,

8/10

15/09/2014

annex). Chad also encourages the Committee to
continue its interaction with Member States to provide
them with guidelines on Security Council measures.
Finally, we encourage the Committee to continue
its communication with the Islamic Republic of Iran
concerning the incident of 31 March.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, through you, Madam President, I would
like to begin by thanking Ambassador Quinlan for
presenting the quarterly report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and, as always, for his dedicated work at the
head of that subsidiary body.
We have received the final report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on the implementation by Iran of its Safeguards
Agreement under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. We underscore that the report
acknowledges that Iran has implemented two of the
five measures agreed with the Agency in May under
the cooperation framework with the IAEA and two
additional measures after the established deadline. We
also note that the report points out that, in the reporting
period, Iran did not enrich uranium above 5 per cent
and that, following reconversion processes, it no longer
has a stock of 20-per cent enriched uranium.
Like the other members of the international
community, we are following developments in the
negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran very closely. We
find the willingness shown by all parties encouraging
and hope that a final agreement can be reached by the
new agreed deadline of November. Once again, we are
pleased that trust has again been placed in the IAEA so
that it may carry out its nuclear energy monitoring and
verification activities in relation to the implementation
of the Joint Plan of Action.
In conclusion, we welcome the progress in the
negotiations. We note the conclusion of the Director
General of IAEA with regard to Iran’s strong
commitment to implementing the Joint Plan of Action.
At the same time, we reiterate our continued belief that
Iran must meet its obligations, including the Council
resolutions, and actively cooperate with the Agency on
all outstanding issues.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for the
presentation of the Committee’s 90-day report and

14-53466

15/09/2014

Non-proliferation

for his able leadershp at the helm of the Committee.
Rwanda recognizes the efforts of the Committee and
its Panel of Experts in helping Member States and other
entities to comply with their obligations in accordance
with resolution 1737 (2006) and other relevant
resolutions. We particularly welcome the Chair’s report
on guidance to Member States, which covers a range
of issues regarding the sanctions regime. We believe
that such communication between the Committee and
Member States or other interested entities will enhance
compliance with the Iranian sanctions regime.
We urge the Government of Iran to cooperate with
the Committee and its Panel of Experts in order to
clarify the issue of the interdiction in the Red Sea by a
Member State of a cargo of conventional arms that were
allegedly loaded onto a vessel in the Iranian port of
Bandar Abbas. Such cooperation will be important in
preventing the Committee and the Panel from reaching
arbitrary conclusions and should be carried out in line
with Iran’s demonstrated willingness to cooperate
with international actors so as to settle the outstanding
issues with regard to its nuclear programme.
Rwanda commends Iran and the P5+1 for the
important ground covered in the ongoing negotiations
towards a final comprehensive nuclear deal. We
commend the parties for finding value and diplomacy
and for seeking peaceful political solutions. However
strenuous it may seem, that was evident in July,
when the parties agreed to extend the period of the
negotiations for another four months to give themselves
more time to close the underlying gaps. We look
forward to the resumption of talks next week in New
York. Meanwhile, in the light of the recent report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, we call on the
Government of Iran to enhance its cooperation with the
Agency regarding its nuclear programme.
In conclusion, we consider the efforts of the 1737
(2006) Committee and its Panel of Experts an integral
part of the initiatives to find a solution to the standoff
between Iran and the international community on Iran’s
nuclear programme. While recalling that the sanctions
regime remains in force until the settlement of the
crisis, we call on the Committee to always be ready
to take actions that would support the success of the
talks between Iran and P5+1 and other similar peaceful
initiatives.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

S/PV.7265

We would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing and his leadership of the Committee. We
appreciate his efforts to ensure that the Committee
remains active in carrying out its mandate.
The Council meets today as P5+1 talks continue
on Iran’s nuclear programme. The representatives of
those countries are negotiating a comprehensive plan
of action that, once implemented, would ensure that
Iran does not acquire a nuclear weapon and that Iran’s
nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful. They seek
to finalize such arrangements by 24 November of this
year. We wish the negotiators well.
In the meantime, the Council and its Iran Sanctions
Committee must ensure the continued implementation
of United Nations sanctions. We have been troubled to
hear reports of confusion as to whether the sanctions
remain in effect during the period of negotiations.
Although the P5+1 offered Iran some limited and
reversible sanctions relief as part of the joint plan of
action, the plan included no changes to United Nations
sanctions. On the contrary, only the Security Council
has the authority to tighten, relax or otherwise modify
the measures imposed under resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). Similarly,
only the Security Council may change the mandate of
the Committee and its Panel of Experts. In the absence
of such a decision of the Council, the important work of
enforcing the sanctions must continue. The Committee
and the Panel should continue their vital efforts. More
should be done to help States understand and implement
their obligations under such resolutions.
We urge the Committee and the Panel to devote
special attention to the long-standing problem of illicit
Iranian exports. Resolution 1747 (2007) prohibits Iran
from exporting all arms and related material to any group
or country around the world. Yet just this spring, Iran
was caught smuggling tons of arms aboard the vessel
Klos C. We are grateful to the Panel for researching
that incident in great detail and for shining a light on
Iran’s prohibited arms shipments. We encourage the
Committee to consider follow-up action to ensure that
those that violate Security Council resolutions face the
consequences.
In that vein, Iran’s arms smuggling to groups in
Gaza has been especially pernicious and should be a
focus of the Committee’s work in the coming months.
Iran’s pipeline of arms and military equipment to
extremist groups in Gaza makes it harder to find

14-534669/10

S/PV.7265

Non-proliferation

15/09/2014

solutions that could enable Israelis and Palestinians to
live in peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In the coming weeks and months, the Committee’s
work will remain vital. We therefore encourage the
Committee to support full enforcement of the Council’s
resolutions for as long as the resolutions remain in
effect.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

10/10

The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

14-53466
