A/69/228*–S/2014/560*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
4 August 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Items 124 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l),
(m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), (s), (t), (u), (v), (w) and (x) of
the provisional agenda**
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central European Initiative
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization

* Second reissue for technical reasons (30 October 2014).
** A/69/150.

14-58636* (E)

311014

*1458636*

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
In a number of resolutions, the General Assembly has noted with satisfaction
the active participation of regional and other organizations in the work of the United
Nations. The present report is prepared pursuant to the most recent requests of the
Assembly that the Secretary-General submit a report on the implementation of those
resolutions at its sixty-ninth session. As requested by the Assembly in paragraph 4 (l)
of the annex to its resolution 58/316, this is a consolidated report on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other organizations .

2/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

The present report covers the period since the issuance of the mos t recent
consolidated report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations, on 9 August 2012 ( A/67/280S/2012/614).
In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to include, in his regular reporting to the Council, assessments of progress
on the cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional organizatio ns.
In its presidential statement of 6 August 2013, the Council also requested the
Secretary-General to include, in his next biannual report to the Council and the
General Assembly on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations, recommendations on ways to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations and arrangements.

14-58636

3/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

II.

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

African Union . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

Association of Southeast Asian Nations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Caribbean Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Central European Initiative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

Collective Security Treaty Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

Council of Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

Economic Community of Central African States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

Economic Cooperation Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

Eurasian Economic Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

International Organization of la Francophonie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

Latin American and Caribbean Economic System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

League of Arab States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Organization for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

Organization of American States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

Organization of Islamic Cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

Pacific Islands Forum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Shanghai Cooperation Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Southern African Development Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, and cooperation between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

Observations and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

III.

IV.

4/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

I. Introduction
1.
Section II of the present report has been prepared pursuant to the most recent
General Assembly resolutions in which the Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral to report on the cooperation between the United Nations and a number of
regional and other organizations.
2.
In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to include, in his regular reporting to the Council, assessments of progress
on the cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional organizations.
In its presidential statement of 6 August 2013, the Council also requested the
Secretary-General to include, in his next biannual report to the Council and the
General Assembly on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations, recommendations on ways to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations and
arrangements.
3.
The activities and achievements described in the present report demonstrate
the depth of cooperation achieved between the United Nations and its regional
partners across the full range of mandate areas, from the maintenance of
international peace and security and humanitarian assistance to development and the
protection of human rights.

II. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations
African Union
4.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council held
their seventh and eighth annual consultative meetings in 2013 and 2014. The United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security continues to meet
twice a year, contributing to the efforts of both organizations to develop a common
understanding of the causes and drivers of conflict in Africa and to promote joint
approaches to resolving those conflicts.
5.
During the past two years, the African Union, supported by the United
Nations, deployed two new peace support operations: the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali and the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic. The United Nations Office to the African Union provides
critical support for the planning and management of the start-up, deployment and
operation of those missions, as well as to ensure more effective communication
between the African Union and the United Nations in preparing for the eventual
handover of those missions to the United Nations. The Office has placed additional
emphasis on making its collaboration with the African Union more systematic and
sustained through all stages of the conflict cycle. This includes a ren ewed focus on
strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in
the areas of early warning, conflict prevention and mediation, including through
enhanced exchange of information and joint analysis, and systematic engagement
with a view to coordinated, timely and effective action based on the principles of
added value and complementarity. The Office has also continued to provide support
to the African Union in the operationalization of the Continental Structural Conflict

14-58636

5/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Prevention Framework and has enhanced its engagement on the Continental Early
Warning System. The United Nations continues to provide electoral advice and
support to the African Union Democracy and Electoral Assistance Unit through the
Office.
6.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, which is the focal
point for United Nations efforts in the fight against the Lord ’s Resistance Army
(LRA), has worked closely with the African Union towards the implementation of
the United Nations regional strategy on LRA and has supported the Union’s
Regional Cooperation Initiative against LRA.
7.
In November 2013, the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the World Bank and the African Development Bank undertook their first
joint visit to the Sahel, a first step towards the provision of more effective and
targeted support to the region. On the margins of the joint visit, ministers from the
Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb regions agreed to establish a regional
mechanism to enhance coordination, mobilize resources and pri oritize regional
initiatives. The mechanism is supported by a technical secretariat co-chaired by the
African Union and the United Nations.
8.
In Somalia, the United Nations Office to the African Union helped to enhance
the ability of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to address the
situation. The Department of Field Support delivers the logistic support package to
AMISOM through the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission
in Somalia. With the establishment of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in June 2013, cooperation with AMISOM on the ground has been
strengthened at the strategic and operational levels.
9.
The Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan provided technical and
advisory support to the African Union High-level Implementation Panel with regard
to the negotiations between the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, which
led to the signing of agreements on 27 September 2012 and the subsequent
operationalization of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism on
16 June 2014.
10. In Guinea-Bissau, the African Union and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries have been key United Nations partners in efforts to restore
constitutional order following the coup d’état of 12 April 2012.
11. The United Nations and the African Union are partners in the implementation
of the African Solidarity Initiative and have initiated a dialogue on coherent
strategies to sustain international attention with regard to the peacebuilding needs in
three countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission: Burundi, the
Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau.
12. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
provided substantive advice to the African Union-Regions Steering Committee on
Small Arms and Light Weapons regarding the implementation of the African Union
Strategy on the Control of Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons and the African Union Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Capacity Programme. The Centre also provided support to African
Member States in their preparations for the Fifth Biennial Meeting of States to
consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

6/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

13. OHCHR provided technical assistance to the African Union for the
development of policies and tools, notably the transitional justi ce policy framework,
the aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and the
Operational Guide to the Integrated Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Standards. OHCHR also provided technical advice on setting up
commissions of inquiry in line with relevant international standards, further to t he
establishment by the African Union Peace and Security Council of a commission of
inquiry in South Sudan.
14. OHCHR facilitated interaction between the African Court on Human and
Peoples’ Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and
between the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
and the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The special procedures of the Human
Rights Council and of the African Commission on Human and Peoples ’ Rights
continued to strengthen their collaboration within the framework of the Addis Ababa
Road Map.
15. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is supporting the African
Union Commission with respect to the implementation of the Plan of Action on
Drug Control and Crime Prevention 2013-2017, which was adopted by the African
Union Conference of Ministers for Drug Control in Addis Ababa in October 2012.
16. In 2013, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict signed a declaration of intent with the African Union
Peace and Security Department setting out joint priorities aimed at enhancing the
mainstreaming of child protection into African Union policies and operations.
17. The Statistics Division has supported the African Union Commission, the
African Development Bank and the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) in their
task of improving international trade statistics in Africa. Among other events, a
regional seminar on international trade statistics was organized in May 2014 at
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa.
18. ECA provided capacity development support to the African Union in the
formulation of its 50-year development vision, the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
including the establishment of baselines and the preparation of perspective studies
and forecasts. ECA coordinates United Nations system-wide support for Agenda
2063.
19. ECA collaborated with the African Peer Review Mechanism secretariat and
other regional stakeholders to increase the number of countries acceding to the
Mechanism process. Technical support was provided for the integration of national
programmes of action arising from that process into national plans and development
strategies. In 2014, the fifteenth session of the Mechanism was co-chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the African
Union.
20. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) works closely with the
African Energy Commission on the development of energy planning capabilities,
including with respect to nuclear power. IAEA supports the Pan-African Tsetse and
Trypanosomiasis Eradication Campaign and collaborates with the Pan-African
Veterinary Vaccine Centre on the Animal Production and Health Subprogramme of
the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/IAEA
Programme of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture.

14-58636

7/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

21. FAO provides technical assistance, capacity development, human resource and
programme funding in the agriculture and food security sectors, most n otably with
the African Union Department of Rural Economy and Agriculture and the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) Planning and Coordination Agency.
In 2013, FAO partnered with the African Union in a project on a “Unified Approach
to End Hunger in Africa by 2025”.
22. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is
working with the African Union to increase intra-African trade and support the
establishment of a continental free trade agreement. UNCTAD organized a visit by
the African Union Commission to its headquarters to strengthen statistical capacity
in the areas of international merchandise and services trade statistics; foreign direct
investment statistics; the production of statistical publications; and data collection.
23. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) collaborated with the
African Union in the preparation of the annual progress report on the Millennium
Development Goals in Africa and provided support to the African Union High-level
Committee of African Heads of State and Government on the Post-2015 Agenda in
articulating its African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda.
UNDP supported the development of the African Charter on the Values and Principles
of Public Service and Administration as an anti-corruption strategy for the public
service.
24. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the African Union,
through the Union’s Commissioner for Rural Economy and Agriculture, work ed
jointly to support ministerial forums such as the African Ministerial Conference on
the Environment and the African Ministers’ Council on Water. UNEP assisted the
development of the Action Plan for the Environment Initiative of NEPAD, in close
cooperation with the NEPAD secretariat and the African Union.
25. The World Meteorological Organization supported the establishment of the
African Ministerial Conference on Meteorology, which convenes every two years to
discuss matters related to the development of meteorology and its applications.
26. The Department of Public Information disseminated information about
NEPAD objectives and achievements, such as in the celebrations of the annual
Africa Week at the United Nations and the commemoration of the tenth anniversary
of the African Peer Review Mechanism.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
27. Following the adoption of the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United Nations
at the Fourth ASEAN-United Nations Summit, held in November 2011, the first
formal review of the implementation of the Comprehensive Partnership was
conducted in 2013. The two secretariats produced a joint report on the implementation
of the Partnership and made recommendations to ASEAN member States.
28. At the Fifth ASEAN-United Nations Summit, held in October 2013, the two
entities proposed two concrete outcomes: the drafting of a road map for the
Partnership in 2014-2015 and the enhancement of liaison functions between the two
organizations. Two ASEAN-United Nations workshops were held, in 2013 and
2014, on “Conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy” and “Conflict prevention
and maintenance of peace and stability in multicultural and pluralistic societies”.

8/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

The Department of Political Affairs continued to convene yearly secretariat-tosecretariat dialogues between the two organizations, and also convened the first
ASEAN-United Nations senior officials meeting in 2013.
29. Since 2010, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide has held yearly
consultations with ASEAN and some of its member States. In 2013, the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect attended the General
Assembly of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Assembly. In March 2014, the Office
organized a seminar with ASEAN parliamentarians for human rights. The Office has
also engaged with representatives of the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on
Human Rights.
30. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the
Pacific contributed to the ASEAN Regional Forum workshop on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), held in Bangkok in May 2013.
31. The United Nations Statistical Division and ASEAN organized an international
seminar on trade and tourism statistics, held in Jakarta in October 2013 and aimed at
enhancing the knowledge of countries in Asia on various areas related to trade and
tourism.
32. In November 2013, ASEAN participated in the Regional Forum on
Cross-boundary Fire Management, organized by the Economic Commission for
Europe (ECE) and FAO. Experts from ASEAN have participated in ECE capacitybuilding events on issues related to regional cooperation in trade facilitation and the
single-window concept.
33. The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ( ESCAP)
convenes the Asia-Pacific Regional Coordination Mechanism, which coordinates the
United Nations system’s collaboration with ASEAN on a number of issues. A
thematic working group worked with the ASEAN Committee on Disaster
Management and the Association’s secretariat on the development of the ASEANUnited Nations Strategic Plan of Cooperation on Disaster Management (2011-2015).
ESCAP also works closely with ASEAN on transport linkages between the countries
in the region, connectivity and technological infrastructure, energy security and
efficiency, climate change, food and water security.
34. UNCTAD has assisted ASEAN in identifying key activities to strengthen
regional investment cooperation and to realize the investment objectives of the
ASEAN Economic Community by 2015.
35. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) prepared background materials for the
2012, 2013 and 2014 ASEAN Integration Monitoring Reports and delivered
technical briefings at Meetings of the ASEAN Senior-level Committee on Financial
Integration on capital market development and capital account liberalization held in
Myanmar in February 2014.
36. UNEP has been working with the ESCAP Regional Coordination Mechanism
to develop a joint United Nations-ASEAN road map for cooperation as agreed at the
Fifth ASEAN-United Nations summit, held in October 2013. UNEP, in cooperation
with ASEAN, has organized the annual ASEAN Plus Three leadership programme
on sustainable consumption and production. UNEP and ASEAN are also supporting
the policy dialogue on sustainable consumption and production through the ASEAN
Forum on that topic.

14-58636

9/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

37. Under the auspices of the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster Management and
Emergency Response, the World Food Programme (WFP) supports the Association’s
plan to grow into an efficient regional responder. WFP has dispatched ASEAN
operational support equipment and relief items in response to earthquakes in
Myanmar and the Philippines, monsoon floods in Cambodia and, most recently,
Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda in the Philippines.
38. ASEAN and the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Offices for
South-East Asia and the Western Pacific are in the process of signing a renewed
joint memorandum of understanding for the period 2014-2017. ASEAN and WHO
collaborate through a number of forums, in particular the ASEAN Mechanism for
Health Cooperation, the ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Health Development,
the ASEAN Task Force on Non-Communicable Diseases and the ASEAN Expert
Group on Food Safety.
39. In 2012, FAO and ASEAN formalized a memorandum of understanding on
strengthening cooperation in agriculture and forestry. FAO collaborates with ASEAN
on food security and sustainable agriculture. During the biennium 2013 -2014, FAO
cooperation with ASEAN was focused on the development of a new strategic plan of
action on food security (2015-2019) and a post-2015 ASEAN vision, objectives and
goals for cooperation in the food, agriculture and forestry sectors.
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
40. The Department of Political Affairs continued to act in accordance with the
priorities of successive chairmanships of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization related to promoting greater regional cooperation, development and
prosperity across the Black Sea region.
41. ECE cooperates with the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization in a
number of transportation-related areas, including border-crossing procedures, the
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under Cover of TIR
Carnets, and the standardization and implementation of international vehicle weight
certificates. ECE and the organization have organized a regional seminar on trade
facilitation and the promotion of best practices in port community systems/the
single-window concept in the Black Sea area.
42. UNEP works closely with the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
to enhance the current structure of environmental governance in the Black Sea
region and to integrate environmental considerations into national and regional
policy dialogue. UNEP facilitates environmental discussions between Member
States and offers expertise regarding transboundary issues of concern.
43. The Director General of FAO visited the headquarters of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization in 2012. The two entities began to draft a
memorandum of understanding setting out technical areas for collaboration, including
agricultural development and food security, food safety for trade facilitation,
consumer protection, and harmonization within the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization region. FAO participates as an observer in the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization working group on agriculture and agro-industry.

10/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Caribbean Community
44. The Seventh General Meeting between the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and the United Nations system was held in New York in July 2013,
with the participation of both Secretaries-General. The participants reviewed the
progress made in implementing the new coordination mechanism led by the United
Nations Development Group for Latin America and the Caribbean and discussed
issues identified as priorities by the CARICOM secretariat. Among the thematic
priorities discussed were climate change, small island developing States, the
post-2015 development agenda, citizen security and transnational organized crime,
as well as agricultural development and non-communicable diseases.
45. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean cooperated with CARICOM in
implementing the Caribbean assistance programme on strengthening the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).
46. In April 2014, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched a
regional programme for the period 2014-2016 in support of the CARICOM Crime
and Security Strategy, developed by the Community’s Implementation Agency for
Crime and Security. A memorandum of understanding between the Office and the
Agency was signed to facilitate collaboration between the two entities.
47. UNDP collaborated with CARICOM in coordinating 13 national consultations
with small island developing States on such issues as debt, the fiscal crisis, and
youth unemployment, producing inputs for the Third International Conference on
small island developing States. UNDP also provided support for the preparation of a
best practices manual for the management of free and fair elections in the Caribbean
Community.
48. The Statistics Division intensified its cooperation with CARICOM in the areas
of national accounts, integrated economic statistics, international trade and tourism
statistics and environment statistics. The Division and CARICOM organized a training
workshop in 2013 on compilation issues relating to travel and tourism statistics for the
Caribbean countries, as well as statistical seminars in 2014 on the System of National
Accounts 2008 and the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting.
49. In 2013, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC) supported the Caribbean Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States. ECLAC also
cooperated with CARICOM in relation to a number of other meetings, such as the
Caribbean Forum on Population, Migration and Development, the Regional
Conference on Population and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
and the CARICOM High-level Ministerial Meeting on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities in the Caribbean.
50. CARICOM is a member of the Steering Committee of the IMF Caribbean
Regional Technical Assistance Centre and provides input into the Fund ’s technical
assistance programme for the region.
51. UNEP participates in the meetings of the Council for Trade and Economic
Development on the environment and sustainable development, and facilitates the
work of the Forum of Ministers of Environment for Latin America and the
Caribbean. UNEP is implementing the European Community project entitled

14-58636

11/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

“Capacity-building Related to Multilateral Environmental Agreements in Africa,
Caribbean and Pacific Countries”, in which the CARICOM secretariat serves as the
Caribbean Hub.
52. The World Food Programme (WFP) and the International Labour Organization
(ILO) have coordinated the support provided by the United Nations system to
CARICOM in the area of human security. A project proposal has been prepared on
“Acceleration of human development in the Caribbean”, aimed at developing a
regional human security observatory for CARICOM member States.
53. In November 2012, the CARICOM secretariat requested the technical
assistance of FAO in strengthening the Caribbean Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Agency in the areas of plant and animal health and food safety. FAO a nd the
Chilean International Cooperation Agency agreed to diagnose the state of food
safety in CARICOM countries and develop a series of recommendations.
54. The Department of Public Information, CARICOM and the African Union
collaborated for the 2013 and 2014 commemorations of the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade.
Commemorative activities included a global student videoconference. In addition,
the Department regularly highlights cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community on its news platforms.
Central European Initiative
55. ECE participates in the annual meetings of the Central European Initiative and
provides advisory services on trade development and facilitation. EC E and the
Initiative are also cooperating within the framework of the new ECE Group of
Experts on Renewable Energy, created in 2013, in particular on regulatory and
policy dialogue and the sharing of best practices on various renewable energy
sources, including biomass, with a view to increasing the share of renewable energy
in the global energy mix. In addition, ECE is participating in the inter -agency
process coordinated by the Initiative on advanced biofuels.
56. FAO provided technical support for the Central European Initiative ministerial
meeting entitled “Green growth — with focus on rural development”, held in
Budapest in April 2013. FAO contributed to the development of a background paper,
provided a keynote lecture on “Food and nutrition security: global trends,
challenges, policy options” and participated in the overall discussion.
Collective Security Treaty Organization
57. In follow-up to its first visit to the headquarters of the secretariat of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in late 2012, jointly organized with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs
organized and supported a series of high-level visits, meetings and discussions
between various United Nations departments and Collective Security Treaty
Organization counterparts working on issues related to, inter alia, peacekeeping,
counter-terrorism, Afghanistan and mediation. In 2013, this series of meetings
culminated in the first videoconference dialogue between the Department and the
organization. Participants discussed the deepening of expert-level cooperation on
key issues of mutual interest, including conflict prevention, early warning and
capacity-building in the Eurasian region.

12/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

58. Furthermore, the Secretary-General of the United Nations met with the
Secretary-General of the Collective Security Treaty Organization on the margins of
the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. The United Nations SecretaryGeneral welcomed the progress achieved in enhancing practical cooperation
between the two secretariats with the recent launch of the dialogue between the
organizations and the finalization of a memorandum of understanding to strengthen
cooperation on peacekeeping-related issues between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
59. In Central Asia, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia continued to engage and meet regularly with the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, with the organization also frequently participating in the
Centre’s activities.
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
60. The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau, in
partnership with the African Union, maintained close cooperation with the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries to support international efforts to
assist Guinea-Bissau in addressing political challenges and carrying out a peaceful
political transition.
61. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime supported activities related to
the adoption of a declaration and action plan on the establishment of common
measures to prevent and combat corruption by civil servant agents in international
commercial transactions, as well as a declaration and action plan on trafficking in
persons, which were signed in 2013. The Office was one of the partners of the first
International Conference on Drugs Policies in the African Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, held in 2014.
62. The Portuguese Unit of United Nations Radio facilitated coverage of issues of
concern to the United Nations and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries. The United Nations Regional Information Centre in Brussels holds the
monthly event “Ciné-ONU” in Lisbon, in partnership with the Portuguese
non-governmental organization platform and the Community secretariat. In January
2013, an event was dedicated to the International Day of Commemoration in
Memory of the Victims of the Holocaust.
Council of Europe
63. On the margins of the first World Forum for Democracy, held in 2012, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations met with the Secretary-General of the
Council of Europe to exchange views on how to further strengthen cooperation on
democracy, as well as to discuss developments in the Middle East and North Africa
and the situation of the Roma, minorities and migrants in Europe. At their meeting
held in Brussels in early 2014, they discussed the engagement of both institutions in
Ukraine.
64. The Statistics Division has served as a member of the Steering Committee and
the Management Group of the International Monitoring Operation on the Population
and Housing Censuses in Bosnia and Herzegovina, established by the Council of
Europe, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

14-58636

13/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

65. In 2012, the Council of Europe participated in the ECE Ministerial Conference
on Ageing in Vienna. The ECE Population Unit and the Council’s European
Committee for Social Cohesion, Human Dignity and Equality participated in the
Social Forum of the Human Rights Council in April 2014. The Council, through its
European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement, is a key partner in the
Team of Specialists on Forest Fire and has funded the establishment of Regional
Fire Monitoring Centres in South-Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Eastern Europe.
66. In September 2013, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) and the secretariat of the Council of Europe signed a joint
declaration defining a general framework for enhancing their cooperation through
consultations, the exchange of information and joint activities at the country level.
The Office and the Council held an annual coordination meeting in November 2013.
Economic Community of Central African States
67. In 2012, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) signed a framework -ofcooperation agreement defining the priority areas of the partnership between the two
entities, such as political governance, mediation support, the fight against the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons, and the reinforcem ent of
institutional capacity. In an effort to reinvigorate their partnership in the light of
new developments and challenges facing the subregion, the framework of
cooperation is currently being reviewed and should soon be finalized.
68. In 2013, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa worked closely
with Central African States and ECCAS in convening the Summit of Heads of State
and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea to develop a
regional anti-piracy strategy. The Office is currently supporting the
operationalization of the strategy and of the Interregional Coordination Centre for
the Implementation of a Regional Strategy for Maritime Safety and Security in
Central and West Africa.
69. Since assuming the secretariat functions of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa in 2011, the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa has been working closely with ECCAS
in the preparation of biannual ministerial meetings. The United Nations supports the
ECCAS-led mediation in the Central African Republic.
70. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa is
cooperating with ECCAS in developing a legislation guide to support ECCAS
member States in harmonizing their national legislation with the Central African
Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly, as well as the Arms Trade Treaty. The Centre contributed substantively to
a workshop on border control and small arms and light weapons organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force for countries in the region.
71. In March 2014, the Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission visited Bangui to consult with representatives of
ECCAS and other key stakeholders.
72. FAO is supporting ECCAS in the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme in seven of its member States.

14/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Economic Cooperation Organization
73. The Statistics Division and the secretariat of the Economic Cooperation
Organization organized training workshops on national accounts and integrated
economic statistics. These included a training workshop on the System of National
Accounts 2008 held in 2012 for States members of the organization and a regional
seminar on the System of National Accounts 2008 held in 2013.
74. In 2014, the secretariat of the United Nations Forum on Forests and the
Economic Cooperation Organization secretariat organized the first regional
workshop on harnessing climate change financing for sustainable fo rest
management. The Forum, the Economic Cooperation Organization and FAO will
support the development of a regional strategy in this area.
75. The Economic Cooperation Organization is an active partner of the Working
Party on Customs Questions affecting Transport. The organization was involved in
the reactivation of the TIR Convention of ECE in Afghanistan and is actively
promoting international road transport in Pakistan.
76. The Economic Cooperation Organization participated in the ESCAP Policy
Dialogue on Strengthening Transport Connectivity among the South and South-West
Asian Countries, held in 2013, and the first meeting of the Regional Network of
Legal and Technical Experts on Transport Facilitation, held in 2014. In 2013,
ESCAP visited the Economic Cooperation Organization secretariat to discuss
transport facilitation issues in railway transport and the implementation of the
organization’s Transit Transport Framework Agreement.
Eurasian Economic Community
77. Under its memorandum of understanding with the Eurasian Economic
Community, ECE has been working on trade facilitation and the single-window
concept. During the biennium 2013-2014, two conferences, one seminar and six
advisory missions took place. As a result, the Integrated Information Syst em for
Foreign and Mutual Trade of the Customs Union was developed, and a second
edition of Trade Facilitation Terms: An English-Russian Glossary was published.
78. A memorandum of understanding among the secretariats of ESCAP and ECE
and the integration committee of the Eurasian Economic Community was signed in
2013. The agreement is focused on the strengthening of cooperation among the
Community secretariat and the secretariats of the two regional commissions to
promote internationally agreed development goals. The Community participates in
projects undertaken by the two regional commissions in such areas as water, energy
and trade.
79. IMF works with the Eurasian Development Bank on country work with some
Member States (e.g., Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan). In addition, IMF has
made initial contacts with the Eurasian Economic Commission on issues related to
the Eurasian Customs Union and the formation of a Eurasian single economic space
as from 2015.
80. UNCTAD cooperates with the Eurasian Economic Community on non-tariff
measures. Two working meetings on that subject were held in 2014.
81. A joint FAO-Eurasian Economic Community round table on food security and
trade in the region was held in 2013. The round table concluded with a set of

14-58636

15/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

recommendations on potential areas of collaboration between FAO and the
Community. A memorandum of understanding on cooperation between FAO and the
Community was signed in 2013.
International Organization of la Francophonie
82. The United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie
coordinated their good offices and mediation efforts in several countries, including
the Central African Republic and Mali. In the Central African Republic, the ECCAS
Mediator and the Special Envoy of the International Organization of la
Francophonie consulted closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Central Africa. The Department of Political Affairs also worked with the
organization at the technical level to reinforce cooperation and increase informationsharing and the exchange of best practices.
83. In December 2013, the United Nations participated in a meeting of
francophone Junior Professional Officers convened at the headquarters of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, at which was discussed the
establishment of a network of experts focusing on peace, security and development
challenges facing countries on the organization’s agenda. In June 2014, a follow-up
meeting was convened by the Office of the Permanent Observer for the organization
to discuss ways to enhance collaboration and synergy with the Secretariat on issues
of common interest.
84. In 2013, OHCHR and the International Organization of la Francophonie
renewed their cooperation agreement for the period 2014-2015. The agreement
included support for the engagement of French-speaking countries with the
universal periodic review and other human rights mechanisms and the
implementation of projects, particularly in the areas of anti -discrimination, the rule
of law and transitional justice. In 2013, eight projects were implemented within the
framework of the agreement.
85. As part of the Observance of the International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, the Department of Publ ic
Information, the International Organization of la Francophonie and Bureau de la
Martinique organized a poetry recital to honour the 100th anniversary of the birth of
Aimé Césaire in 2013. The Department and the organization also cooperated in
relation to a number of other cultural events throughout the period, including a
series of annual round-table discussions on multilingualism.
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
86. The Latin American and Caribbean Economic System participated in a
workshop on the Trade Facilitation Implementation Guide organized by ECE in
cooperation with ECLAC in 2013. ECE was invited by the System to participate in a
Latin American and Caribbean regional meeting on international trade single
windows held in Mexico in 2013.
87. IMF participated in a meeting of experts organized by the Latin American and
Caribbean Economic System entitled “Debt burden and fiscal sustainability in the
Caribbean region” in 2013.
88. In 2012, WFP participated in the 13th meeting of international cooperation
directors of Latin America and the Caribbean, on cooperation on regional food

16/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

security and organized by the Latin American and Caribbean Economic System, the
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation and Agriculture and FAO.
League of Arab States
89. The United Nations and the League of Arab States (LAS) have taken steps to
review their overall cooperation. The Department of Political Affairs is
implementing a project to help LAS to develop its capacities in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution, mediation and, in particular, elections. This is being
achieved through staff visits, teleconferences and the exchange of communications.
Cooperation in the political, humanitarian, economic and social fields was discussed
at the United Nations-LAS general cooperation meeting held in June 2014. A new
matrix of cooperation was adopted to guide joint activities during the next
biennium.
90. Over the past two years, the Department of Political Affairs, in cooperation
with UNDP, has strengthened its electoral partnership with LAS, including through
BRIDGE (Building Resources in Democracy, Governance and Elections) training
sessions on electoral matters and technical advice on the establishment of LAS
electoral databases.
91. The annual discussions between the United Nations and LAS regularly address
the issue of counter-terrorism, in order to ensure enhanced cooperation and
coordination with respect to the counter-terrorism activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
92. The Office for Disarmament Affairs participated in three consultative meetings
with LAS and Member States regarding the Helsinki conference on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. A number of LAS member States participated in regional workshops,
including in Pretoria (2012), Addis Ababa (2013) and Astana (2014). In June 2013, the
LAS secretariat and the Office for Disarmament Affairs held a two -day joint
conference for LAS small arms focal points.
93. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) cooperates with LAS in various areas. In September 2013, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of LAS co-chaired
a special meeting of a group of supporters of UNRWA on the margins of the General
Assembly, which was focused on the consolidation of the contributions of Arab
countries to the UNRWA regular budget. A League delegation visited Palestine
refugee camps in Lebanon in January 2013 as part of a fact-finding tour of areas
affected by the Syrian Arab Republic crisis. LAS hosts an annual high-level
strategic meeting in Cairo of directors of education and other officials and civil
society representatives from UNRWA host States.
94. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and LAS cooperate within the
framework of the Regional Programme on Drug Control, Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Reform for the Arab States (2011-2015). In addition to promoting the
ratification and implementation of the international conventions and protocols related
to terrorism, the Office has focused on international and regional cooperation aimed at
combating transnational organized crime in North Africa and the Middle East.
95. ECE and the LAS Centre of Water Studies and Arab Water Security organized
a workshop on legal frameworks for cooperation on transboundary waters in 2014.

14-58636

17/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

The Arab Ministerial Water Council adopted a resolution in June 2013 inviting the
Centre to cooperate with ECE with respect to the holding of a workshop to discuss
the Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes.
96. IMF works with the Arab Monetary Fund on regional policy coordination,
training, Arab statistics and Arab debt markets.
97. OHCHR provided technical advice on modalities for the Arab Court of Human
Rights, which were adopted at the Arab summit held in Doha in March 2013.
Furthermore, OHCHR has been supporting LAS in the strengthening of its human
rights mechanisms. In 2014, OHCHR and the League organized a regional
conference on the promotion and protection of human rights in the Arab region.
98. UNDP assisted LAS in the establishment of a regional Crisis Response Centre
and Early Warning System. UNDP also supports the regional Aid for Trade project,
launched in 2012 to support the institutional capacity-building of the Economic
Integration Department of the LAS secretariat. UNDP, ESCWA and UNEP co -chaired
consultations between League of Arab States and the United Nations on economic,
social and cultural affairs, which resulted in an agreement on joint activities for the
biennium 2013-2014.
99. UNEP works with LAS, the Council of Arab Ministers Responsible for the
Environment and the Joint Committee on Environment and Development in the
Arab Region. Under the memorandum of understanding between UNEP and LAS,
UNEP contributes to the implementation of activities in follow-up to the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
100. The WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean is continuing the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding signed with LAS in 2009.
WHO supports the establishment of an Arab committee for coordination in
combating counterfeit drugs, and advocacy for the develop ment of national
medicine policies and good governance with respect to medicine in Arab countries.
101. WMO supports the LAS Permanent Committee on Meteorology and its
working groups, which met in 2014 to consider capacity development issues in
relation to meteorological and hydrological services in the Arab States.
102. In 2013, the FAO Regional Office for the Near East and North Africa hosted a
high-level meeting with a LAS delegation. FAO is collaborating with the Arab
Centre for the Study of Arid Zones and Dry Lands in the formulation of an action
plan for the implementation of the Arab Water Security Strategy.
Organization for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM
103. The Department of Political Affairs visited the headquarters of the
Organization for Democracy and Economic Development — Guam, in Kyiv, in 2013
to discuss with the Secretary-General of GUAM the deepening of cooperation
between the Department and the organization.
104. During the biennium 2013-2014, ECE has worked with GUAM to assist the
organization in the development of a simplified customs transit data exchange.

18/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
105. In the annual staff meeting between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in 2013, the two institutions discussed options for
closer cooperation, in particular with regard to conflict prevention and mediation in
the OSCE area. Two staff exchanges were piloted successfully, focused on the
Republic of Moldova and mediation support, respectively. In 2014, the United Nations
and OSCE co-organized a training course aimed at enhancing the reconciliation skills
of staff from the headquarters, regional and national offices of the United Nations and
OSCE. Partnership in the electoral field is another area of discussion.
106. The United Nations and OSCE have cooperated closely in South -Eastern
Europe and the South Caucasus. In Central Asia, the Department of Political Affairs
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia
work closely with OSCE, including through regular desk-to-desk contacts and visits.
OSCE, in particular the Action against Terrorism Unit of its Transnational Threats
Department, is also participating in a project run by the Regi onal Centre and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. Cooperation has been
strengthened significantly in the context of the crisis in Ukraine, with fre quent
contacts between the United Nations and OSCE at all levels.
107. The Department of Political Affairs participated in the 2014 Annual Security
Review Conference, on “Fostering security and stability”, as well as in the OSCE
Security Days conference. The Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
of the United Nations met with the Secretary-General of OSCE on several occasions
during the reporting period. The Swiss Chair of OSCE briefed the Security Council
early in the year.
108. ECE supports the OSCE Border Management Staff College, in Dushanbe, in
the provision of training courses for senior border management staff from almost all
Central Asian countries, including Afghanistan and Pakistan. In November 2012,
ECE and OSCE jointly published the Handbook of Best Practices at Border
Crossings: A Trade and Transport Facilitation Perspective. OSCE was a co-sponsor
of the ECE/FAO Regional Forum on Cross-boundary Fire Management in 2013.
109. In 2014, OHCHR and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutio ns and Human
Rights signed a joint agreement aimed at strengthening cooperation in the Euro Atlantic region.
Organization of American States
110. The Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Sustainable
Democracy and Special Missions of the Organization of American States (OAS)
hold yearly desk-to-desk dialogues, the most recent of which took place in October
2013. The two departments held a three-day workshop in Panama in March 2014 on
conflict prevention and resolution, bringing together United Nations and OAS field
representatives. The United Nations and OAS coordinated election -related activities
in Latin America, including joint activities aimed at sharing comparative
experiences with other regional organizations. With regard to Hondura s, the two
organizations co-organized an international forum to promote democratic values and
discuss the code of ethics adopted by all political parties before the elections of
November 2013.

14-58636

19/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

111. The Inter-American Committee against Terrorism collaborates closely with a
number of entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force on key
counter-terrorism and security issues. The substantive expertise of OAS on topics
related to infrastructure protection, countering the financing of terrorism and
ensuring aviation, maritime, travel document, tourism and Internet security is a
valuable resource for the United Nations system.
112. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean collaborate d with OAS in
supporting the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in conducting country-specific activities in July 2013.
113. In August 2013, the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect briefed the Inter-American Juridical Committee on regional developments
related to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The Office also provided training on genoc ide prevention at the
annual Course on International Law organized by OAS.
114. In 2011, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and OAS, through the
Executive Secretariat of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission,
signed a memorandum of understanding that was recently extended until 2015. In
2014, the two entities agreed on a workplan for collaboration during the period
2014-2015, with an emphasis on capacity-building with respect to the monitoring of
synthetic drugs and new psychoactive substances.
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
115. In response to the Security Council presidential statement of 28 October 2013,
the United Nations strengthened its collaboration with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in the area of peace and security, including by developing
mechanisms for political consultations on matters of mutual interest, deepening the
mediation partnership of the organizations and engaging in electoral cooperation.
United Nations representatives attended important OIC meetings, such as the
summit held in Cairo in 2013 and two recent sessions of the Council of Foreign
Ministers, held in December 2013 and June 2014.
116. The biennial general meeting on cooperation between the United Nations and
OIC was hosted by OIC in Istanbul in May 2014. Following an extensive exchange
of views on issues related to peace and security, development and human rights, the
two sides adopted a new matrix of joint activities that will serve as guidance for
effective cooperation during the next biennium.
117. The Department of Political Affairs and OIC cooperated in the electoral field,
including through a BRIDGE training workshop and a round -table discussion on
election monitoring for OIC representatives in 2014. Representatives of OIC and
other regional organizations shared experiences, lessons learned and good practices
with respect to the monitoring of elections.
118. IAEA is collaborating with OIC in various areas, including supporting
comprehensive cancer control across the African region, with a specific focus on
radiation medicine services, and conducting a feasibility study on the suitability of
the sterile insect technique as a strategy for the integrated control of anopheles
arabiensis in northern Sudan.

20/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

119. In July and December 2012, OHCHR organized a visit to Geneva and New
York for the then-newly elected commissioners of the Independent Permanent
Human Rights Commission of OIC, to enhance their knowledge of the United
Nations human rights mechanisms and explore possible areas for cooperation.
120. UNCTAD continued to cooperate with OIC in various areas. UNCTAD
contributed to publications of the Islamic Centre for the Development of Trade and
to the training of staff.
121. WHO is a member of the OIC Steering Committee on Health and has
supported the development of the OIC Strategic Health Programme of Action 2014 2023. The WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean is the secretariat for
the Global Islamic Advisory Group on Polio Eradication.
Pacific Islands Forum
122. On 27 September 2013, the Secretary-General met with the leaders of the
Pacific Islands Forum on the margins of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly to discuss recent developments in the region and ways to enhance
cooperation. During the meeting, the Forum leaders and the Secretary-General
affirmed the need for stronger political will to address climate change as well as the
United Nations post-2015 development framework.
123. ESCAP is a member of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Developme nt
Goals tasked with coordinating regional efforts in support of sustainable
development in the Pacific. ESCAP is also engaged in the Forum-led Cairns
Compact on Strengthening Development Coordination in the Pacific, in terms of
promoting coherence in development cooperation and aid effectiveness in Forum
countries. ESCAP has also undertaken joint work in nine Pacific Islands Forum
countries to review and revise national disability policies and convene the Pacific
Disability Forum.
124. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and
the Pacific provided substantive support to the Pacific Islands Forum technical
capacity-building workshop for the national points of contact with regard to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, organized by the Forum in Suva in
December 2013.
125. The Forum secretariat recently requested FAO to carry out a study on
agriculture, tourism and the opportunity to reduce foreign exchange “leakage” from
the tourism sector. In addition, FAO has collaborated with Pacific Islands countries
through the Forum Fisheries Agency in the implementation of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries.
126. IMF maintains close cooperation with the Pacific Islands Forum, which is
regularly invited to participate in high-level Pacific island conferences hosted by the
Fund in the Pacific region.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
127. In March 2013, the Secretary-General of the United Nations met with the
Secretary-General of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and they agreed to
continue strengthening the cooperation between the two organizations. Two Special

14-58636

21/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Representatives of the United Nations Secretary-General attended the meeting of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in
Bishkek in September 2013.
128. Cooperation between the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization extends to such areas as counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and its Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure
participate in the counter-terrorism project organized by the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force in Central Asia, aimed at implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy within the framework of the
Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
129. Shanghai Cooperation Organization member States, with technical and
financial assistance from ESCAP, concluded their negotiations on the draft
agreement on the facilitation of international road transport and the annexes thereto
in June 2012. Initially, some 15,500 km of roads are to be opened as a consequence
of the agreement, and two seaports can now be used by transit traffic from
landlocked Central Asian countries.
130. In 2013, the Executive Secretary of ESCAP attended the 12th meeting of the
SCO Council of Heads of State and reached broad agreement with the SCO
Secretary-General on ways to enhance collaboration. SCO participated in the
ESCAP Regional Seminar on Development of Efficient and Effective Logistics
Systems, held in 2013. SCO also participated in an expert consultation on the Asian
Information Superhighway and regional connectivity organized by ESCAP in 2013.
Southern African Development Community
131. In 2013, the Department of Political Affairs, in response to a request from the
secretariat of the Southern African Development Community (SADC), re -established
the joint liaison team with SADC, based in Gaborone. In collaboration with the United
Nations Office to the African Union, the Department seeks deeper cooperation
between the United Nations and the SADC secretariat in strengthening regional
capacities in the areas of electoral support and conflict prevention and mediation, in
accordance with the 2010 framework of cooperation signed between the secretariat
and the Department. The Department, the secretariat, the Government of Namibia
and UNDP organized an interactive dialogue in Namibia in July 2014 to explore
ways to strengthen regional cooperation between the United Nations and SADC and
share regional good practices with respect to conflict prevention and mediation.
132. The Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region has been working closely with the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC to advance the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region, signed in February 2013. The United Nations has also been cooperating
with the African Union and SADC in its efforts to eradicate illegal armed groups
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably the Mouvement
du 23 mars and the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda.
133. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is engaging with SADC on the
development of a regional counter-terrorism strategy to be based on the United

22/24

14-58636

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Efforts in this regard will continue in
2014 and 2015 in close consultation with the Department of Political Affairs -SADC
liaison team.
134. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and SADC jointly developed
their Joint Regional Programme to Make the SADC Region Safer from Crime and
Drugs (2013-2016). The Office has supported SADC member States in
strengthening their capacity to implement the United Nations Conventio n against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
Convention.
135. The Statistical Division and the SADC secretariat organized a seminar on the
implementation of the System of National Accounts 2008 in 2012 and an
international “Workshop on sharing implementation experiences of water accounts
and statistics for better policymaking in southern African countries” in 2013.
136. IMF and SADC secretariat staff held a teleconference in November 2012 to
discuss the Community’s effort to harmonize regulation for the insurance sector. The
Botswana article IV missions carried out in both 2013 and 2014 continued the
dialogue and met with the SADC secretariat in Gaborone to discuss common areas
of interest.
137. FAO assisted SADC with the preparation of a regional agriculture policy,
which was approved in June 2013. In partnership with WFP, FAO supported the
United Nations Development Group Food and Nutrition Security Working Group for
Southern Africa in the organization of a technical consultative meeting and the
discussion of programmatic approaches and related strategic information needs for
the effective integration of HIV, nutrition and gender priorities i nto regional and
national food security, agriculture and disaster risk reduction interventions.

III. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
138. Further to Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) and Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Executive Council decision
EC-M-33/DEC.1, the United Nations and OPCW established the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Mission for the Elimination of the Chemical Weapons Programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic in October 2013.
139. OPCW is a member of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
Co-Chair of the Working Group on Preventing and Responding to Weapon of Mass
Destruction Attacks. In this connection, OPCW will spearhead a Task Force project
aimed at ensuring the interoperability of relevant U nited Nations agencies and
international partners in the event of a chemical or biological attack or incident.
140. With the support of OPCW, the Biological Weapons Convention
Implementation Support Unit of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the

14-58636

23/24

A/69/228
S/2014/560

Pacific organized a workshop on the national implementation of the Biological
Weapons Convention and the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2014.
141. WMO collaborates with the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, principally in the area of the numerical
simulation of atmospheric transport and dispersion, in “backtracking” mode. Nine
Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres are currently involved.

IV. Observations and recommendations
142. As the present report illustrates, cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations now touches virtually every area of the
Organization’s mandate, from peace and security and human rights to economic and
social affairs, development and humanitarian assistance. The United Nations
should continue to strengthen its partnership with regional and subregional
actors as a means to implement the Organization’s mandates and the overall
objectives enshrined in the Charter.
143. This report also shows that regional and subregional organizations are highly
diverse, with distinct approaches, structures, priorities, thematic areas of work and
expertise. A one-size-fits-all approach to such cooperation would not be conducive to
success. In this regard, the United Nations should continue to develop contextspecific approaches to cooperation with its regional and subregional partners,
taking into account the specificities of each region, the mandate and objectives of
the institution concerned and the overall interests of Member States.
144. As varied as United Nations cooperation with regional actors may be, a
common principle across all of the partnerships described in the present report is the
recognition that more interaction and coordination are beneficial for the international
community at large. This has translated into more cooperation agreements, high -level
contacts, staff exchanges, joint training, common publications and , more broadly,
strategic coordination across a breadth of mandates. The United Nations and
regional and subregional actors should continue to explore ways in which their
cooperation can be better articulated at the strategic and technical levels.
145. The Secretary-General remains committed to further strengthening this
cooperation in the future, taking into account the different needs and demands of
each partnership.

24/24

14-58636
