General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Doi, of

R,,olllliofl

No.

TWe

11,,,.

odo1>1iot1

P-,,

27

7 December 1970

11

13

2"0 (XXV) Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and
Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof (A/8198) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
General and complete disarmament (A/8198)
Resolution A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons (A/8179)
Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests (A/8180)
Resolution A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27
27
27
28

7 December 1970
7 December 1970
7 December 1970
7 December 1970

14
14

29
29

7 December 1970
7 December 1970

1.5
1.5

2'64 (XXV) Implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-NuclearWeapon States (A/8192) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

7 December 1970

16

31

7 December 1970

16

93

7 December 1970

17

94

98

7 December 1970
7 December 1970

17
18

26
26
26
26
32

16 December 1970
16 December 1970
16 December 1970
16 December 1970
16 December 1970

19
20
20
21
22

25

17 December 1970

24

25
25
25

17 December 1970
17 December 1970
17 December 1970

2.5
25
26

2661 (XXV)

2662 (XXV)

2663 (XXV)

13

2"1 (XXV)

Bltablishment, within the framework of the International Atomic
Energy Aaency, of an International 1C1Vice for nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes under appropriate international control (A/8193)
2"' (XXV) Status of tho implementation of General Auembly resolution 24.56 B
(XXIII) concernlna the lianature and ratification of Additional Protocol n of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latia America (Treaty of natelolco) (A/8181) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2667 (XXV) E-:onomlc and social consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace and security (A/8184) ... .
2668 (XXV) Question of Korea (A/8185) .................................. .
2733 (XXV) International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space (A/8250)
Resolution A
........................................ .
Resolution B ............................................ .
Resolution C ............................................ .
Resolution D ............................................ .
2734 (XXV) Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security (A/8096)
2749 (XXV) Declaration of Principles Governing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor,
and the Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction
(A/8097) ................................................. .
27,0 (XXV) Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and the
ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas beyond
the limits of present national jurisdiction and use of their resources
in the interests of mankind, and convening of a conference on the
law of the sea (A/8097)
Resolution A ............................................ .
Resolution B ............................................ .
Resolution C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. ..... .

interests of maintaining world peace, reducing international tensions and strengthening friendly relations
among States,
Recognizing the common interest of mankind in the
reservation of the sea-bed and the ocean floor exclusively for peaceful purposes,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmanent, 1 dated 11 September

2660 (XXV). Treaty on the Prohibition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear W eapon.s and Other
Weapona of Maaa Deatruction on the SeaBed and the Ocean Floor and in the Suhaoil

Thereof
TM General .Assembly,
R«:alling its resolution 2602 F (XXIV) of 16
December 1969,
Convinced that the prevention of a nuclear arms
nee on the sea-bed and the ocean floor serves the

1 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1970, document DC/233.

11

General Auembly-Twenty-fifth SeHion

12

1970, and being appreciative of the work of the Conference on the draft Treaty on the Prohibition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons
of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, annexed to the report,
Convinced that this Treaty will further the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Commends the Treaty on the Prohtbition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons
of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, the text of which is
annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the depositary Governments to open
the Treaty for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses the hope for the widest posSible adherence to the Treaty.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
ANNEX
Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplaeement of Nuelear
Weapon11 and Other Weapon• of Ma■• De■traetlon on the
Sea-Bed and the Oeean Floor and ln the Subeoll Thereof

Th, Stat11 Partl,s to this Tr,aty,
R,cognizlng the common interest of m1nldnd in the
proare11 of the exploration and use of the sea-bed and the
ocean floor for peaceful purposes,
Consid,ring that the prevention of a nuclear arms race on
the sea-bed and the ocean floor serves the interests of maintaining world peace, reduces international tensions and
strengthens friendly relations among States,
Convinc,d that this Treaty constitutes a step towards the
exclusion of the sea-bed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof
froa. the arms race,
Convinc,d that this Treaty constitutes a step towards a
treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control, and determined to continue
negotiations to this end,
Convinc,d that this Treaty will further the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in a manner
consistent with the principles of international law and without
infringing the freedoms of the hiah seas,
Bav, agr,,d as follows:
.AII.TICLEI

1. The States Parties to this Treaty undertake not to emplant or emplace on the sea-bed and the ocean floor and in
the subsoil thereof beyond the outer limit of a sea-bed zone,
as defined in article Il, any nuclear weapons or any other
types of weapons of mass destruction as well as structures,
launching installations or any other facilities specifically designed for storing, testing or using such weapons.
2. The undertakings of paragraph 1 of this article shall
also apply to the sea-bed zone referred to in the same paragraph, except that within such sea-bed zone, they shall not
apply either to the coastal State or to the sea-bed beneath
its territorial waters.
3. The States Parties to this Treaty undertake not to assist,
encourage or induce any State to carry out activities referred
to in paragraph 1 of this article and not to participate in any
other way in such actions.
.AII.TICLE II

For the purpose of this Treaty, the outer lirnit of the seabed zone referred to in article I shall be coterminous with the
twelve-mile outer limit of the zone referred to in part II of
the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous

Zone, signed at Geneva on 29 April 1958, and shall be
measured in accordance with the provisions of part I, eection II, of that Convention and in accordance with intern&•
tional law.
MTICLBill

1. In order to promote the objectives of and enmre compliance with the provisions of this Treaty, each State Party
to the Treaty shall have the right to verify throua}i observation the activities of other States Parties to the Treaty on the
sea-bed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof beyond
the zone referred to in article I, provided that observation
does not interefere with such activities.
2. If after such observation reasonable doubts remain ClOllcerning the fulfilment of the obligations uaurned under tbe
Treaty, the State Party having auch doubta and the State
Party that is responsible for the activitiea giving rile to tbe
doubts shall consult with a view to removin1 the doubtl. If
the doubts persist, the State Party having such doubta lhaD
notify the other States Parties, and the Parties concerned shall
co-operate on such further procedures for veriftc:ation u may
be agreed, including appropriate inspection of objects, atructures, installations or other facilities that reasonably may be
expected to be of a kind described in article I. The Pardea
in the region of the activities, including any coutal State, and
any other Party so requesting, shall be entitled to participate
in such consultation and co-operation. After completion of the
further procedures for verification, an appropriate report shall
be circulated to other Parties by the Party that initiated mch
procedures.
3. If the State responsible for the activities giving rile to
the reasonable doubts 11 not identifiable by obtervation of the
object, atructure, installation or other facility, the State Party
having such doubts ahall notify and make appropriate inquiries of States Parties in the region of the activities and of
any other State Party. If it ls ascertained through these inquiries that a particular State Party is responsible for the
activities, that State Party shall consult and co-operate with
other Parties as provided in paragraph 2 of thia artide. If
the identity of the State responsible for the activities cannot
be ascertained through these inquiries, then further verfflcatioa
procedures, including inspection, may be undertaken by the
inquiring State Party, which shall invite the participation of
the Parties in the region of the activities, includin1 any coastal
State, and of any other Party desiring to co-operate.
4. If consultation and co-operation pursuant to paragraphs
2 and 3 of this article have not removed the doubts concerning the activities and there remains a eerious queation
concerning fulfllment of the obligations usurned under thia
Treaty, a State Party may, in accordance with the provialona
of the Charter of the Umted Nations, refer the matter to the
Security Council, which may take action in accordance with
the Charter.
5. Verification pursuant to this article may be undertaken
by any State Party using its own means, or with the full or
partial assistance of any other State Party, or throuah appropriate international procedures within the framework of
the United Nations and in accordance with its Charter.
6. Verification activities pursuant to this Treaty shall not
interfere with activities of other States Parties and shall be
conducted with due regard for rights recognized under international law, including the freedoms of the high seas and tbe
rights of coastal States with respect to the exploration and exploitation of their continental shelves.
.AII.TICLEIV

Nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as supporting
or prejudicing the position of any State Party with respect to
existing international conventions, including the 1958 Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, or
with respect to rights or claims which such State Party may
assert, or with respect to recognition or non-recognition of
rights or claims asserted by any other State, related to waters
off its coasts, including, inter alia, territorial seas and contiguous zones, or to the sea-bed and the ocean floor, including
continental shelves.

13

Resolutiom adopted on the reporb of the Fint Committee
AaTICLBV

The Parties to this Treaty undertake to continue negotiations in good faith concerning further measures in the field of
diaarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the seabed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof.
AaTICLBVI

Any State Party may propose amendments to this Treaty.
Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority
of the States Parties to the Treaty and, thereafter, for each
remainina State Party on the date of acceptance by it.
AaTICLB VII

Five years after the entry into force of this Treaty, a conference of Parties to the Treaty shall be held at Geneva,
Swiu.erland, in order to review the operation of this Treaty
with a view to assuring that the purposes of the preamble and
the provisions of the Treaty are being realized. Such review
ahall take into account any relevant technological developments. The review conference shall determine, in accordance
with the views of a majority of those Parties attending, whether
and when an additional review conference shall be convened.
AaTICLB VIII

Each State Party to this Treaty shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from this Treaty
if it decides that extraordinary eyents related to the subjectmatter of this Treaty have jeopardized the supreme interests
of its country. It shall give notice of such withdrawal to all
other States Parties to the Treaty and to the United Nations
Security Council three months in advance. Such notice shall
include a statement of the extraordinar; events it considers
to have jeopardized its supreme interests.
ARTICLE IX

The provisions of this Treaty shall in no way affect the
obligations assumed by States Parties to the Treaty under international instruments establishing zones free from nuclear
weapons.
AaTICLBX

1. This Treaty shall be open for signature to all States.

Any State which does not sign the Treaty before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification and of accession shall be
deposited with the Governments of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, which
are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force after the deposit . of
instruments of ratification by twenty-two Governments, including the Governments designated as Depositary Governments of this Treaty.
4. For States whose .instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited after the entry into force of this Treaty, it shall
enter into force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform the
Governments of all signatory and acceding States of the date
of each signature, of the date of deposit of each instrument
of ratification or of accession, of the date of the entry into
force of this Treaty, and of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
AaTICLB XI

This Treaty, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall be de-

posited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the
Depositary Governments to the Governments of the States
signatory and acceding thereto.
IN wrrNBss WHBllBOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto, have signed this Treaty.
DoNB in - - - - . at - - - - - . this - - day of
----. ~2

2661 (XXV). General and complete disarmament
A

The General A.s.-,embly,
Convinced of the necessity, for the very survival of
mankind, of bringing the nuclear arms race to an immediate halt,
Recalling its resolutions 2456 D (XXIII) of 20
December 1968 and 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Noting with satisfaction the continuation of bilateral
negotiations between the Governments of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States
of America on the limitation of offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Believing that the possibilities for rapid success in
these negotiations would increase if steps were taken
now by the nuclear-weapon Powers to halt the development of new nuclear weapons,
Urges the Governments of the nuclear-weapon
Powers to bring about an immediate halt in the nuclear
arms race and to cease all testing as well as deployment of offensive and defensive nuclear-weapon systems.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

B
The General Assembly,
Noting that all States have the inalienable right to
develop research, production and use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes without discrimination,
A. ware of the development of new techniques for
uranium enrichment,
Considering that these new techniques may contribute to the promotion of the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes,
Considering also that material produced by these
new techniques may be diverted for weapons purposes
unless subject to effective safeguards,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
is engaged in the study of safeguards under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
1. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to pay attention also to the safeguards required with respect to new techniques for uranium
enrichment;
2. Further requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to inform the General Assembly at its twentysixth session on its consideration of this subject.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2 The Treaty was signed in London, Moscow and Washington on 11 February 1971.
