General ANembly--81idh Senion

76

Nations and the Camesie Foundation conceming the use of
the premises of the Peace Palace at The Hague as contained
in annex A to General Assembly resolution 84 (I), adopted
by the General Assembly on 11 December 1946, shall be
amended to read as follows :
"Article II

"The annual contribution payable by the International
Court of Justice in respect to the use of the Peace Palace is
hereby fixed at 68,400 Netherlands florins net."
2. This. Supplementary Agreement shall enter into fotcc as
of 1 January 1952.

587 (VI). United Nations Joint Staff Penaion
Fund: annual report of the Uaited Nations
Joint Staff Pemion Board
The General Assembly
Takes note of the annual report 18 of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board for the year ended
31 December 1950 and of the supplementary report 17
as of 31 May 1951.
360th plenary meeting,
12 January 1952.

598 (VI). Staff Regul■tiom of the United Nations
The Gene,-al Assembly
Adopts as the Staff Regulations of the United Nations the regulations annexed to the present resolution.
These regulations, which shall supersede all previous
staff regulations, shall become effective on 1 March
1952.
372nd meeting,
2 Febrnary 1952.
ANNEX

StaO Regulation• oJ the United Nationa

Scope and Purpose
The Staff Regulations embody the fundamental conditions of
""ice and the basic rights, duties and obligations of the
United Nations Secretariat. They represent the broad principles
of penonnel policy for the staffing and administration of the

Seerete,riat. The Secretary-Ge~ral, as the Chief Administrative Officer, shall provide and enforce such Staff Rules consistent with these principles as he considers necessary.
ARTICLE I

Duties, obligations and privileges

1.1. Members of the Secretariat are international civil ser-

588 (VI). United

Nations
system

telecommunication•

The Gener-al Assembly
Takes note of the report 18 of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations telecommunications system.
360th plena,-y meeting,
12 January 1952.
589 (VI). Headquarters of the United Nations
The Gene,.al Assembly

1. Takes note of the report 19 of the Secretary-Gen~
eral-on the Headquarters of the United Nations ;
2. Decides that the Headquarters Advisory Committee, established by General Assembly resolution 182
(II) of 20 November 1947, shall be continued with
the existing membership;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its seventh session on the progress
of construction of the Headquarters.
372nd plenary meeting,
2 Feb,-ua,-y 1952.

11
See Official Rec01'ds of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 8.
u Ibtd.
18
See document A/1919.
18
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/1895.

vants. Their responsibilities are not 'national but exclusively

international. By accepting appointment, they pledge themselves
to discharge their functions and to regulate their conduct with
the interests of the United Nations only in view.
1.2. Staff members are subject to the authority of the
Secretary-General and to assignment by him to any of the
aetivities or offices of the United Nations. They are responsible to him in the exercise of their functions. The whole time
of staff members shall be at the disposal of the SecrctaryGeneral. The Secretary-General shall establish a normal workin1 week.
1.3. In the performance of their duties members of the
Secretariat shall neither seek nor accept instructions from
~ government or from any other authority external to the
Organization.
).4. Members of the Secretariat shall conduct themselves

al ~I times in a manner befitting their status as international
civil servants. They shall not engage in any activity that is
incompatible with the proper discharge of their duties with the
United Nations. They shall avoid any action and in particular
any kind of public pronouncement which may adversely reflect
on their status. While they arc not expected to give up their
national sentiments or their political and religious convictions,
they shall at all times bear in mind the reserve and tact incumbent upon them by reason of their international status.
1.5. Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion in
re,ard to all matters of official business. They shall not communicate to any person any information known to them by
reason of their official position which has not been made
public, except in the course of their duties or by authorization
of the Secretary-General. Nor shall they at any time use such
information to private advantage. These obligations do not
cease upon separation from the Secretariat.
1.6. No member of the Secretariat shall accept any honour,
decoration, favour, gift or fee from any government or from
any other source external to the Organization during the period
of his appointment, except for war service.
1.7. Any member of the Secretariat who becomes a candidate for a public office of a political character shall resign
from the Secretariat.
