Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

in Article 27, by an affirmative vote of nine members
instead of seven,
Considering that these amendments make it necessary also to amend Article 109 of the Charter,
1. Decides to adopt, in accordance with Article 108
of the Charter of the United Nations, the following
amendment to the Charter and to submit it for ratification by the States Members of the United Nations:
"In Article 109, paragraph 1, the word 'seven' in
the first sentence shall be replaced by the word
'nine'";
2. Calls upon all Member States to ratify the above
amendment, in accordance with their respective constitutional processes. at the earliest possible date.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2102 (XX). Consideration of steps to he taken
for progressive development in the field of
private international law with a particular
view to promoting international trade
The General Assembly,
Recalling that it is one of the purposes of the United
Nations to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations in the attainment of such common ends as the
achievement of international co-operation in solving,
inter alia, international economic problems,
Mindful of its responsibilities under Article 13 of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that conflicts and divergencies arising
from the laws of different States in matters relating to
international trade constitute an obstacle to the development of world trade,
Believing that the interests of all peoples, and particularly those of developing countries, demand the
betterment of conditions favouring the extensive development of international trade,
Recognizing the efforts made by the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, and by inter-governmental
and non-governmental organizations, towards the progressive unification and harmonization of the law of
international trade by promoting the adoption of international conventions, uniform or model legislation,
standard contract provisions, general conditions of sale,
standard trade terms and other measures.
Convinced that it is desirable to further co-operation
among the agencies active in this field and to explore
the need for other measures for the progressive unification and harmonization of the law of international
trade,
Taking note of the preliminary study prepared by the
Secretariat on this subject, 10
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session a comprehensive report including:
(a) A survey of the work in the field of unification
and harmonization of the law of international trade;
( b) An analysis of the methods and approaches
suitable for the unification and harmonization of the
various topics, including the question whether particular
topics are suitable for regional, inter-regional '.lr worldwide action ;
( c) Consideration of the United Nations organs and
other agencies which might be given responsibilities
10 Ibid.,

agenda item 92, document A/C.6/L.572.

91

with a view to furthering co-operation in the development of the law of international trade and to promoting
its progressive unification and harmonization;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-first session an item entitled "Progressive
denlopment of the law of international trade".
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2103 (XX). Consideration of principles of inter•
national law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1505 (XV) of 12 December
1960, 1686 (XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1815 (XVII)
of 18 December 1962 and 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of
international peace and security and the development
of friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the improvement of the international
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of these principles, so as to secure their
more effective application, would promote the realization of the purposes of the United Nations,

Bearin.r; in mind that the Second Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
which met at Cairo in 1964, recommended to the General Assembly of the United NatioPs the adoption of
a declaration on these principles as an important step
towards their codification,
Being convinced of the significance of continuing the
effort to achieve general agreement at every stage of
the process of the elaboration of the seven principles
of international law set forth in General Assembly
resolution 1815 (XVII), without prejudice to the applicability of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and with a view to the early adoption of a declaration
which would constitute a landmark in the progressive
development and codification of these principles,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Frien~ly Relations and Co-operation among States, 11
established by General Assembly resolution 1966
( XVIII). which met in Mexico City from 27 August
to 2 October 1964,
Having also considered, pursuant to paragraph 5 of
~eneral Assembly resolution 1966 (XVIII), the principle of the duty of States to co-operate with one
another in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and the principle that States shall fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them m accordance with the Charter,
11

Ibid., agenda items 90 and 94, document A/5746.

General AHembly-Twentieth Seuion

92

1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for the valuable work it performed in Mexico
City;
3. Decides to reconstitute the Special Committee,
which will be composed of the members of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
1966 (XVIII) 12 and of Algeria, Chile_, Kei:iya and
Syria, in order to complete the consideration and
elaboration of the seven principles set forth in Assembly resolution 1815 (XVII);
4. Requests the Special Committee:
(a) To continue, in the light of the debates which
took place in the Sixth Committee during the seventeenth eighteenth and twentieth sessions of the General
Asse~bly and of the report of the previous Special
Committee the consideration of the four principles set
forth in paragraph 3 of Assembly resolutio~ 1815
(XVII), having full regard to matters on which the
previous Special Committee was unable to reach agreement and to the measure of progress achieved on particular matters;
( b) To consider the three principles set forth in
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 1966
( XVIII), with particular regard to :
( i) The practice of the United Nations and of
States respecting the application of the principles laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations;
(ii) The comments submitted by Governments on
this subject in accordance with paragraph 6 of
resolution 1966 (XVIIT);
(iii) The views and suggestions advanced by the
representatives of Member States during the
seventeenth, eighteenth and twentieth sessions
of the General Assembly;

( c) To submit a comprehensive report on the results
of its study of the seven principles set forth in resolution 1815 (XVII), including its conclusions and
recommendations, with a view to enabling the General
Assembly to adopt a declaration containing an enunciation of these principles;
5. Recommends the Governments of the States designated members of the Special Committee, in view of
the general importance and the technical aspect of the
item, to appoint jurists as their representatives on the
Special Committee ;
6. Requests the Special Committee to meet at United
Nations Headquarters as soon as possible and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its task and to provide all the
services, documentation and other facilities necessary
for its work;
8. Decides to include an item entitled "Consideration
of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations" in the provisional agenda of its twenty-first session.
1404th plena:ry meeting.
20 Derembfr 1965.
12 See

A/5689 and A/5727.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Observance by
Member States of the principles relating to the sovereignty of States, their territorial integrity. noninterference in their domestic affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the condemnation of subversive
activities",
Hearinq in mind the close connexion between this
item and· the item entitled "Consideration of principles
of international law concerning friendly relations ;ind
co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations",
Requests the Special Committee on Principles nf
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States, reconstituted under paragraph 3 of resolution A above, to take int~ con~ideration,
in the course of its work and in drafting its report,
the request for the inclusion in the agenda of the item
mentioned in the first preambular paragraph ahovern
and the discussion of that item at the twentieth session
of the General Assembly.
1404th plenary mcctinq.
20 Decembrr 1965.

2104 (XX). Question of methods of fact-finding
The Gi'neral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1967 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 on methods of fact-finding,
.Votiny with a{'Preriation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this question, 14
:1\1 otinr, the comments submitted by Governments pms11;-int to paragraph 1 of resolution 1967 (XVTIT) and
the views expressed during its twentieth session,
N otinq chapter \'TT of the report of the Special Committee on Principles of Tnternational Law concerning
Friendlv Relations and Co-operation ;imong States. 1 fi
established under Genera 1 Assemblv resolution 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
·
8l'!ie·vi11_q that the question of methods of fact-finding
requires further stuclv and that the materials resulting
from such further studv would also he of value fnr
;mv further consideration of the item entitled "Pe;icefol
settlement of disputes",
1. Requests the Secretary-General to supplement his
study 011 the relevant aspects of the problem so ;is to
cover the main trends and ch;iracteristics of intern;itional inquiry. as envisaged in some treaties as a means
of ensuring their execution. anrl to report to the General Assembly ;1t its twenty-first session;
2. lnvitl's Member States to suhrnit in writing to
the Secretary-General. hefnre J ul_v 1Q66, any views or
further views they 111;1y have on this subject in the
light of the reports of the Secret;iry-Gener;i I and the
relevant chapter of 1he report of the Special Committee
on Principles of Tnternational Law concerning Friendh·
Relations and Co-oper;ition ;imong St;ites, ;ind req11ests
the Secretarv-General to tr,msmit these c0111111ents tn
Member States before the beginning of the twenty-first
session of the General Assembly.
1404th plen,zr3• mcrli11_11,
20 Dffr111brr 1965.
is Official Records of the Grneral Assembly, Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 2, documents A/5757 and Add.1.
14 Ibid., Twentieth Session. Annexes, agenda item~ <JO and 94,
,lornment A/5694.
15 Ibid., document A/5746.
