S/2020/278

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 6 April 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
During the course of the current conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, a number
of incidents have occurred in which facilities that were on the United Nations
deconfliction list or that were receiving support from the United Nations were
reported to have been hit or to have otherwise sustained damage in the course of
military operations. A considerable number of these incidents are reported to have
occurred in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since the signing of the
Memorandum on the Stabilization of the Situation in the Idlib De -escalation Area by
the Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey on 17 September 2018.
In my capacity as Chief Administrative Officer of the Organization, I decided
to establish a United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry to review and investigate
a number of these incidents.
My aim in taking this step was to develop a clear record of the facts of these
incidents, their causes and the persons or entities to which they might be attributable.
This would make it possible for me, inter alia, to identify any gaps or shortcomings
that there might have been in the Organization’s procedures and to take any measures
and put in place any arrangements that might be needed to prevent the recurrence of
such incidents in the future or at least minimize their number and mitigat e their
effects. It would also put me in a better position to determine what steps I might need
to take to protect and better manage the Organization’s resources, in particular the
funds entrusted by Member States to the United Nations to finance programme s in
the humanitarian field.
I would emphasize in this connection that a board of inquiry is not a judicial
body or court of law; it does not make legal findings or consider questions of legal
liability or legal responsibility.
The difficulties that any board of inquiry would face in developing a clear
picture of precisely what occurred in the case of each incident naturally placed limits
on the number of incidents that the Board could reasonably be expected to investigate
within the time frame that is usually given to such a body. This was all the more the
case in view of the complexities of the situation in the north -west of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the fact that the Organization did not have any personnel on the ground
in that part of the country who could have been potential eyewitnesses to the incidents
under investigation. A decision was consequently taken to limit the number of
incidents to be investigated to seven. Even then, it proved necessary to extend the
mandate of the Board by nearly three months beyond the date that was originally set
for it to complete its work.

20-05232 (E)

160420

*2005232*

S/2020/278

I appointed Lieutenant General (retired) Chikadibia Obiakor as Head of the
Board. The other members of the Board were Janet Yuen Kheng Lim and Marta Santos
Pais. I also appointed two senior experts to support the Board: Major General
Fernando Ordóñez and Pierre Ryter. Hanna Dreifeldt Lainé served as Secretary of the
Board, with the assistance of Carla Gomes Horner Hoe.
The Board was convened on 13 September 2019 and held its firs t meeting on
30 September 2019 in New York. From 2 to 16 November 2019, it conducted field
visits to Amman and to Ankara and Gaziantep, Turkey. The Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic did not respond to repeated requests for the issuance of visas to the
members of the Board. The Board was therefore unable to visit the Syrian Arab
Republic, in particular the scenes of the incidents that it had been tasked with
investigating. Obviously, this greatly complicated its work.
The Board submitted its report to me, through the Chef de Cabinet, on 9 March
2020.
As with all United Nations boards of inquiry, the report of the Board is an
internal document and is not for public release. It contains significant amounts of
information that external parties shared with the Board in strict confidence.
I am aware, however, that my decision to establish the Board of Inquiry has
generated considerable interest. In view of this, and in the light of the seriousness of
the events that have taken place over the past year and a half in the north-west of the
Syrian Arab Republic, I have accordingly taken the decision to release a summary of
the Board’s report, which is contained in the annex to the present letter.
I wish to emphasize that this is a summary of the Board’s report and not the
report itself. Notwithstanding the difficulties encountered by the Board in obtaining
evidence, the report is 185 pages long and is accompanied by over 200 appendices
and annexes of supporting materials.
I would also emphasize that this summary of the report of the Board was
prepared by the Secretariat and has been neither prepared nor reviewed by the Board
or any of its members. It faithfully and objectively reflects the full report of the Board
and includes a description of six of the seven incidents that the Board was tasked with
reviewing and investigating, together with a summary of the key findings of the Board
on the facts of each of those incidents, their causes and the entities to which they
might be attributable. The seventh incident was found by the Board to fall outside its
mandate. A summary of the Board’s conclusions is also included. The Board’s
recommendations to me have been reproduced in full from the Board’s report.
I am satisfied that the Board has done a thorough and professional job in seeking
to provide me with a clear record of the facts of the incidents, of their causes and of
the persons or entities to which they might be attributable. Its report therefore
provides a basis for me to consider what I might do to better protect and manage the
Organization’s resources, in particular the funds entrusted by Member States to the
United Nations to finance programmes in the humanitarian field.
The Board has made a series of recommendations, which I am considering
carefully. Some of the issues raised are complex, including the question of which
parties to a conflict should be given information intended to support deconfliction. In
order to help to determine how best to address the recommendations of the Board, I
am planning to appoint a senior independent adviser with expertise and experience in
this area. I will also be open to receiving views from Member States on this matter.
The impact of the hostilities on civilian and humanitarian sites in the north -west
of the Syrian Arab Republic is a clear reminder of the importance for all parties to the
conflict to observe and ensure respect for international humanitarian law, in particular
2/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

the obligations to distinguish at all times between civilians and combatants and
between civilian objects and military objectives and to direct attacks only against
combatants and military objectives; the obligation to take all feasible precautions in
conducting an attack to avoid and, in any event, minimize incidental harm to civilians
and civilian objects; the obligation not to conduct attacks that may be expected to
cause incidental harm to civilians and civilian objects that would be excessive in
relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated; and the prohibition
of indiscriminate attacks, including the indiscriminate use of high explosive
weaponry in populated areas. According to numerous reports, the parties have failed
to do this.
I would emphasize in this connection, as the Security Council has done, that any
measures that Member States may take to counter terrorism must be consistent with
their obligations under international law, in particular international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international refugee law.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council for their information.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-05232

3/23

S/2020/278

Annex
Summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the
United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry into certain
incidents in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since
17 September 2018 involving facilities on the United Nations
deconfliction list and United Nations-supported facilities
1.
On 1 August 2019, I announced my decision to establish a United Nations
Headquarters Board of Inquiry to investigate certain incidents that had occurred in
the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since 17 September 2018, when the
Memorandum on the Stabilization of the Situation in the Idlib De -escalation Area was
signed by the Russian Federation and Turkey, in which facilities on the United
Nations deconfliction list or supported by the United Nations were destroyed or
damaged as a result of military operations.
2.
On 13 September 2019, I proceeded to convene the Board and tasked it with
reviewing and investigating the following specific incidents:
(a) Damage done to the Martyr Akram Ali Ibrahim al-Ahmad secondary
school in Qalʻat al-Madiq, Hama Governorate, on 28 April 2019;
(b) Damage done to the Rakaya primary health-care centre in Rakaya Sijnah,
Idlib Governorate, on 3 May 2019;
(c) Damage done to, and deaths and injuries occurring at, the Kafr Nabudah
primary health-care centre and surgical unit in Kafr Nabudah, Hama Governorate, on
7 May 2019;
(d) Damage done to, and deaths and injuries occurring at, the Neirab Palestine
refugee camp in Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, on 14 May 2019;
(e) Damage done to, and injuries occurring at, the Suqaylibiyah national
hospital in Suqaylibiyah, Hama Governorate, on 26 May 2019;
(f) Damage done to the Kafr Nubl surgical hospital in Kafr Nubl, Idlib
Governorate, on 4 July 2019;
(g) Damage done to, and injuries occurring at, the Ariha protection centre in
Ariha, Idlib Governorate, on 28 July 2019.
3.
The Board was headed by Lieutenant General (retired) Chikadibia Obiakor, a
former Military Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It also
comprised Janet Lim, a former Assistant High Commissioner for Operations in the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and Marta Santos
Pais, my former Special Representative on Violence against Children. Hanna
Dreifeldt Lainé served as Secretary. I appointed two senior experts to support the
work of the Board: Major General Fernando Ordóñez of the Peruvian Air Force and
Pierre Ryter, formerly of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
4.
As set out in the Board’s terms of reference, the detailed tasks of the Board
were:
(a) To gather and review all evidence, available investigation reports and other
relevant source materials regarding the incidents, including any available report or
reports that may result from national investigations;
(b) To identify and interview all relevant witnesses and others who can help
the investigation and make a record of their statements;
(c)
4/23

To visit the sites where the incidents occurred;
20-05232

S/2020/278

(d)

To produce a report on the incidents, to include the following:

(i) Findings on the facts of and the circumstances relating to the incidents,
including:
a.
The full names and professions of persons who were killed or
injured;
b.

The dates, times and places of their deaths or injuries;

c.

The nature of their injuries;

d.

The causes of their deaths or injuries;

e.
Descriptions of losses of, or damage to, United Nations property, of
the organizations operating the facilities concerned and of the persons who
were killed or injured;
f.
The involvement of the United Nations with respect to the facilities
concerned before and at the time of the incident;
(ii)

Findings on the causes of the incidents;

(iii) Findings on the attributability of the incidents to any individuals or
entities;
(iv) Findings on compliance with applicable United Nations protocols,
procedures, rules and regulations;
(v) Recommendations concerning any action that, in the opinion of the Board,
should be taken by the United Nations, including any actions or measures that
should be taken to avoid or at least minimize the recurrence of such incidents or
to mitigate their effects;
(vi) Relevant evidence, to be added as appendices and annexes, including
photographs and post-mortem reports.
5.
As is standard practice for United Nations boards of inquiry, the Board was
directed not to include in its report any findings of law or any recommendations
regarding compensation, disciplinary action or legal liability.
6.
The Board commenced its work at United Nations Headquarters in New York
on 30 September 2019. According to its terms of reference, the Board was to submit
its report to me by 13 December 2019 or 40 days after the return of the Board from
the area, whichever was the later. The terms of reference also stated that the Board
might request me to adjust that time frame depending on the progress of its work. In
view of the delays experienced by the Board in obtaining information relevant to its
task from various sources and the volume of work involved in investigating the seven
incidents specified in its terms of reference, the Board requested an extension of its
mandate until 31 January 2020 and, subsequently, to 13 March 2020. I approved both
of these requests.
Methodology followed by the Board in its work
7.
The Board made several requests to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to visit the country but never received a response. It was therefore not
possible for it to visit the sites of any of the incidents that it had been tasked with
reviewing and investigating. In these circumstances, the Board stated that it
considered it essential to obtain information from a wide variety of sources – all the
more so given the time that had passed since those incidents had taken place and the
complexities surrounding the ongoing conflict in the country. The Board also stated
that it placed great emphasis on evaluating each item of evidence for the reliability of
20-05232

5/23

S/2020/278

its source and for the credibility of the information that it contained. The Board’s
findings, it said, were based on information that, in each case, had been corroborated
by more than one source of information that the Board itself had gathered.
8.
The Board wrote to 10 Member States that were identified as possibly having
information relevant to the Board’s work, asking them to share with it any such
information that they might have. It followed up with written rem inders. A number of
Member States that might have been in a position to provide crucial information,
including from military sources, assured the Board that they would cooperate with it.
In the end, however, only four provided information to the Board, and that
information was limited in its nature. The Board received no information or
documentation from the Government, despite several formal requests and follow -up
telephone calls and emails.
9.
The Syrian Negotiation Commission provided the Board with information on
incidents involving health facilities, schools, protection centres and camps that had
occurred in the geographical areas and within the time frame specified in the Board’s
terms of reference.
10. The Board sought and received information from a number of United Nations
entities, as well as from entities within the broader United Nations system. This
included information on the conflict in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
the United Nations cross-border operation in that area, the support that they had
provided to the facilities involved in the incidents under investigation and the
deconfliction mechanism and its operation. They also provided the Board with
information on the incidents themselves. Some of this information included raw da ta,
such as witness statements and email exchanges, but much of it did not. The Board
was also provided with photographs and video recordings that the United Nations
system entities concerned had received from third parties.
11. Since the United Nations did not have a presence on the ground in the northwest of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Board considered it essential to receive
information from organizations and entities that did. This naturally included
non-governmental organizations that were directly involved in the operation of those
facilities that had been in areas that were outside the control of the Government at the
time. They provided information on the support that, as the Organization’s
implementing partners, they had received from the United Nations to run programmes
at those facilities, details of those programmes, information that they had provided to
the United Nations for the deconfliction of the facilities and reports on the incidents
themselves, as well as photographs and video recording s. However, in the case of the
two facilities that were located in areas that had been under government control at the
time of the incidents that were to be investigated, the Board was unable to identify or
engage with any such organization or entity.
12. The Board also obtained information from non-governmental organizations that,
although not directly involved in the operation of the facilities specified in its terms
of reference, had nevertheless had a presence in the area. In addition, the Board
received information from organizations or entities that had data relating to military
activities, including flight data. The Board corroborated and triangulated such
information with information that the Board itself had gathered from other sources.
13. The Board interviewed a number of witnesses to the incidents, including
eyewitnesses. Because the Board was not able to gain access to the country, most of
these interviews had to be conducted remotely, by electronic means.
14. The Operational Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research provided the Board with aerial satellite images.
While recognizing their limitations, the Board considered these critical to its work.
6/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

The Programme also provided the Board with meteorological information for the days
of the incidents.
15. The Board gathered photographs and video recordings of the sites of the
incidents, in vast numbers for some and in scant numbers for others. Most lacked
metadata. In such cases, the Board cross-referenced them with other information to
establish their reliability. Where this was not possible, the Board disregarded them.
16. The Board reviewed large amounts of open source material, but approached it
with great caution.
17. Owing to the concerns expressed by a number of organizations and entities that
cooperated with the Board for the safety of their staff and the security of their
operations, the Board put in place the measures necessary to protect their identities.
For similar reasons, it did the same for the witnesses interviewed by it. The
organizations, entities and individuals concerned are not named in the Board’s report
or in this summary.
United Nations involvement in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
Humanitarian cross-border operation
18. The Security Council, in its resolution 2165 (2014), expressed grave alarm at
the significant and rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic and noted that the steps taken by the Syrian parties to facilitate the
expansion of humanitarian relief operations of the United Nations, its specialized
agencies and humanitarian actors had not had the necessary impact on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all people in need throughout the country. Deeply
disturbed by the continued, arbitrary and unjustified withholding of consent to relief
operations and the persistence of conditions that impeded the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, the Security Council decid ed that United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners were authorized to use routes
across conflict lines and four specified border crossings, including two at the Turkish
border with the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reached people in need throughout the country through the most direct
routes. The Security Council repeatedly renewed that decision up to and including the
dates of the incidents that the Board was tasked with reviewing an d investigating.
19. Cross-border operations authorized by the Security Council in its resolution
2165 (2014) were conducted by the World Food Programme (WFP), the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), together with their
implementing partners.
20. The Board noted that facilities that were engaged in humanitarian work in the
north-west of the country received different forms of support from the United Nations
pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014). Some received commodities from the United
Nations, such as flour, educational materials and medical supplies; some received
supplies procured with United Nations funds; and some had staff who received their
salaries from the United Nations.
21. The Board noted that a humanitarian response plan for the Syrian Arab Republic
served to establish a framework within which United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and humanitarian international and
national non-governmental organizations would respond to the large-scale
humanitarian and protection needs in the country for a given year, on the basis of
priorities that were established across and within sectors.
20-05232

7/23

S/2020/278

22. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs coordinated the crossborder humanitarian operation from Turkey to the northern part of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The coordination framework was composed of nine thematic clusters, an
inter-cluster coordination group, other coordination forums and the Humanitarian
Liaison Group under the leadership of the Deputy Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator. The thematic clusters were groups of United Nations and non -United
Nations humanitarian organizations with programmes in e ach of the main sectors of
humanitarian action, such as water, health, education and protection. Each thematic
cluster was generally headed by two coordinators, one representing a United Nations
system entity and the other a non-governmental organization. The functions of each
thematic cluster were to ensure that service delivery was coordinated and driven by
the humanitarian response plan, to avoid duplication of effort, to assist in the
identification of gaps in coverage and ensure that they were met, and to monitor
implementation.
23. Funding for the cross-border humanitarian operation from Turkey was provided
by individual United Nations entities and the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund
, which is managed by the Office for the Coordination of Humanit arian Affairs on
behalf of the Deputy Regional Humanitarian Coordinator. The Board noted that the
Fund financed projects and services, not facilities. Its funds were to finance projects
and services carried out by humanitarian actors that were assessed to be eligible for
that purpose. Those actors included United Nations entities and non -governmental
organizations that were active members of a relevant thematic cluster. The Office
screened implementing partners before they were eligible to receive such fund ing.
The Board understood that, if the Office had concerns about a particular facility that
was to be supported by a project, it could use third parties on the ground to visit that
facility and report back. The Office also operated an email account to rece ive reports
of any undue activity. To ensure oversight of funding from the Fund, implementing
partners that received funds from it were required to report to the Office when an
incident affecting their operations resulted in a loss of funds or goods. These reports
helped, inter alia, to identify the most vulnerable and most severe situations.
Humanitarian deconfliction
24. The Board noted that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
defined deconfliction as the exchange of information and planning advisories by
humanitarian actors with military actors in order to prevent or resolve conflicts
between the two sets of objectives – humanitarian and military – to remove obstacles
to humanitarian action and to avoid potential hazards for humani tarian personnel. The
Board was informed that the Office had established deconfliction mechanisms in a
variety of settings, the Syrian Arab Republic being just one. Through those
mechanisms, the Office notified parties to the conflict of United Nations sta tic
locations and mission movements, as well as the static locations and movements of
other humanitarian actors. Some humanitarian organizations, such as Médecins sans
frontières and the International Committee of the Red Cross, made their own
notification arrangements with parties to the conflict when they were present in
conflict zones.
25. In 2014, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, at the request
of the humanitarian country team in Damascus, established a humanitarian
deconfliction mechanism in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was described in a
guidance document. That document had gone through several iterations and was being
adjusted once more in consultation with relevant implementing partners and Member
States while the Board was conducting its work. According to the version that was
being used at the time of the incidents under investigation, the Office served as a
channel between those humanitarian organizations that chose to provide deconfliction
8/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

information and designated focal points of the international coalition forces, the
Russian Federation and Turkey. In order to increase awareness at the political level,
the Office also shared deconfliction information through the mechanism with the
Chairs of the International Syria Support Group in Geneva – the Russian Federation
and the United States of America. The Office did not communicate deconfliction
information directly to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Russian
Federation being expected to share the information w ith it. The Office also did not
communicate deconfliction information to armed opposition groups that were present
in the area concerned.
26. The deconfliction mechanism was open to all humanitarian organizations
operating in the Syrian Arab Republic. Participation in it was purely voluntary. Under
the mechanism, as it was operating at the time of the incidents under investigation,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs received deconfliction
information from those organizations that chose to participate and transmitted that
information exactly as it was received. It did not verify that information, and
responsibility for its accuracy rested entirely with the submitting organization
(according to a subsequent iteration of the guidance docume nt, the Office was to
check the data that it received against a map and, in the event of discrepancy, was to
revert to the humanitarian actor that provided the information to address the issue
before transmitting the information to the parties). The templa te that participating
organizations were to use when submitting deconfliction information contained an
assurance by that organization that the information that it was submitting was true
and correct. It also stated that the submitting organization accepted that the Office
would share the data with the coalition forces, Turkey, the Russian Federation and the
Chairs of the International Syria Support Group.
27. Although this was not addressed in the version of the guidance document that
was being used at the time of the incidents under investigation, the Board was
informed that it was the standard practice of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to request that the parties acknowledge receipt of the
deconfliction information that was transmitted to them. The guidance document also
did not address the question of what was to happen if a facility or operation that had
been deconflicted through the mechanism was hit or otherwise affected by military
operations. The Board was informed that it had become the practice of the Office to
notify the parties and request an investigation. However, it was not clear to the Board
when this practice had begun.
28. The Board noted that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
had explained to Member States and humanitarian organizations that, from a legal
point of view, the purpose of the deconfliction mechanism was to help parties to the
conflict to comply with their existing obligations under international humanitarian
law and that it did not in any way dilute those obligations.
29. The Board was informed that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs had recently made a number of adjustments to the deconfliction mechanism.
It had established a new centralized unit in Amman to manage it, and, since September
2019, the mechanism had become a seven-step process, whereby a participating
humanitarian organization submitted its deconfliction information to a centralized
email address, using the relevant standard form on the Office’s webs ite; the Office
mapped the coordinates and sent the mapping back to the participating organization
for validation; the humanitarian organization validated and confirmed the
deconfliction information; the Office assigned a reference number to the deconflict ion
notification; the Office sent the deconfliction information to the international
coalition forces, Turkey and the Russian Federation, as well as to the Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group (however, if the humanitarian organization
specifically requested this, the Office would notify only the party or parties that the
20-05232

9/23

S/2020/278

organization had specified); the Office requested an acknowledgement of the
deconfliction information from those parties; and the parties provided that
acknowledgement.
Findings of the Board on the incidents and their attribution
30. The Board reached the following conclusions regarding the facts, causes and
attribution of the incidents enumerated in its terms of reference. Complete findings,
together with supporting evidence and documentation and the rationale for the
Board’s conclusions, are contained in the Board’s full report, which was submitted to
me in strict confidence, consistent with the Board’s terms of reference and with
standard practice with respect to United Nations boards of inquiry.
Incident (a): Damage done to the Martyr Akram Ali Ibrahim al-Ahmad secondary
school in Qalʻat al-Madiq, Hama Governorate, on 28 April 2019
31. The Martyr Akram Ali Ibrahim al-Ahmad secondary school is located in Qalʻat
al-Madiq city, Qalʻat al-Madiq subdistrict, Suqaylibiyah district, Hama Governorate.
Qalʻat al-Madiq city is in the western countryside of Hama. The school is situated in
the northern part of Qalʻat al-Madiq city, in a compound of five buildings comprising
the secondary school itself, Hospital 111, the Martyr Akram Ali al-Ahmad preparatory
school, the Martyr Ali Ahmad primary school and the Fawwaz Nasrallah school, the
construction of which had not been completed at the time of the incident. The
compound is situated on the corner of a block where a side road joins the main road
that runs through Qalʻat al-Madiq city. The front of the secondary school is on the
side road. The Education Directorate is located on the other side of the side road, on
the corner with the main road. Directly north of the compound are the grain silos of
Qalʻat al-Madiq. A mosque is close by. The secondary school was built by the
Government and had been functioning on the site since 1978.
32. The Board understood that, at the time of the incident, Qalʻat al-Madiq was
controlled by Jaysh al-Nasr, an armed opposition group, and that Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham was present in the area. The closest front line was approximately 2.5 to 3 km
away and the closest checkpoint operated by armed opposition group s was 2.5 km
away. The Board was informed that none of the armed groups would come to the
school and that the area was civilian. The Board was informed that the Education
Directorate was part of the opposition administration and was linked to the armed
opposition groups, but was nevertheless civilian.
33. The secondary school was supported by a non-governmental organization
registered in the United States with offices in Turkey. That non -governmental
organization was a member of the education cluster and an implementing partner of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. It received funds from the
Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund for a project that was to be implemented in
seven schools in the Governorates of Hama and Idlib, including the Martyr Akram
Ali Ibrahim al-Ahmad secondary school. It provided education services. The project
proposal that the implementing partner had submitted to the Office and that was
funded from the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund stated that some 140 children,
typically between the ages of 16 and 18 years, would receive education services at
the school. The implementing partner began to support the school in September 2018,
providing salaries to the teachers, furniture, educational materials and heaters. It also
attended to other logistical needs of the school and organized training courses for the
teachers.
34.

The school was not on the United Nations deconfliction list.

35. When the grain silos near the school were hit in early April 2019, services and
hours at the school were reduced. In late April 2019, the Government of the Syrian
10/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

Arab Republic and its allies launched a military offensive in the area of Qalʻat
al-Madiq. The Government eventually succeeded in reasserting control over the area
on or around 10 May 2019. The Board understood that educational services at the
school were suspended on or around 20 April 2019. The implementing partner
informed the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that this was
because of the daily bombardment that had been taking place.
36. At around 1 a.m. on 28 April 2019, the compound housing the secondary school
was hit. Owing to its proximity to the place of impact, the school suffered damage to
its facade, including its outer wall and windows. No one wa s killed or injured. After
considering all the information available to it, the Board concluded that the school
had been hit from the air by a fixed-wing aircraft. For lack of any forensic evidence,
the Board could not conclusively determine the nature of the weapons that had been
used. However, having considered all the information available to it, the Board
concluded that it was highly probable that guided munitions had been used.
37. The Board found it highly probable that the Government of the Syrian Ar ab
Republic and/or its allies had carried out the air strike. However, the evidence that it
had gathered was not sufficient for it to reach a conclusive finding.
38. The Board understood that the grain silos of Qalʻat al-Madiq also sustained
damage from air strikes on 28 April 2019.
Incident (b): Damage done to the Rakaya primary health -care centre in Rakaya
Sijnah, Idlib Governorate, on 3 May 2019
39. The Rakaya primary health-care centre is located in Rakaya Sijnah village, Hish
subdistrict, Ma‘arrah district, Idlib Governorate. Rakaya Sijnah is a small village with
approximately 5,000 residents. The primary health-care centre is located in the middle
of the village, about 50 m from the main road, and is surrounded by residential houses.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic had originally constructed it as a
municipal building in or around 2010, but, with the start of the conflict in the country,
building work was halted. Around November 2011, the community of Rakaya Sijnah
took over the building, completed the construction work and transformed it into a
medical facility. A cave beneath the centre served as a shelter for medical personnel
and patients when shelling or air strikes occurred nearby.
40. From 2015, the centre provided health-care services, specifically in the fields of
internal medicine, emergency services, family planning and reproductive health,
obstetrics and gynaecology, antenatal and postnatal care, paediatrics and dermatology,
including treatment for leishmaniasis. It also dispensed medicine and had been
selected by WHO to run a non-communicable diseases pilot programme. It employed
more than 20 staff. Volunteers also worked there. It provided services 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, although only the emergency unit was open at night and on days
off. It served both Rakaya Sijnah and its neighbouring villages.
41. The area of Rakaya Sijnah was controlled by armed opposition groups and
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham at the time of the incident. The Board was informed that there
were no military locations near the centre, and it received no information to contradict
that. It was informed that individuals affiliated with Hay’at Tahrir al -Sham might
conduct police patrols near the centre, but it received no information that individuals
affiliated with armed opposition groups or Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham would enter the
facility.
42. The Board recalled that the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations had, in a letter dated 16 July 2019 to me and the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/572), stated that all health-care facilities in
Idlib Governorate had been overrun by terrorist groups, that they no longer served
20-05232

11/23

S/2020/278

their original purpose, that they could not be considered hospitals, health-care centres
or even civilian objects under international humanitarian law and that they had been
converted by armed terrorist groups into military posts, prisons, arms depots,
workshops for manufacturing weapons and explosives, sharia courts and launch pads
from which to fire shells and rockets at residential districts and safe areas. The Board
stated that, in the case of the Rakaya primary health-care centre, it had received no
information to corroborate these assertions. On the contrary, it found that health-care
services were being provided at the centre at the time of the incident.
43. UNFPA had begun to support the centre in January 2019, working through a
non-governmental organization registered in Turkey, which served as its
implementing partner. That organization was a member of the health cluster. UNFPA
was the centre’s main donor, providing staff salaries, medical equipment, medical
supplies and reproductive health kits for basic emergency obstetric and newborn care.
It also helped to meet the centre’s running costs. WHO also provided material and
training support.
44. In January 2019, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
transmitted deconfliction information regarding the centre by email to the Russian
Federation. It did not send deconfliction information to the international coalition
forces, Turkey or the Chairs of the International Syria Support Group in Geneva. The
Board found that the coordinates for the centre that the UNFPA implementing partner
had provided to the Office and that the Office had transmitted to the Russian
Federation were accurate.
45. The Board understood that there was an escalation of hostilities in southern Idlib
in April and May 2019. It was told that, on 1 May 2019, two barrel b ombs were
dropped on Rakaya Sijnah, one falling approximately 100 m from the centre, causing
damage to its doors and windows. The implementing partner instructed staff to
suspend services. However, on the insistence of some staff, the centre continued to
provide emergency services, including for childbirth, but with reduced staff.
46. The day of the incident, 3 May 2019, was a Friday; the centre was therefore
functioning with reduced staff. About nine persons were there, including a patient
who was delivering a baby and her companion. Having learned that helicopters were
over the area, everyone had moved to the cave to take shelter. At around 11.30 a.m.,
an explosion occurred approximately 15 m from the centre. A volunteer and others
who were assisting the patient with her delivery had not managed to fully enter the
cave and were impacted by the blast, but did not sustain any injuries.
47. The facade, main entrance, reception area, toilets, dispensary, walls, windows
and doors of the centre sustained damage and the external guard room was destroyed.
No one was killed or injured. Property of the implementing partner located in the
centre was damaged, including medical equipment, medical supplies, medicines,
chairs, desks, mirrors and tables. As a result of the incident, the centre went out of
service and remained closed at the time that the Board was writing its report. The
Board understood that the implementing partner might have relocated or be in the
process of relocating some of the services previously provided at the centre to another
facility in the north-west of the country.
48. The Board found that the incident had been caused by an air strike. For lack of
forensic evidence, the Board could not reach a conclusive finding on the weapon that
had been used. However, on the basis of the evidence before it, it was highly probable
that it had been a barrel bomb and that it had been dropped by a rotary -wing aircraft.
49. In the light of the information available to it, the Board concluded that it was
highly probable that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic had conducted the

12/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

air strike. However, the evidence that it had been able to gather was not sufficient for
it to reach a conclusive finding on the attribution of the incident.
50. The Board was told that subsequently, on 28 May 2019, air-to-ground missiles
had impacted about 10 m from the centre. The Rakaya Sijnah area came under the
control of the Government in early 2020.
Incident (c): Damage done to, and deaths and injuries occurring at, Kaf r Nabudah
primary health-care centre and surgical unit in Kafr Nabudah, Hama Governorate,
on 7 May 2019
51. The Kafr Nabudah primary health-care centre was located in Kafr Nabudah,
Qalʻat al-Madiq subdistrict, Suqaylibiyah district, Hama Governorate. Kafr Nabudah
is one of the last towns in the northern countryside of Hama. The centre was in the
northern part of the town. It was located in a building with an annex in a compound
of some 300 m 2, surrounded by a wall. The building had been constructed in the 1980s
by the Government, which had used it as a clinic. After the outbreak of the Syrian
conflict, the residents of Kafr Nabudah had decided to open a health -care centre in
the facility. The centre consisted of an inpatient clinic offering internal medicin e
services, a paediatric clinic, a gynaecology clinic, a dental clinic and a pharmacy. It
did not provide trauma services or carry out surgery. The centre was in the process of
expanding its services when the incident took place. It served a large geograph ical
area with about 30,000 people, comprising the town of Kafr Nabudah and the
neighbouring rural areas.
52. The Board found that there was no surgical unit connected to the centre. There
was a surgical unit in Kafr Nabudah, located about 300 m from the centre, but it was
a quite separate facility, which was supported by a different organization and managed
by different people and provided different services and which, the Board understood,
had been damaged by military activity on a different date from th at specified in its
terms of reference, specifically, 1 May 2019. The Board accordingly considered that
to be a separate incident that was not within in its remit to investigate. It therefore
investigated only the incident at the primary health-care centre.
53. Kafr Nabudah is located almost on the border of the southern part of one of the
four de-escalation areas established pursuant to the memorandum on the creation of
de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab Republic, signed in Astana on 4 May 2017. The
Board was informed that there were no military concentrations or encampments near
the centre and that the Free Syrian Army and other fighting factions did not have any
presence in the town. The Board received no other information suggesting that there
were military locations near the centre, nor any information suggesting that
individuals affiliated with armed opposition groups or Hay’at Tahrir al -Sham would
enter the facility.
54. Since March 2015, the centre had been supported by a non-governmental
organization that was registered in the United States, with offices in other countries,
including Turkey. That organization was an implementing partner of both UNICEF
and WFP and a member of the health cluster. Pursuant to its arrangement with
UNICEF, the implementing partner had, since at least August 2017, provided support
for a number of health-care facilities in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including the Kafr Nabudah centre. That support included the payment of staff
salaries, the defrayment of operational costs, the provision of medicines, supplies and
equipment, as well as capacity-building. Pursuant to an agreement concluded with
WFP in November 2018, the implementing partner provided specialized food
commodities to the centre, in particular nutrition supplements for pregnant women
and children. WHO was also providing medicines, medical equipment and material
to the centre around the time of the incident.
20-05232

13/23

S/2020/278

55. In March 2018, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
transmitted deconfliction information regarding the centre by email to the Russian
Federation. It did not send deconfliction information to the international coalition
forces, Turkey or the Chairs of the International Syria Support Group in Geneva. The
Board found that the coordinates for the centre that the implementing partner had
provided to the Office and that the Office had transmitted to the Russian Federation
were accurate.
56. The Board understood that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and its
allies launched a military offensive in the area around Kafr Nabudah on or around
27 April 2019. Heavy fighting took place between the Government and its allies and
armed opposition groups and Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, involving both air and ground
attacks. On 30 April 2019, there was heavy shelling at military positions around Kafr
Nabudah, and, by 1 May 2019, almost all civilians had fled the area. Owing to the
security situation in the area, the implementing partner suspended services at the
centre on 27 and 28 April 2019. The centre reopened briefly on 29 April 2019, but
services were suspended once more on 30 April 2019, at which point the
implementing partner decided to evacuate the facility and relocate it elsewhere. The
fact that services at the centre had been suspended and most of the population had
fled the town made it difficult for the Board to establish a clear and detailed record
of what happened next. However, it was able to find that the centre was damaged
during the continuing offensive, most probably on 1 and 7 May 2019, and that, as a
result of those incidents, the building, its doors and windows and the property inside,
as well as the compound wall, sustained damage. No one was killed or injured. In
view of the intense fighting that had taken place and the many kinds of weaponry that
had been employed, the Board was unable to reach a finding on the kind or kinds of
weaponry that had caused damage to the centre.
57. On the basis of the information that it received, the Board found it plausible that
the damage to the centre was attributable to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and its allies. It noted that it had received no information suggesting that
other parties to the conflict had hit the facility.
Incident (d): Damage done to, and deaths and injuries occurring at, the Neirab
Palestine refugee camp in Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, on 14 May 2019
58. The Neirab refugee Camp is located 13 km east of the city of Aleppo, in Jabal
Sim‘an subdistrict, Sim‘an district, in Aleppo Governorate. Alepp o international
airport and Nayrab military airport are nearby. It is 12 km from the 15 to 20 km -wide
demilitarized zone that was established pursuant to the Memorandum on the
Stabilization of the Situation in the Idlib De-escalation Area, signed in Sochi, Russian
Federation, on 17 September 2018, along the inside edge of the de-escalation area
that had been created pursuant to the memorandum on the creation of de -escalation
areas in the Syrian Arab Republic of 4 May 2017. The camp was established between
1948 and 1950 for Palestine refugees who had fled to the Syrian Arab Republic in
1948. It was managed by the General Administration for Palestine Arab Refugees, an
agency within the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) had a
number of installations in the camp, including schools, a food distribution centre, a
health centre, a community centre and a training centre, as well as an office, through
which it served the camp’s residents. These installations were all marked as United
Nations buildings. At the time that the Board wrote its report, there were some 18,000
registered residents. In addition to Palestine refugees, these included Syrians who had
been displaced as a result of the conflict.

14/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

59. Given its location close to Aleppo international airport and Nayrab military
airport, the camp had repeatedly been affected by hostilities since the Syrian conflict
began in 2011. In particular, it was under siege between lat e 2012 and October 2013.
60. In April 2018, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
transmitted by email to the international coalition forces and Turkey deconfliction
information relating both to the camp in its entirety and to individual UNRWA
installations within it. The Office did not send that information to the Russian
Federation or the Chairs of the International Syria Support Group. The Board received
no information indicating that the deconfliction information had been brought to th e
attention of armed opposition groups active in the area.
61. Aleppo and the territory east of the city, where the camp is located, were under
the control of the Government at the time of the incident. Armed opposition groups
controlled the territory to the west of Aleppo and Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham was present
in that area. The Quds Brigade had a strong presence at the camp and at the nearby
Nayrab military airport, approximately 600 m to the north. Either Iranian forces or
Iranian-backed militias were located near Aleppo international airport, immediately
to the north of Nayrab military airport.
62. In the evening of 14 May 2019, before or around 7 p.m., projectiles landed inside
the camp, hitting houses and apartments and killing 10 persons. Another perso n died
of his injuries 15 days later. Five of those who died were children between the ages
of 6 and 11 years. The Board understood that a further 29 persons were injured, 19
seriously. UNRWA closed its schools the following day as a precautionary measure.
They reopened on 16 May 2019. No UNRWA installations sustained damage and no
UNRWA personnel were killed or injured. The Board concluded that the camp had
been hit by ground-to-ground fire and that it was highly probable that the munitions
used had been Grad rockets or rockets of a similar type.
63. The Board found that it was probable that the strike had been carried out either
by armed opposition groups or by Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, noting that the vast majority
of the evidence provided to it was to that effect. However, there was no evidence that
allowed it to reach a conclusive finding.
Incident (e): Damage done to, and injuries occurring at, the Suqaylibiyah national
hospital in Suqaylibiyah, Hama Governorate, on 26 May 2019
64. The Board found that the Suqaylibiyah national hospital was not on the United
Nations deconfliction list. The Board was also unable to establish whether the hospital
received support from the United Nations, be it from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNFPA, UNICEF or WFP. It was informed that WHO
provided material support to the hospital around the time of the incident. However,
WHO is a specialized agency of the United Nations within the meaning of Article 57
of the Charter of the United Nations and, although part of the United Nations system,
is a separate intergovernmental organization.
65. The Board recalled that its terms of reference stipulated that it was to review
and investigate incidents in which facilities on the United Nations deconflictio n list
or supported by the United Nations were destroyed or damaged as a result of military
operations. The hospital was not such a facility. It therefore had no mandate to review
and investigate the incident concerned.
Incident (f): Damage done to the Kafr Nubl surgical hospital in Kafr Nubl, Idlib
Governorate, on 4 July 2019
66. The Kafr Nubl surgical hospital is located in the city of Kafr Nubl, Kafr Nubl
subdistrict, Ma‘arrah district, Idlib Governorate. It is in the northern neighbourhood
20-05232

15/23

S/2020/278

of the city, on the edge of town, on the road between Kafr Nubl and the town of Barah.
A bakery and residential houses are nearby. The Board understood that the hospital
had been built by the Government some time before 2011 as a cultural centre. Around
2013, the local community decided to convert it into a makeshift hospital. The
building in which the hospital was located used to consist of three floors, but these
had been damaged between 2015 and 2018 and were no longer in use. In 2016 and
2017, excavations took place under the hospital to create a purpose-built underground
hospital and safe space. On 5 February 2018, the hospital was hit by an air strike and
severely damaged. All services were then moved to the underground space, where
they had remained since. The one exception was the dialysis unit. In addition to the
dialysis unit, there were 24 inpatient beds and an intensive care unit with four
intensive care beds. About 100 staff worked in shifts at the hospital. It was one of the
only hospitals providing services for kidney dialysis in the area.
67. The area around the hospital was under opposition control at the time of the
incident. In this connexion, the Board recalled once more the letter dated 16 July 2019
from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations
to me and the President of the Security Council (S/2019/572), in which he had stated
that all health-care facilities in Idlib Governorate had been converted by armed
terrorist groups into military posts, prisons, arms depots, workshops for
manufacturing weapons and explosives, sharia courts and launch pads from which to
fire shells and rockets at residential districts and safe areas. The Board stated that it
had received no information to corroborate these assertions in respect of the hospital.
On the contrary, the Board found that the hospital was providing health -care services
at the time of the incident, specifically in the fields of internal medicine,
otorhinolaryngology, general surgery, orthopaedic and trauma surgery and kidney
dialysis. The Board was informed that armed opposition groups had their own health care facilities and that staff at the hospital were instructed not to allow anyone
carrying weapons or in military dress to enter. The Board also received no information
that there were armed opposition groups in close proximity to the hospital. Indeed, it
was informed that there were no armed opposition groups within a 5 km radius of it
and that neither they nor Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham were present in the city, but on the
front line.
68. Since 2016, the hospital had been supported by a non -governmental
organization registered in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
A Member State was the organization’s main donor. The organization was a member
of the health cluster. The organization received funds from the Syria Cross -border
Humanitarian Fund from November 2016 to 2017 to create the underground hospital
and safe space. The Board was informed that, up to and at the time of the incident,
the hospital had been receiving support from WHO in the form of trauma, surgical
and dialysis kits, medication and equipment.
69. In February 2018, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
transmitted deconfliction information regarding the hospital by email to the Russian
Federation. It did not send deconfliction information to the international coalition
forces, Turkey or the Chairs of the International Syria Support Group in Geneva. The
Board found that the coordinates for the hospital that the Office had transmitted to
the Russian Federation were accurate.
70. The Board understood that the hospital had been affected by air strikes on
several occasions in the course of the Syrian conflict prior to the incident under
investigation, including the incident of 5 February 2018 mentioned above. An air
strike took place on 5 May 2019, causing damage to the main entrance of the hospital.
The entrance was hit once more on 6 November 2019, after the incident under
investigation. The Kafr Nubl area came under the control of the Government at the
end of February 2020.
16/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

71. On 4 July 2019, the hospital was functioning normally. Some 30 members of
staff were present, as well as some patients and their companions. I ntense air strikes
on the city took place throughout the day, conducted by rotary - and fixed-wing
aircraft. They began at approximately 10.30 a.m., peaked at around 2 p.m. and then
continued until around 7 p.m. Between 2 and 2.45 p.m., more than one air st rike hit
at or around the main entrance to the hospital, necessitating the removal of rubble so
that people could enter the facility once more. Material and equipment inside the
hospital were also damaged. No one was killed or injured. As a result of the i ncident,
services were suspended for several days while water connections, the ventilation
system and some doors were replaced or repaired. The hospital reopened on or around
7 July 2019.
72. The Board found that it was highly probable that the strikes had been carried
out by rotary- and fixed-wing aircraft. For lack of forensic evidence, the Board could
not conclusively determine the nature of the weapons that had been used, but it was
highly probable that an air-to-ground missile and a barrel bomb had been employed.
73. In the light of the information available to it, the Board found that it was highly
probable that the strikes had been carried out by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and/or its allies. However, the evidence at its disposal was n ot sufficient for
the Board to reach a conclusive finding on the attribution of the incident to any
individual or entity.
Incident (g): Damage done to, and injuries occurring at, the Ariha protection centre
in Ariha, Idlib Governorate, on 28 July 2019
74. The Ariha protection centre, also known as the child-friendly space, was located
in the community of Ariha, Ariha subdistrict, Ariha district, Idlib Governorate. The
centre was in a stand-alone, single-story building, rented from a private landlord and
situated in the middle of the community of Ariha. There was a mosque nearby and a
shop opposite. The area was under opposition control at the time of the incident.
However, the Board received no information suggesting that there were military
centres or camps near the centre at that time. The Board was informed that, before
renting the centre, the organization running it had ensured that its landlord was neither
affiliated with, nor belonged to, any armed group.
75. The centre provided child protection services. It employed 15 staff members. It
opened its doors in June 2018. From then until the end of 2018, UNICEF funded a
project that was being run there by a Turkish non-governmental organization as its
implementing partner. During that period, the centre provided a structured programme
in parenting skills, structured psychosocial support, recreational activities,
awareness-raising conducted through mobile teams, awareness-raising on risk
education and child protection case management. From January to June 2019, the
implementing partner funded its own work at the centre. During that time, the centre
provided structured psychosocial support, recreational activities and awareness raising sessions through an outreach team. From 1 July 2019, the work of the
implementing partner was funded by an international non-governmental organization.
That organization, or “donor”, in turn received funding for the project from the Syria
Cross-border Humanitarian Fund. It also received funding from the Fund for two
other projects that the same implementing partner was running elsewhere in the north
of the country. The “donor” organization was a member of the child protection
subcluster.
76. In September 2018, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
transmitted deconfliction information regarding the centre by email to the Russian
Federation. It did not send deconfliction information to the international coalition
forces, Turkey or the Chairs of the International Syria Support Group in Geneva. The
20-05232

17/23

S/2020/278

Board found that the coordinates for the centre that the implementing partner had
provided to the Office and that the Office had transmitted to the Russian Federation
were accurate.
77. The Board was informed that there had been no attacks in Ariha before July
2019. At around midday on 27 July 2019, there was an air strike, which impacted
about 50 m from the centre, causing damage to its doors and windows. Since it was a
Saturday, there were no staff or beneficiaries at the centre, and no one was therefore
killed or injured. In view of the air strike, a decision was taken to suspend services at
the centre. However, because of the damage that it had sustained, it was feared that
the centre might be burgled. The implementing partner therefore asked one of its staff
members to sleep in the centre overnight to keep an eye on the place. The following
day, at around 11 to 11.45 a.m., there was another air strike on Ariha. It impacted
about 2 or 3 m in front of the centre, causing the entire facade and the walls of the
building to collapse. The implementing partner’s assets and furniture inside the centre
were lost, burned or damaged. Its staff member who had stayed overnight at the centre
was hit by falling rubble, suffering minor injuries to his chest, hand and leg. The
frontage of the shop opposite the centre also collapsed, and some people were trapped
under the rubble. As a result of the incident, the centre was put out of service for about
a month and had to be relocated elsewhere in Ariha.
78. The Board found that the air strike of 28 July 2019 had been carried out by a
fixed-wing aircraft. For lack of forensic evidence, the Board could not conclusively
determine the type of weapon that had been used, but it found it highly probable that
missiles had been employed.
79. Having considered all the evidence available to it, the Board found it highly
probable that the air strike had been conducted by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and/or its allies. However, the evidence before it was not sufficient for it to
reach a conclusive finding.
Conclusions
80.

The Board reached a number of conclusions as a result of its work.

Cross-border operations for humanitarian assistance
81. The Board recognized the significant, comprehensive and efficient system of
cross-border support and assistance to the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
managed by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in compliance
with Security Council resolution 2165 (2014). This had been achieved through its
convoys of aid delivery and its financial support for humanitarian activities and
facilities from the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund. Thanks to this decisive
effort, the cross-border humanitarian operation had, since its inception in 2014,
provided aid to an impressive number of people in need in the north -west of the
country. This could not have been achieved, the Board recognized, without the
dedication, hard work and relentless efforts of the United Nations personnel in volved.

18/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

Access of United Nations personnel to the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
82. The Board noted that humanitarian access is critical for principled humanitarian
action, which depends on the ability to independently assess needs and deliver
assistance and to independently monitor and evaluate the impact thereof, including
by regularly engaging directly with affected people. However, United Nations
personnel were not present on the ground in the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic at the time of any of the incidents that were investigated by the Board.
Consequently, aid had been provided and its use monitored remotely, through
implementing partners.
83. The Board recognized that the security of staff needs to be taken very seriously.
It was also aware of the regular assessments undertaken by the Department of Safety
and Security on risk management and mitigating measures for the north -west of the
Syrian Arab Republic. However, it was unable to receive information on assessments
that the Security Management Team in the country might have made on programme
criticality. Upon enquiry, it was informed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs that operational deliberations on the deployment of staff in the
north-west of the country were not conducted as part of a formal exercise and that a
written record was not produced.
84. The Board considered that the absence of any United Nations presence in, or
visits to, the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic raised a number of concerns.
Access by United Nations personnel was critical to preserving humanitarian space
and delivering aid to all people in need in accordance with the humanitarian principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. It was equally crucial to
promoting respect for international law and assessing any breaches that might take
place. Moreover, it was fundamental to undertaking an accurate assessment of needs,
informing strategic humanitarian action and monitoring implementation. It was also
fundamental to monitoring, in an accurate and accountable way, United Nations
support for humanitarian facilities and the use of United Nations resources.
Furthermore, it was indispensable to demonstrating solidarity with the civilian
population and influencing positive change through engagement with all parties to
the conflict.
85. The Board stated that engagement with armed groups was of particular
importance in this regard. Engagement did not confer legitimacy on them, it said, but
was of decisive relevance to promoting respect for international humanitarian law, to
ensuring the effective provision of humanitarian assistance and to promoting the
formal commitment of the groups to ensuring the protection of civilians and
humanitarian sites, stopping attacks on populated areas and the use of humanitarian
sites for military purposes and to achieving a no-weapons policy inside health-care
facilities and other humanitarian sites.
86. The Board noted in this connection that, under the auspices of the Office for th e
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, some armed opposition groups in the north west of the country had signed a declaration of commitment on compliance with
international humanitarian law and humanitarian assistance. By this declaration,
armed opposition groups committed themselves to protecting and assisting civilians
and to respecting international humanitarian law at all times. The declaration also
emphasized the responsibility of signatories for the implementation of local
deconfliction arrangements and days of tranquillity and for the investigation of
alleged violations. However, the Board was unable to access information about the
implementation of the declaration. The Office informed the Board that the declaration
helped to structure the engagement of humanitarian actors with armed opposition
groups and was not a framework for monitoring and assessing adherence. An
evaluation of its implementation had not been conducted.
20-05232

19/23

S/2020/278

87. In view of the considerations set out above, the Board stated that the Unit ed
Nations should continuously negotiate with the authorities and relevant actors for
United Nations access to, and seize on any opportunity that might arise to secure
United Nations presence in, the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Board
welcomed in this regard the one-day United Nations inter-agency mission to the
north-west of the country that had taken place on 2 March 2020, just as it was
completing its work.
Cross-border funding, record-keeping and accountability
88. One of the Board’s tasks was to make findings on compliance with applicable
United Nations protocols, procedures, rules and regulations. In reviewing the
incidents detailed in its terms of reference, the Board found that there was overall
compliance with United Nations protocols, rules and regulations with respect to the
funding of cross-border operations by implementing partners. However, it identified
two areas of concern, both of which indicated that there was a need for a strengthened
system of record-keeping and for better tracking of the operations of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
89. In the case of incident (g), funds were disbursed from the Syria Cross -border
Humanitarian Fund to one non-governmental organization, which then transmitted
them to another, which in turn administered the programme at the facility concerned.
The systems that were in place did not allow for the ready identification of that second
organization – the “sub-grantee”. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs had first informed the Board that the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund
did not fund any activities at the facility in question. It was the Board itself that
established that there was such funding, through information that it received from the
“sub-grantee” organization. The Office provided the Board with the relevant funding
information only when asked to provide the specific grant agreement with the
organization that was the direct recipient of the funds – the “donor” organization.
Similarly, UNICEF had initially stated to the Board that it did not provide support to
the facility in question, and it was the “donor” and the “sub -grantee” organizations
that informed the Board that they had received UNICEF funds for that purpose. Only
after various requests for clarification did UNICEF confirm that it had provided
support, albeit for a period preceding the incident under investigation. This situation
raised serious concerns from a data accuracy and accountability perspective, the
Board observed.
90. In the case of incident (a), funds were disbursed from the Syria Cross -border
Humanitarian Fund to an implementing partner to finance a programme that it ran at
several facilities, some in the town concerned and some in other areas of the north west of the country. The systems in place did not allow for the ready identification of
those specific facilities. The Board therefore encountered difficulties in confirming
whether the United Nations did in fact provide support to the facility that was the
subject of the incident in question. The project documents between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the implementing partner did not
specifically mention that facility, and the implementing partner itself was initially
unsure whether its programme included it. The Board again considered that this raised
concerns from a data accuracy and accountability perspective.
Thematic clusters and incident reports
91. The Board noted that thematic clusters played a critical role in ensuring the
efficient coordination of the delivery of humanitarian services. However, the clusters
did not have a direct overview of incidents occurring at facilities supported by their
members, despite the fact that such incidents obviously had an impact on the
programmatic and protection work carried out by the clusters.
20/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

92. There was therefore no requirement that members of a cluster report such an
incident to it. Such reporting was certainly encouraged, but it remained voluntary.
When an incident was reported, clusters did not verify the information provided to
them and nothing was done, it seemed, to document and follow up on them. Cluster
coordinators might give briefings to the members of the cluster, but they were usually
on the trends of incidents, rather than the details of the specific incidents themselves.
There was also no integrated cross-cluster system to record information on incidents
and to coordinate necessary response action, in particular when the incident raised
concerns that were of relevance to more than one cluster. The Board considered that
this limited the coordination work that clusters carried out and their ability to monitor
programme implementation and ensure strategic follow-up.
Humanitarian deconfliction
93. The Board received briefings from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other United Nations entities on the deconfliction
mechanism operated by the Office. It also held discussions with implementing
partners that ran programmes at facilities in the north -west of the Syrian Arab
Republic that were included in the deconfliction list. The Board identified a number
of concerns regarding the guidance document that the Office had issued as a standard
operating procedure for the mechanism and the process of its implementa tion.
94. With respect to the guidance document, the Board considered that it did not
explicitly situate the deconfliction mechanism within the context of international
humanitarian law. This had led to implementing partners misinterpreting it as a
replacement for, or alternative to, the standards established by that law. The document
also did not make clear the purpose of the mechanism, with the result that
implementing partners understood it in different ways. The document emphasized that
the mechanism was designed to identify and protect humanitarian personnel, offices,
facilities, distribution sites, internally displaced person sites and routes taken by
mobile clinics; the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs nevertheless
cautioned against using the mechanism as a “protection tool”.
95. The participation of all relevant parties to the conflict in the mechanism was
crucial to its effective implementation, the Board observed; the guidance document
did not, however, provide for the communication of deconfliction information to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, and it remained unclear whether
deconfliction information had been transmitted and received by it. The guidance
document also did not provide for the communication of deconfliction information to
armed opposition groups.
96. The version of the guidance document that appeared on the website of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at the time that the incidents occurred
was also unclear and lacking in a number of respects. It did not make clear the role
and responsibility of the Office in relation to the verification of the accuracy of the
deconfliction information that it received from participating organizations; it did not
provide detailed guidance on how the coordinates of deconflicted facilities should be
established; and it did not address the question of what follow -up actions should be
taken in the event that an incident occurred at a facility that had been deconflicted
through the mechanism. The Board noted that some of these issues had been
addressed to a certain extent in a more recent version of the guidance document, but
noted that confusion remained with respect to its implementation.
97. The Board observed that these concerns, which had been communicated to it by
implementing partners, had led to mistrust in the mechanism and hampered its
effective implementation.

20-05232

21/23

S/2020/278

98. Turning to the implementation of the guidance document, the Board observed
that it had lacked rigour and consistency.
99. As appeared from the incidents that the Board had been tasked with
investigating, deconfliction information had not been systematically shared with all
the entities listed in the guidance document. The Board noted that it was possible that
participating organizations might have identified only some of those entities as being
ones to which they wished the information to be transmitted. However, there were no
records to show that they had exercised such a choice. There was also a lack of
consistency in the way in which participating organizations established the
coordinates of deconflicted facilities; however, there was a need to establish them in
a standardized way. There was, moreover, a need for a clear system for verifying the
accuracy of deconfliction information, as well as for storing and updating it.
Furthermore, parties had not been systematically required to acknowledge receipt of
deconfliction information communicated to them or to signify their acceptance of the
humanitarian nature of the facilities concerned. This, the Board observed, had led to
scepticism towards, and a lack of confidence in, the mechanism among participating
organizations, aggravated by the fact that several facilities that had been deconflicted
through the mechanism had been hit.
100. The Board found that, as a result of the above, humanitarian organizations and
their personnel felt hampered in their ability to make informed decisions and mitigate
risks. In a number of cases, organizations had participated in the mechanism, not
because it was thought to prevent or mitigate the risk of attacks, but rather with a
view to providing evidence for accountability purposes.
101. Concluding, the Board stated that, although there was an ongoing effort by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to make adjustments to it, the
overall mechanism needed to be revisited in the light of lessons learned and the work
of other humanitarian organizations in that field.
Recommendations
102. The Board’s terms of reference included making recommendations concerning
any action that, in its opinion, should be taken by the United Nations, including any
actions or measures that should be taken to avoid or at least minimize the recurrence
of incidents of the kind under investigation.
103. In the light of its findings, the Board made the following recommendations:
1.
In order to further strengthen the implementation of international
humanitarian law, the United Nations should enhance its awareness -raising and
capacity-building efforts with all parties to the conflict in the north-west of the
Syrian Arab Republic, including armed opposition groups.
2.
Based on the regular assessment of staff security risks, mitigating
measures and programme criticality, the United Nations should seize on any
opportunity that may arise to secure United Nations access to or presence in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic.
3.
Building upon lessons learned from past experience, including the
declaration of commitment on compliance with international humanitarian law
and humanitarian assistance signed by a number of armed opposition groups in
the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations should issue
clear guidance on United Nations engagement with non-State actors in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic and monitor its implementation.
4.
In any situation where an entity has access to resources under the Syria
Cross-border Humanitarian Fund and transmits such resources to an
22/23

20-05232

S/2020/278

implementing partner, both entities – that is, the entity receiving the funds and
its implementing partner – should be explicitly identified and acknowledged in
project agreements signed with the United Nations.
5.
In any situation where a project is conducted by an implementing partner
using funds of the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund in a number of
facilities, all such facilities should be specifically and individually identified in
the project agreements and in any subsequent amendments or revisions to them.
6.
Upon receipt of an incident report concerning a facility which benefits
from United Nations support, thematic clusters should engage and share any
relevant information about the incident with other concerned thematic clusters
and assess in a coordinated manner the incident’s impact on the implementation
of the humanitarian response plan and the need for any follow -up action.
7.
With regard to the deconfliction mechanism managed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs:
(a) The Office should consider renaming it the “humanitarian
notification mechanism” to highlight its distinct nature in the overall framework
of international humanitarian law;
(b) The Office should develop a comprehensive and publicly available
guidance document to clarify its role and responsibilities in relation to the
humanitarian notification mechanism and to provide clear and detailed guidance
on its implementation process;
(c) The Office should directly notify all parties to the conflict, including
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, of the deconfliction information,
unless for security reasons an implementing partner formally requests that such
information is not brought to the attention of one or more parties;
(d) Armed opposition groups relevant in the north-west of the Syrian
Arab Republic should be involved in the deconfliction mechanism;
(e) The Office should consistently request all parties involved in the
deconfliction mechanism to acknowledge receipt of the deconfliction information;
(f) Implementing partners should be required to inform the Office of any
incident against any of its deconflicted facilities;
(g) The Office should consistently notify the parties involved in the
deconfliction mechanism of any incident affecting a facility on the deconfliction
list and request that the incident be duly investigated;
(h) The Office should keep implementing partners informed of any
follow-up actions taken upon receipt of an incident report;
(i) The Office should keep comprehensive, accurate and reliable records
of all sites included in the deconfliction mechanism, as well as of the
communications with those involved in the deconfliction mechanism;
(j) Only specifically identified sites or installations inside a refugee
camp should be submitted for deconfliction, rather than the camp in its entirety.
8.
Given the complexity and multifaceted nature of the responsibilities of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the north -west of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the very high demands on its important work, the
Office should further strengthen its capacity for record-keeping and tracking all
aspects of its operations. That includes the need for detailed records of all the
projects funded through the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund and of the
facilities where the projects are implemented.

20-05232

23/23
