VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

make the necessary preparations for the programme of
that meeting;
8. Encourages Governments in a position to do so to
include in their delegations participating in the abovementioned commemorative plenary meeting of the General Assembly persons from their respective countries who
were associated with the drafting of the Declaration.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 19R7

42/132.

Assistance to refugees and displaced persons in
Malawi

The General Assembly,
Having heard the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees regarding the refugee situation in Malawi, 151
Expressing its appreciation for the effort;. of the Government of Malawi in providing shelter and asylum to thousands of refugees and displaced persons,
Recognizing the consequences of the social and economic burden placed on the Government and people of
Malawi as a result of the influx of refugees and displaced
persons and the subsequent impact on national development and the infrastructure of that country,
Noting with appreciation the action already taken by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international humanitarian organizations
in establishing a programme of emergency assistance to
the refugees and displaced persons in Malawi,
Noting that a United Nations inter-agency team is currently visiting Malawi to discuss with the Government
ways and means of strengthening its capacity to cope with
the burden imposed on its economy, vital resources and
public services by the presence of refugees and displaced
persons and to prepare a comprehensive programme of assistance, which will respond both to refugee-related
humanitarian and to development needs for eventual submission to the international community,
1. Commends the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme for their timely action in sending
an inter-agency mission to Malawi to ascertain the needs
of the refugees and displaced persons in Malawi and the
magnitude of assistance required;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, to give the report of the interagency mission the widest possible circulation to all
States, all pertinent international organizations and voluntary agencies;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, to mobilize international assistance and to launch an international appeal for generous
contributions to the projects and programmes recommended in the report of the inter-agency mission;
4. Appeals to Member States, the High Commissioner,
the organizations concerned within the United Nations
system and voluntary agencies to render maximum finan151 See Official Records "frhc General Asscmhl,. hir1v-1<",oll(/ Ses.\/OI/
Third Committee, 45th and 50th mee1ing,. and u,rngendum. ,ee al," A.

AC.96/693 (Part I) and Corr 1 and Add 1 para, 1 10 1-1 10.7

225

cial and material assistance to the Government of Malawi
in its efforts to provide shelter, food and other services to
the growing number of refugees and displaced persons in
that country;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1988 and to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/ 133.

Status of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 40/142 of 13 December 1985
and 41/147 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1986/18 of 10 March 198661 and 1987/25 of
10 March 1987,26
Recalling its resolution 260 A (III) of9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature, ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Rea.fjirming once again its conviction that genocide is a
crime under international law, contrary to the spirit and
aims ,if the United Nations,
Taking note with sati.1:faction of the report of the Secretary-General, 152
I. Once again strongly condemns the crime of genocide:
2. Reaffirms the necessity of international cooperation in order to liberate mankind from such an odious cnme;
3. Notes with satisfaction that many States have ratified
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide or have acceded thereto;
4. Expresses its conviction that implementation of the
provisions of the Convention by all States is necessary for
the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide;
5. Urges those States which have not yet become parties tn the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without further delay;
b.
Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the
,tatu~ of the Convention.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December J9R7

42/134.

Need to enhance international co-operation in
the field of the protection of and assistance for
the family

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the resolve of the peoples of the United Nations to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom, with a view to the creation of condition~ of stability and well-being, which are necessary for
peaceful and friendly relations between nations,
Recalling that, in accordance with the International
Cownant on Economil·, Social and Cultural Rights, L1 the
