S/PV.9247

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9247

th meeting
Tuesday, 24 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane/Mrs. Shino. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Osei
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2023/41)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02299 (E)
*2302299*

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing away of His
Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon
The President: The members of the Security
Council were deeply saddened to learn of the recent
passing of His Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo,
distinguished diplomat and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Gabon. They recall the skill with which Minister
Adamo presided over several meetings of the Security
Council in October 2022.
The members of the Security Council express their
heartfelt condolences to Mr. Adamo’s family, to the
Permanent Mission and the Government of Gabon and
to all the people touched by Minister Adamo, in Gabon
and beyond.
On behalf of Council members, I would ask that we
all stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of
Foreign Minister Michael Moussa Adamo.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2023/41)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Canada, the Dominican Republic and
Haiti to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Dominican Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/19

begin

its

24/01/2023

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/41, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: January is a bitter-sweet month for
Haiti, as celebrations of independence are accompanied
by painful remembrance of the devastating earthquake
that on 12 January 2010 ravaged the capital, killed
hundreds of thousands of people and displaced
thousands more. Commemorations of the tragedy this
year were muted, overshadowed by the protracted crisis
the country is facing as years of hard-fought recovery
gains are being undone and Haitians grapple with
setting the country back on a path to democracy.
Gang-related violence has reached levels not seen in
decades. Murders and kidnappings increased for a fourth
consecutive year: 1,359 kidnappings were recorded in
2022, more than doubling the number recorded in 2021
and averaging roughly four per day. Murders are also
up by a third over the previous year. A total of 2,183
were reported in 2022, touching nearly all segments of
society, including a former presidential candidate and
the director of the National Police Academy.
Forthcoming reporting by the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti, along with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, establishes that turf wars involving two
gang coalitions — the G9 and the G-Pep — reached
unprecedented levels in several neighbourhoods
of Cité Soleil. The violence is part of well-defined
strategies designed to subjugate populations and
expand territorial control. Gangs have increasingly
resorted to the deliberate killing of men, women and
children — some of them as young as 10-years-old
being brutally raped — as a tactic to spread fear and
destroy the social fabric of communities under the
control of rival gangs. Besieging and displacing whole
populations already living in extreme poverty, gangs
have intentionally blocked access to food, water and,
amid a cholera outbreak, health services.
Approximately 5 million people are facing
conditions of acute hunger across the country. While
90 per cent of schools are now operating, thousands of
children, especially those living in gang-affected areas,
have yet to start the school year. There are increasing
reports of minors being recruited to serve in gangs.
The humanitarian response plan will likely be almost
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

double that of 2022. I urge donors to continue to give
generously in order to help to address the immediate
needs, as well as the long-term development gaps that
exist in the country.
The expiration of the mandate of the 10 senators
holding office on 9 January means that there is not one
elected official left in the country. While a profound
challenge, that institutional vacuum presents an
opportunity for Haiti to take stock, look at the root
causes of the dysfunction and set the country on a
course to address them. Two key developments, if
properly supported, can help to chart a path back to
accountability, the rule of law and the restoration of
democratic institutions.
The first development was driven by the members of
the Security Council, namely, the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2653 (2022), establishing sanctions
measures on those supporting criminal activities and
violence involving armed groups. As I noted in my
most recent briefing to the Council in December (see
S/PV.9233), bilateral sanctions were also welcomed
during that period. Such measures are creating space
for additional political dialogue and necessary reforms.
That has been reinforced by encouraging developments
in the judiciary, with new steps being taken on both
the vetting of judges and the reduction of pretrial
detention levels.
The second development was taking shape as I
briefed the Council on 21 December. It culminated
later that day with the signing of the National
Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent
Elections by a broad spectrum of political figures,
civil society organizations, religious authorities, trade
unions and, for the first time ever, the private sector.
The Consensus identifies a calendar for installing
an elected Government by February 2024 and lists
immediate steps to be taken for the promotion of
fiscal reforms to increase State revenue collection and
restore public services. A High Transitional Council
has now been established and named. It will work with
the Government to make nominations to the Court of
Cassation — the country’s highest court — and the
Provisional Electoral Council, and it will appoint a
committee to review the Constitution.
The agreement is by no means a done deal, and it
remains fundamentally open. A series of round tables,
which will include discussions on establishing an
inclusive electoral road map and a national security

S/PV.9247

plan, provides opportunities for those who are interested
in, but who have not yet committed to, engaging in
the effort.
The agreement, the adherents to which are growing
every day, is indeed the most promising sign to emerge
from dialogue efforts until now. We are heartened
by the positive reactions from major political leaders
and international partners alike. But implementation
will be essential to building confidence around the
agreement. The country urgently needs to see those in
positions of influence and leadership, whether at the
national or local level, including the diaspora, put aside
their differences and do their part for the restoration of
legitimate State institutions.
The Haitian National Police (HNP) remains a
priority for the Government, with an almost 50 per
cent increase in the budget allocation for the current
year to $162 million. Last month, the thirty-second
class of cadets — 714 additional officers, including 174
women — entered the force . I thank those partners who
contribute to working with the basket fund in support
of the HNP. The police are using the armoured vehicles
that they purchased, and that continue to arrive in Haiti,
to launch operations against gangs, some of which are
more successful than others. But the challenge remains
maintaining and consolidating the gains made after
the operations.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/41), and as I referred to earlier, the National
Consensus and sanctions are two important
developments that can meaningfully contribute to
overcoming the crisis and help to alleviate untold
suffering. They offer a clear path to the restoration of
democracy and legitimacy. The third element that will
reinforce both the HNP and those developments is the
deployment of an international specialized force, as
requested by the Government in October. That has yet
to materialize.
The reality is that, without that international
deployment operating in an integrated way with the
HNP, the very positive effects of the political process
and the sanctions so far will remain fragile and
vulnerable to being reversed. Haitians overwhelmingly
want that assistance so that they can go about their
daily lives in peace. The population is living in fear,
and it is all too conscious of the limitations of the police
force. In this month of remembrance, the people of

23-022993/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti, whose suffering never ends, are counting on the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. La Lime for her
briefing.

24/01/2023

fuel terminal this past fall, which had disrupted
the life of countless Haitians and directly led to
the shutdown of some hospitals and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General La
Lime for her briefing.

We are encouraged that the establishment of a
sanctions regime by the Security Council has deterred
those who would carry out and finance the violence
causing Haiti’s instability. The United States is
identifying additional targets involved in the unrest in
Haiti to nominate at the United Nations.

The United States continues to work to address
Haiti’s humanitarian crisis, as well as its insecurity, and
to support Haitian-led efforts to facilitate the political
conditions that would lead to free and fair elections. We
would also like to thank Ecuador for taking on the role
of co-penholder of the Haiti file, and we look forward
to working collaboratively, along with the rest of the
Security Council, to address the ongoing situation
in Haiti.

We recognize the need to support institutional
reforms, in addition to addressing Haiti’s immediate
security and humanitarian needs. Through the 10-year
Global Fragility Act plan, the United States seeks to
address root causes of instability, building on justice
sector reform while addressing civic engagement and
economic opportunity. We also urge partner nations to
contribute to the United Nations basket fund given the
dire need to change the security situation in Haiti.

We are encouraged that a broad spectrum of political
actors, the private sector, civil society groups, religious
groups, trade associations and others were able to come
together to agree on the necessary steps for Haiti to
move towards free and fair elections. The adoption of
the 21 December accord is an opportunity for Haitians
to get back to restoring their country’s stability and
improving governance. It is vital that the political
accord and its implementation remain inclusive. We
value the role that civil society and the private sector
played in helping to bring disparate parties together.

Time is of the essence in order to turn the tide in
Haiti’s severe security environment. Without improved
security, progress on the political, economic or
humanitarian fronts will be impossible. We encourage
the international community to continue focusing on
supporting Haiti’s efforts to address all these needs.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Furthermore, to facilitate progress on fulfilling the
requirements of the political accord, Haiti must address
its continued insecurity challenges. Gang-related
violence has reached unprecedented levels, which has
only exacerbated the ongoing humanitarian crisis and
hampered the country’s ability to address the cholera
outbreak, which has had a disproportionate impact on
children and young people. We continue to see children
and young people being recruited by criminal gangs.
We see human rights abuses, as those same criminal
gangs use gender-based violence, including rape, to
instil fear and expand their territorial control.
The international community must step up to
address the increasing humanitarian needs while also
helping Haiti to address insecurity, so that progress
can be made on implementing the 21 December
political accord. We applaud the efforts of the Haitian
National Police to break the gang siege of the Varreux
4/19

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by expressing my deep condolences for
the tragic death of Foreign Minister Moussa Adamo.
Throughout his life, he actively campaigned for the
promotion of peace and security in Africa, making
valuable contributions to the maintenance of world
peace. His tragic passing is a great loss to the people
of Gabon. My sincere condolences go to Ambassador
Biang and our brothers and sisters in the Permanent
Mission of Gabon to the United Nations.
Just now, Special Representative La Lime briefed
us on the situation in Haiti, for which I am grateful. I
also welcome the presence of the Dominican Foreign
Minister and the Permanent Representatives of Haiti
and Canada at today’s meeting.
Over the past year, the situation in Haiti has not
improved, with a political power vacuum and rampant
gang violence weighing heavily on the Haitian people.
The terms of the Haitian Chamber of Deputies and
the President expired in 2020 and 2022, respectively,
and the terms of the Senate President and the last 10
senators ended two weeks ago. That means that Haiti’s
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

State institutions are completely devoid of legitimately
elected representatives. The crisis of political legitimacy
is the fundamental crisis in Haiti. The country’s parties
and factions must respond to the people’s call for a
return to constitutional order and take responsibility
for advancing the political transition without delay.
Last month, the interim authorities reached the
National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and
Transparent Elections, with some parties and civil
society groups deciding to restore democratically
elected institutions within an 18-month time frame.
That is a step forward, but it still falls far short of
the expectations of the Haitian people and the parties
concerned. We note that some civil society groups,
including the Montana Group, were explicitly against it.
Parties in Haiti should continue to engage in inclusive
dialogue, enhance the sense of urgency in political
consultations and agree on a universally acceptable,
credible and feasible transitional arrangement so as to
create conditions for holding free and fair elections at
an early date.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
should build a platform for dialogue among all Haitian
parties and factions and step up efforts to promote a
Haitian-led and -owned political process that respects
the choices of the Haitian people.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2023/41)
notes that violent criminal activities by Haitian gangs
have intensified. With more than 2,000 people killed
last year, an increase of more than 30 per cent over the
previous year, Haitians generally welcome the sanctions
imposed by the United Nations on Haitian gangs and
their supporters and expect the sanctions regime will be
effective in curbing gang activities. Some people also
expressed their hope that sanctions would be imposed
on more gangsters who have undermined peace and
stability in Haiti. Like many Security Council members,
China supports efforts to help the Sanctions Committee
become operational as soon as possible, to urgently
review and update the sanctions list and to monitor
and ensure the full implementation of the sanctions
measures in order to create the necessary deterrent to
gang violence. That should be one of the priorities of
the work of the Security Council.
China acknowledges the efforts of the Haitian
National Police to ensure law and order and supports
Haiti in improving its law enforcement and judicial
capabilities, strengthening control of illegal arms and

S/PV.9247

financial flows and bringing criminals to justice. China
welcomes regional partners in providing capacitybuilding support to the Haitian National Police. When
considering the deployment of troops, countries
should take into full consideration the various views
within Haiti and draw the appropriate lessons from
failed external interventions so as to avoid repeating
those mistakes.
Haiti is facing the most severe humanitarian and
economic crisis in decades. In Haiti, the past year has
been marked by rampant violence, cholera outbreaks,
an economic slump, increased poverty and food
insecurity. Particularly distressing is the vulnerability
of women and children.
A certain country recently adopted new deportation
measures against migrants crossing the borders from
Haiti and other countries seeking asylum. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
expressed concerns about those measures, which risk
undermining the basic foundations of international
human rights and international refugee law. We believe
that the human rights and dignity of Haitian migrants
should be protected and that no country should
deport migrants at the expense of their human rights.
China supports the efforts of the United Nations and
regional partners to increase humanitarian resources
to Haiti and to play a constructive role in improving
the humanitarian situation on the ground in order
to overcome economic and livelihood difficulties.
Together with the international community, we will
continue to play a constructive role to support the
Haitian people in their pursuit of peace and stability.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
condolences and sympathy to the Government and the
people of Gabon as well as to our colleagues in the
Permanent Mission of Gabon to the United Nations
on the passing of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo.
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Helen La Lime for her valuable
briefing and her efforts in Haiti. I also welcome the
participation of Haiti, the Dominican Republic and
Canada in today’s meeting.
In the context of today’s discussion, I would like
to focus on four issues relevant to Haiti’s path towards
achieving stability and prosperity.

23-022995/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

First, we are encouraged by some of the progress
made on the political track with the signing of the
21 December accord. We hope that the accord will
enhance political dialogue, which remains essential
for a shared vision among Haitian political actors. That
would also contribute to improving the humanitarian,
economic and security situations and ensuring Haiti’s
long-term stability. We therefore reiterate our previous
calls to all stakeholders to put aside their differences
and engage in a constructive and inclusive dialogue
in order to create the conditions necessary for holding
successful elections.
Secondly, violence will remain a threat to the
stability in Haiti as long as the security institutions,
law enforcement and judicial authorities are not able to
address it effectively. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Haitian National Police to promote security,
which must be strengthened, especially in response to
the persistent and alarming rise in the levels of sexual
and gender-based violence. Addressing the security
situation in a comprehensive and sustainable manner
also entails combating corruption, the illicit trafficking
and proliferation of arms, and illicit financial flows.
We commend the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for cooperating with the Haitian authorities and
assisting them in capacity-building in order to address
the illicit trafficking of arms and illicit financial flows.
We also recognize the important role and continued
engagement of regional actors in that regard.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the
worsening humanitarian crisis in Haiti, which must
remain at the top of the Council’s list of priorities. The
people of Haiti suffer from poverty, water scarcity
and severe food insecurity, in addition to the negative
consequences of climate change. Those circumstances
have been compounded by the rapid spread of cholera
throughout the country and insufficient humanitarian
aid. We condemn in that context the closure of main
roads by gangs and their obstruction of access to
necessary aid and services, which have only exacerbated
the already dire situation.
Fourthly, we cannot ignore the repercussions of the
humanitarian, health and security situation on children
and their right to education. According to UNICEF,
in the past year alone more than 500,000 children in
Haiti were denied education across the country and
were also targeted for recruitment by gangs. Such
restrictions prevent children from gaining the skills
that enable them to work in the labour market and
6/19

24/01/2023

build their communities, and they also undermine
development efforts. Any harm that young Haitians
are subjected to in Haiti will have severe effects on the
country’s succeeding generations. It is therefore critical
for Haiti and other relevant actors to explore ways to
safely reopen schools and ensure children’s access to
education in a sustainable manner.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its solidarity with the Haitian people. We support the
work of the United Nations in Haiti, including the work
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, to
achieve security and stability in the country. We will
also continue to cooperate constructively with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti, which is an
important tool for addressing violence in Haiti, and will
participate in any future discussions on the proposals of
the Special Representative.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in reiterating to Ambassador Biang
our deepest condolences for the untimely passing of
Foreign Minister Moussa Adamo, and I ask Mr. Biang
to convey our country’s sentiments to the Government
and the people of Gabon.
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime for her comprehensive
briefing, which as always was of great concern, although
on this occasion it contained a glimpse of optimism.
I also welcome the presence of Mr. Roberto Álvarez
Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, and the Permanent Representative of Haiti.
Since our last meeting on this subject, held in
December 2022, there has been little progress on the
security situation in Haiti, which remains as challenging
and worrisome as before. Gangs continue to control and
paralyse a large part of Port-au-Prince, significantly
worsening the dire multidimensional crisis in which
the country remains plunged. In addition, the current
outbreak of cholera continues to pose significant risks
for Haiti’s population. As we have pointed out before,
the current political stalemate and the humanitarian
and security crises in Haiti reinforce each other. As the
10 remaining senators in Haiti’s Parliament officially
left office this month, the country is currently without
a single democratically elected Government official.
Brazil is concerned that such a legitimacy vacuum, if
not addressed, will trigger an even deeper crisis.
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

A breakthrough in the political dialogue between
the Government and the opposition is therefore
fundamental to break the current perverse cycle. We
took positive note of the political initiative launched
on 21 December to build a National Consensus for an
Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections. We are
encouraged by that initiative and hope it will represent
the beginning of a comprehensive process to achieve
national unity. There is an urgent need to enlarge
that Consensus so that institutional normalcy can be
re-established in Haiti and elections organized. Political
and economic groups willing to foment the humanitarian
crisis for their narrow goals should not prevail in Haiti.
In that context, we hope that the sanctions regime
adopted in October will effectively establish targeted
sanctions against those engaging in or supporting
violence, irrespective of how powerful those individuals
may be. As some members have already imposed
unilateral sanctions against some Haitian individuals,
we consider that it is high time for the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti to start its own deliberations
so that sanctions can be considered and imposed
with the full force of the international community.
With regard to the options, conveyed by
the Secretary-General in his letter of 8 October
(S/2022/747), to increase the security in Haiti and the
appeal by the Government of Haiti to receive specialized
armed support to help control the humanitarian crisis in
the country, we look forward to engaging with Council
members on ways to move that concept forward. We
all know that Haiti needs change that goes well beyond
the control of criminal activities. Besides security
measures, socioeconomic progress in Haiti is essential
for addressing the current crisis in an effective and
sustainable way. Haiti remains a top priority for
Brazilian international cooperation projects, and we
urge the donor community to step up its efforts towards
effectively fostering economic and social development
so that the country will not relapse into violence once
the current crisis is curbed.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to once again
exhort all Haitian political actors to deepen the current
dialogue, which will hopefully pave the way for safe and
fair elections. Brazil believes in Haitian-led solutions,
which will materialize only if Haitian stakeholders
accept to talk to each other and compromise. For our
part, I would like to underline that Haiti has been a
priority for Brazil and will remain so. Brazil has a long-

S/PV.9247

standing contribution to peace and stability in Haiti
and continues to be fully committed to supporting the
country, particularly in these challenging times.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
The A3 would like to collectively pay our fond
tribute to the late Foreign Minister of the Republic
of Gabon, Mr. Moussa Adamo, who devoted his
entire life to the service of Africans, the international
community and the cause of peace and security.
We join other colleagues in expressing our deepest
heartfelt condolences to the people of our sister country
of Gabon for their loss.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her rich
briefing on the developments in Haiti over the past
few months. We welcome the presence of Mr. Roberto
Álvarez Gil, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, as well as the representatives of
Haiti and Canada, at today’s meeting.
Today’s briefing by Special Representative La Lime
touched on several familiar notes about the situation in
Haiti and the grim realities ordinary Haitians continue
to face. A Haitian-led political agreement that can
restore democratic and institutional governance is
yet to be reached. Violence perpetrated by gangs has
reached unprecedented levels. Food insecurity is on
the rise. The increasing levels of insecurity continue
to put the existence of an already fragile country in
grave jeopardy.
As the A3 has consistently emphasized, the
prevailing situation in Haiti demands urgent action.
In keeping with our responsibilities as the Security
Council, we have sought to accompany Haiti in that
process over the past years. However, much work
remains to be done to match the scale and dimension
of the present crises and to help Haiti build the
much-needed resilience to forestall recurrence. The
engagement of the international community in Haiti
must drive results for the people of Haiti. The A3 trusts
that more ambitious action that factors in the needs of
Haiti and that can help address the root causes of the
country’s crises will continue to be explored.
To that end, the A3 would like to welcome the
ongoing consultations and the intensive efforts to

23-022997/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

broaden support for the National Consensus document
and the consequent establishment of the High Council
for the Transition. We are cautiously optimistic about
those developments on the political landscape. We
recognize that an inclusive and credible political
process, based on constructive dialogue, can create
the conditions necessary for compromises and an
agreement on the country’s political future. We
therefore encourage all segments of the Haitian society
to deepen their engagement in support of the national
consensus agreement.
Clarity about the political process is necessary in
rebuilding Haiti’s democratically elected institutions, in
strengthening its governance institutions and criminal
justice systems and in putting the country back on the
path of recovery. We see the agreement as an important
step in establishing the needed confidence and creating
conditions conducive to addressing the insecurity and
political instability Haiti has been going through for so
many years.
With respect to the security situation, the A3
remains deeply concerned about the aggravation of
the security situation in the country. Gang violence
and other criminal activities, including sexual and
gender-based violence, kidnappings and homicides, as
well as the impunity of the perpetrators of those acts,
undermine the peace, stability and security of Haiti
and worsen the already dire economic situation of the
Haitian people. The disproportionate impact of gang
violence on women and girls is particularly disturbing.
We join the Secretary-General in condemning in the
strongest terms the use of sexual violence by armed
gangs as a weapon to instil fear in communities.
In reiterating our concern about gangs and their
activities in Haiti, we cannot help but recall the
interrelated nature of Haiti’s multidimensional and
complex challenges. The lack of economic opportunities
for young people in the neighbourhoods of Haiti serves as
a significant factor for gang membership. It is apparent
that, unless we intensify our bilateral and multilateral
efforts to improve livelihoods in Haiti, extreme poverty
and unemployment will continue to drive young people
into gangs and, with it, the recurrent cycle of insecurity
the country has been witnessing.
In addition, it is vital for us to continue to support
the Haitian National Police in their quest to counter
the gang phenomenon. We must not relent in our
ongoing efforts to reinforce the operational capacity
8/19

24/01/2023

of the Haitian National Police through training and the
provision of equipment. In that regard, we commend
Haiti’s international partners for their generous
contributions in support of the Haitian police. We
encourage further contributions in support of Haiti.
The A3 encourages the ongoing consultations for the
establishment and deployment of an international force
to fight the gangs that sow terror in Haiti. We recognize
that such actions must continue to be complemented by
measures to address the proliferation of illegal arms
and ammunition to gangs in Haiti. In that regard, the
progress made by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime over the reporting period is noteworthy.
The international community’s commitment to support
Haiti in the implementation of its national action plan
pertaining to the Caribbean Community Road Map on
the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition
will also be instrumental.
Concerning sanctions, we are encouraged by the
generally positive reaction of the Haitian public to the
Council’s adoption of targeted sanctions measures,
which have contributed to positive developments on the
ground. The sanctions regime must serve the purpose for
which it was established, including depriving criminal
networks of sources of funding. It must therefore target
those whose links with gang networks are clearly
established and avoid creating a climate of suspicion.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti is also deeply
concerning for the A3, with worsening food insecurity,
compounded by a cholera outbreak, and millions of
people without access to basic needs. We wish to echo
the call for urgent assistance to respond to the growing
humanitarian needs and help stem the cholera outbreak.
We call on other donors to increase support during this
critical period for Haiti and urge the countries of the
region to show a greater sense of solidarity. Haiti needs
help from the international community and even more
so from its immediate neighbours.
We cannot conclude without reaffirming our
support for the work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti under the leadership of Special
Representative La Lime. We will continue to do our
best to act in the interests of the Haitian people at
this difficult and challenging time. As the first Black
nation to gain independence from colonialism and
slavery, Haitians — whom we consider as Africa’s
sixth region — have, despite the recurring challenges
of violence, demonstrated their remarkable resilience
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

as a people. We call on them to manifest that resilience
even now, in this period of crisis, as we know that
with the support of the international community,
they will advance on the path to stability, sustainable
development and unity.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I join other colleagues in
reiterating our deepest sympathies to Gabon following
the premature loss of its Foreign Minister.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral La Lime for her briefing and welcome her back
to the Council.
We reiterate our deep concern at the persistent
lawlessness, deepening humanitarian crisis and
continued political impasse in Haiti. Criminal gangs
continue to lay siege to the country, which is marred
by chaos, destruction and violence. We deplore the
severe violation of human rights, especially those of
children, and the dreadful humanitarian crisis, as a
result of which half of the population now faces acute
hunger. Haiti’s multifaceted problems have multiple
causes that are exacerbated by a complex of factors,
including a lack of real capacity and ideas, as well as
accumulated acute structural problems. Only urgent,
decisive and bold measures will be able to disrupt that
downward spiral.
First, gang rule and violence must be uprooted.
The use of legitimate force to restore law and order is
a must. Haiti urgently needs all the help it can get in
that regard.
Secondly, there will be no deus ex machina solution
and no miracle imported from outside. The solution
to the country’s problems must come from Haitians
themselves and can only be Haitian-born and Haitianled. We welcome and support all efforts to bring
together political actors and civil society to create a
national critical mass in favour of a process of dialogue
to address the country’s ills together. As we know,
building democracy requires citizens’ involvement,
strong institutions, legitimacy and continued political
dialogue. All of that is currently missing in Haiti. In
the face of such an acute crisis, Haiti cannot afford an
irresponsible political class that continues to put its
narrow interests before the common public good. Haiti
needs responsible political dialogue, unity of purpose
and honest commitment, not a cacophony of divergent
views when the country is burning. Otherwise, the only
working coalition in the country will be that of the
gangs, which is currently the case. In that respect, the

S/PV.9247

establishment of a National Consensus for an Inclusive
Transition and Transparent Elections constitutes the
first and welcome basis for putting the country on the
right path, towards restoring legitimacy in order to take
the decisions that will lead to restoring the rule of law
and bringing back democracy and development.
Thirdly, the sanctions regime enacted by resolution
2653 (2022) was an important step to help Haiti fight
corruption, crime and gang violence. Its full and swift
implementation is a matter of priority. Haitians have
welcomed it. We must stand ready to strengthen and
broaden targeted sanctions against perpetrators. Those
responsible for the breakdown of law and order must
know that they will not be allowed to act with impunity.
Fourthly, we reaffirm our full support for the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the
critical work it delivers amid the heightened violence
and insecurity. But more is needed, and the Council
can and should do more to assist the people of Haiti
in regaining control over their country. That is why
we support the call for the creation of an international
security assistance mission.
In conclusion, let us remind ourselves that only
gangs, criminals and those directly or indirectly
affiliated with them have an interest in a failed State in
order to rule over a weak and vulnerable society. They
have made democracy an empty word, human rights
an illusion and normal life impossible. The 12 million
desperate Haitians deserve better. We know that they
are capable of the best and the marks they have made
on history are indelible. They need help and they need
it now.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Malta would like to extend its
sincere condolences on the untimely passing of Foreign
Minister Michael Moussa Adamo to Ambassador Biang,
the Gabonese delegation and the people of Gabon.
I thank Special Representative La Lime for her
comprehensive and sobering briefing today.
It is deeply regrettable and tragic that Haiti
continues to suffer in the grip of numerous crises, with
the worst human rights and humanitarian emergency in
decades. In gang-controlled areas, people are deprived
of their most fundamental rights, including their rights
to life, water, food and health care. Throughout the
past year, we have continued to witness an ongoing
downward spiral. According to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/41), homicides have increased by more

23-022999/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

than 35 per cent, and kidnappings have more than
doubled compared to 2021. Turf battles between heavily
armed gangs in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince,
Artibonite and the northern regions have made the lives
of local populations unbearable, with deliberate killings
and maimings and coordinated acts of sexual violence.
The violence has forced children out of school and left
more than 150,000 Haitians internally displaced.
The harrowing accounts of the widespread instances
of sexual violence and collective rape perpetrated by
armed gangs as a strategy for extending their control
over communities are shocking and reprehensible. We
condemn such acts without reservation and call for an
accountable justice system to take immediate action
against the current state of impunity for the perpetrators
of those crimes. We also underline the need to strengthen
the availability, accessibility and quality of medical and
psychosocial care for the survivors of sexual violence
and the need to strengthen coordination efforts among
relevant units within the Haitian National Police.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti continues
to deteriorate, particularly with regard to food and
nutrition, with 4.7 million people acutely food insecure
and nearly 20,000 people estimated to be living in
famine-like conditions. Cholera has also spread rapidly
throughout all 10 regions of the country, with 40 per cent
of all suspected cases being children. Those numbers
are likely to rise unless the level of humanitarian
assistance increases quickly. Armed gangs continue to
attack ports and block roads, restricting the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and jeopardizing the
safety of aid workers. Malta commends the national
and international humanitarian partners who risk
their own safety to deliver life-saving assistance to
people in desperate need. More must be done to enable
humanitarian access and ensure that adequate resources
are made available for the humanitarian response.
Security and stability in Haiti can be brought about
only through an inclusive, Haitian-owned political
solution. The National Consensus for an Inclusive
Transition and Transparent Elections, signed by the
Government and other stakeholders in December
2022, is reflective of a possible opening for progress
on the political front. We welcome that opportunity
and urge all political actors in Haiti to set aside their
differences and come together in compromise for the
sake of the Haitian people. It is apparent in the briefing
of Special Representative La Lime and the report of
the Secretary-General that, in order to make progress
10/19

24/01/2023

towards a political solution, the Haitian Government
needs urgent support from the United Nations and the
international community.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2653 (2022),
which established targeted sanctions measures for those
engaging in, or supporting, criminal networks and gang
violence has been seen to have had positive effects.
The sanctions should continue to be used as a tool to
impede those seeking to perpetuate chaos and hold the
Haitian people ransom for their own gain. We call on
the international community to enhance support for the
Haitian National Police, including those outlined in the
Secretary-General’s recommendations.
The people of Haiti need urgent action now. There is
no more time to lose. Let the Council lead by example,
and let 2023 be a year of progress towards the peaceful
and prosperous future that Haiti’s people deserve.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Before proceeding with my statement, I would like
to express Ecuador’s heartfelt condolences to the
Government of Gabon on the death of the country’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Michael Moussa Adamo.
In first 24 days of Ecuador’s fourth term in the
Security Council, we have addressed core issues
related to peace and security in the world and have even
adopted needed measures related to various items on
the Council’s agenda. We have come to this meeting
today aware of the solemn responsibility of the United
Nations to support the efforts of the Republic of Haiti to
overcome the security, peace, development and human
rights challenges facing its people.
I am grateful for the briefing and the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime. I also acknowledge the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic and the representatives of Haiti
and Canada.
Ecuador, Latin America and the Caribbean will
always be mindful of Haiti’s historical contribution
to achieving freedom in our countries and our region,
as well as throughout the world. Therefore, the most
meaningful tribute that we can pay to the Haitian people
is to effectively show the solidarity and unity of the
international community. I am specifically highlighting
the unity demonstrated in the Council over the final
quarter of 2022, which was reflected in the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti through the adoption of resolution 2645 (2022) in
July 2022 and the series of specific measures set out
in resolution 2653 (2022) of October 2022, including
the establishment of the Sanctions Committee targeting
individuals and entities responsible for, or complicit
in, the commission of acts threatening the peace and
security of Haiti.
I am grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/41) on the increasingly complex situation
despite the fact that the main fuel terminal at Varreux
was liberated on 3 November. I acknowledge the
work of the Haitian National Police, which continues
to improve, and I also acknowledge its limitations
and needs in confronting powerful criminal groups
and gangs. In addition, the Council, in synergy with
the other entities of the United Nations system, must
contribute to combating transnational organized crime.
For that reason, the Council must continue to support
the technical work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in shoring up border and port control
and countering tracking illicit financial flows. The
selective arms embargo pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) is a starting point that must be strengthened
through comprehensive efforts to combat illicit arms
trafficking. In that regard, I would like to reiterate that
same point, which is underscored in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General.
During its two-year term, Ecuador will seek to
strengthen the support of the Council and the United
Nations system for Haiti within a framework that
above all respects and is committed to its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and unity. We
will support all efforts to end human rights abuses,
sexual and gender-based violence, human trafficking,
the smuggling of migrants and the recruitment of
children to carry out armed violence. Advancing an
inclusive transition towards the holding of transparent
elections is critical, and the 21 December 2022 signing
of the National Consensus document is encouraging.
We call on all stakeholders to encourage building the
broadest possible consensus around it. At the same time,
it is clear that, in order to guarantee the stability of any
process, minimum security conditions are required.
When Ecuador held a non-permanent seat on the
Council in 1991, my country and the United States
addressed a joint letter, dated 3 October 1991, to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/23109) transmitting the resolution of the Foreign
Ministers of the Organization of American States, in

S/PV.9247

which we demanded the restoration of constitutional
order in Haiti, following the coup d’état of 29 September
that same year. In acknowledging the leadership of
Mexico, which concluded its term on the Council in
December 2022, and the United States in the progress
achieved by the Security Council on Haiti in 2022, I
would like today to reaffirm Ecuador’s commitment to
work closely with the United States as a co-penholder
on this critical issue, in close consultation with
all delegations.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to join others today in extending
its sincere condolences to the people of Gabon on the
passing of Foreign Minister Michael Moussa Adamo.
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing and the
continued work of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti. We also welcome the participation of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic
and the Permanent Representatives of Haiti and Canada
at this meeting.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the dire humanitarian and security situation in
Haiti. The statistics speak for themselves, with 58 per
cent of the population under the poverty line, 4.7 million
acutely food insecure and an increase in kidnappings
in 2022 of more than 100 per cent as compared to the
previous year. We have also heard chilling accounts of
the widespread use of sexual violence by armed gangs
as a weapon to instil fear in communities. It is in that
context that we recognize the need for an urgent response
to Haiti’s request for international assistance, and we
look forward to further Security Council discussion on
the authorization of an international security assistance
mission, as proposed by the Secretary-General. Such
a mission would have to be led by Haitian needs and
should be aimed at contributing to the restoration of
effective governance through combating endemic
gang violence.
We also recognize the role of targeted sanctions
in this regard. Following the establishment of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti, we stand
ready to consider further designations against those
involved in criminal gang activity and the human rights
violations that continue to threaten the peace, stability
and security of Haiti.

23-0229911/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

However, sanctions alone do not offer a solution.
Now is the time for Haitians to come together to find
a solution to the political impasse — one that tackles
the deep-rooted economic, humanitarian and security
challenges blighting the daily lives of the Haitian
people. The United Kingdom welcomes recent moves
towards a broader dialogue and efforts aimed at
reaching a consensus. We renew our call for all actors
to take part in political dialogue and work together
to identify and implement a consensus route towards
democratic elections.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Let me first join others in expressing our deepest
condolences to our dear colleague the Ambassador and
to the people and the Government of Gabon on the sad
passing of their Foreign Minister.
I thank Special Representative Helen La Lime for
her briefing. Her words illustrate the very difficult
situation experienced by Haitians. Following the
expiration on 9 January 2023 of the terms of the last
10 senators in office, as was mentioned by others,
the country no longer has any elected officials. The
political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and security
crises are mutually reinforcing. In addition, there has
been a resurgence of cholera and lack of access to
basic services. We would like to express our solidarity
with the Haitian people, whose youth are deprived
of prospects.
Switzerland has been present in Haiti for a long
time. It has remained there through every crisis and
will continue to support efforts aimed at improving
the situation. We also support a national inter-Haitian
dialogue that is as inclusive and consensual as possible.
Let me highlight the following three points.
First, the security situation in Haiti is alarming
because of the steady increase in gang activity that
translates into violence against the population. Rapes,
sexual violence, murders, robberies, armed attacks
and kidnappings are committed on a daily basis. We
condemn the brutality of this violence, including against
children. Furthermore, we condemn the abduction and
recruitment of children by criminal gangs.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/41)
points out, prevention and protection measures are
insufficient. Switzerland would like to reiterate the
importance of documenting cases, as Haitian human
rights organizations, the United Nations Integrated
12/19

24/01/2023

Office in Haiti and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights are doing. Perpetrators of
violence must be held accountable, and medical and
psychological support for survivors must be reinforced.
In the coming months, Switzerland will increase
its support to local and international organizations
that provide psychosocial services in certain gangcontrolled neighbourhoods.
Secondly, Switzerland welcomes the unity shown
by the Security Council in establishing a sanctions
regime as well as the momentum that has recently
developed as a result of its implementation. These
measures can contribute to the stabilization of the
country, respect for the rule of law and especially to
the fight against impunity and corruption. They must
be implemented effectively. To this end, we hope that
the panel of experts will be able to begin its work on the
ground quickly. The Council has recognized the need
for fair and clear procedures and expressed its intention
to authorize the Ombudsperson for this purpose.
Thirdly, more than half of the Haitian population
lives below the poverty line, and an estimated
4.7 million people are acutely food insecure. As a donor,
Switzerland supports the World Food Programme and
the Peacebuilding Fund. It also contributes directly
to organizations in the southern provinces. We are
working with authorities at all levels and with local
organizations to strengthen social protections and food
security and to reduce disaster risks, which are often
exacerbated by climate change, while improving access
to water and local governance. We note with concern
that access to humanitarian assistance and the safety of
humanitarian personnel are severely compromised by
gang violence, reducing the impact of our efforts and
those of our partners.
The Security Council has been united in its
commitment to Haiti and must support improvement of
the situation on the ground. Switzerland is committed
to working with the Haitian people to strengthen good
governance at all levels, the rule of law, security,
stability and the protection of human rights. It is
also committed to improving the coordination of the
response to the many existing needs. We hope that the
international community will continue to maintain a
presence in Haiti. Switzerland stands ready to support
all efforts in this regard.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): Like my colleagues, I also wish to extend
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

my deepest condolences to the Government and the
people of Gabon and to the entire Permanent Mission
in New York on the passing of their Foreign Minister,
Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo.
I would like to thank Ms. La Lime for her briefing
and welcome the presence among us of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic and the
representatives of Haiti and Canada.
We met just one month ago to make an alarming
assessment of situation in Haiti (see S/PV.9233), and it
is clear that the situation has continued to deteriorate. It
is with a sense of great urgency that France calls on the
international community to redouble its efforts.
Allow me to reiterate several priorities.
First, we welcomed with interest the signing on
21 December 21 of the National Consensus document,
and we encourage the Haitian actors to pursue an
inclusive dialogue, which should lead to the organization
of democratic elections when the security conditions
are met. In this regard, we hope that a Provisional
Electoral Committee will swiftly be appointed and a
timetable set. I recall, as the Special Representative
also pointed out, that there are no longer any elected
officials in the entire country since the terms of the last
10 senators in office expired on 9 January. The political
class must show responsibility in order to overcome the
current impasse.
Secondly, the security situation remains extremely
difficult, and the objective must be to support more
effectively the Haitian National Police, whose personnel
is on the front line. As we all know, they need equipment,
funding and training. To restore security, the Haitian
authorities have also appealed to the international
community. We stand ready with our partners to do
more to redress the situation on the ground.
Thirdly, France welcomes the establishment of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022) and its panel of experts. We
hope that this Committee will get quickly to work to
make proposals. Sanctions are a dissuasive signal for
criminals and their political and financial backers.
But we also know that sanctions alone will not solve
every problem. It is imperative to rebuild justice in
Haiti. The fight against impunity and the strengthening
of the entire criminal justice system must be a priority
if we wish to eventually put an end to the violence.

S/PV.9247

Finally, France will remain committed to facilitating
humanitarian aid, particularly in the areas of health and
food, because we cannot accept the current situation.
France will continue to support the efforts of the
United Nations and of all organizations working for
Haiti, including the International Organization of la
Francophonie. We will continue, as much as necessary,
to stand by the Haitian people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
heartfelt condolences to the delegation of Gabon and
the people of Gabon on the passing of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of their country. We too are mourning
with our friends from Gabon.
We thank Ms. Helen La Lime for her briefing.
According to statistics for 2022 provided in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/41), the situation
continues to deteriorate in Haiti, with an increasing
number of murders, abductions and cases of sexual
violence. The number of internally displaced persons
and refugees is also on the rise. Recent reports of
increased violence on the streets of Port-au-Prince leave
no doubt that the issue of crime will remain at the top of
Haiti’s agenda this year. We are very concerned about
the humanitarian issues, which have been compounded
by the cholera epidemic. According to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number
of cases of cholera rose by 57 per cent over the past
month. It is clear that without a full-fledged resumption
of the work of State institutions and inclusive dialogue
among political forces, there will be no way out of the
situation. We are monitoring efforts on that track and
note the signing on 21 December 2022 of the National
Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent
Elections. Any steps that could help to overcome the
divisions and restore constitutional order in Haiti
should be supported. However, it is important that all
major opposition actors be included in that dialogue.
Meanwhile, we must acknowledge that there are no
legitimate elected authorities in the country. The final
third segment of the senators elected on the basis of
statutory procedures recently completed their term of
office. We have repeatedly stated that the legitimacy
crisis is one of the key obstacles to breaking the
country’s vicious cycle of lawlessness, violence and
socioeconomic degradation. The crisis of statehood
in Haiti is largely the result of external political
engineering and neocolonial policies, which have

23-0229913/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

prevented several colleagues in the Security Council
from speaking frankly. The goal of the international
community is to send a clear message to Port-au-Prince
about the need to create legitimate institutions based on
international and regional instruments, such as the 2001
Inter-American Democratic Charter. We believe that
issue should be more clearly reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s reporting.
We support the Secretary-General’s call to
investigate the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse.
In the year and a half since the tragedy, which had
clear traces of external interference, no progress has
been made in the investigation. All those responsible,
especially those who ordered the assassination, must
be brought to justice and punished. We are also very
disappointed with a document signed by the head of
the Secretariat, in which unilateral coercive measures
are basically equated with Security Council sanctions,
while those two very different instruments are covered
in the same section of the report. Everyone knows that
in other countries, unilateral sanctions have already led
to dire humanitarian and economic consequences. In
several cases, they have undermined efforts made by
the international community to assist a given State.
In the context of Haiti, we view such measures as an
attempt by the United States and Canada to steer internal
processes in the country in their preferred direction. But
such measures cannot by any means be considered an
expression of the will of the international community,
which can be expressed only through the decisions of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti. We expect
the Committee to intensify its work, including with
a view to determining the true sources of funding of
the gangs in Haiti and routes used for supplying illegal
weapons to the island.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral La Lime for her briefing and efforts in Haiti,
and I also welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic and the Permanent Representatives of Haiti
and Canada.
Haiti faces increasing insecurity and humanitarian
turmoil and an economic downturn. The Security
Council and the international community must renew
their solidarity with the people of Haiti. We also need
14/19

24/01/2023

to increase support for their efforts to overcome the
multifaceted crisis, restore the rule of law and achieve
long-term stability. Japan is particularly concerned
about the widespread gang violence and criminal
activities, which have also exacerbated humanitarian
and economic difficulties. Therefore, the restoration
of a minimum level of order is a top priority. In that
context, we express support for the sanctions introduced
by resolution 2653 (2022) as a means to help to bring
security and stability to Haiti, and we encourage the
Panel of Experts to visit the country as soon as possible.
We also take note of the Secretary-General’s call for
the deployment of an international specialized armed
force (see S/2023/41), and we are ready to engage in
the Council’s discussions to find a way to support
relevant initiatives.
The primary responsibility to restore and maintain
security, however, rests with the Haitian authorities.
The Haitian National Police (HNP) must be further
empowered and equipped to carry out its duties with
the support of the international community. For its part,
Japan has contributed to the United Nations basket
fund, which has been spearheaded by Canada and the
United States in support of the HNP.
Japan is also gravely concerned about the rapid
spread of cholera over the past few months, which has
affected vulnerable people, especially children. To help
address the crisis, Japan decided earlier this month
to extend emergency grant aid of $3 million through
international humanitarian organizations. It is also
imperative to enhance Haiti’s socioeconomic resilience
in order to achieve immediate and mid- to long-term
stability in the country and its communities. It is critical
to ensure human security by protecting and empowering
populations, including women, young people and
people in vulnerable situations. In particular, efforts
should centre around building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions to deliver basic services.
Over the years, Japan has invested in people and
institutions in Haiti in order to enhance its self-reliance,
including its long-term support for the build-up of
medical facilities since the devastating earthquake in
2010. However, all such efforts need to be underpinned
by political unity in the country. Japan supports the
efforts of the Haitian Government to forge an inclusive
agreement among all political and civil sectors in Haiti,
in particular the signing of the 21 December 2022
agreement. We expect that endeavour to make further
progress towards achieving a broader consensus. Japan
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

calls upon all Haitian stakeholders to join the process
and promote dialogue in order to restore law and order
and find a path for restoring democratic institutions
through free, fair and transparent elections. We
reaffirm the growing importance of the good offices
of the United Nations, including the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti, and expect it to make
further efforts to encourage constructive dialogue.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates its commitment to
continuing to support Haiti’s efforts to overcome its
unprecedented challenges.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to extend our heartfelt condolences to the
Ambassador of the Gabonese Republic in the wake of
the sudden demise of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of that brotherly country.
I would like to congratulate the Japanese
presidency of the Council and thank the members
of the Security Council for their ongoing interest in
the multidimensional crisis in Haiti. I welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic and the
Permanent Representative of Canada. I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for
her insightful briefing on recent developments in Haiti
and for introducing the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/41), which provides us with a comprehensive
diagnosis of the social, political, economic and security
situation in Haiti and several apt observations.
We are at the midpoint of the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, which was renewed
on 15 July 2022 for a year. For us, this meeting is
therefore an assessment to see the progress made, the
gaps to be filled and the challenges to be overcome
in implementing its mandate. It comes only one
month after the meeting of 21 December last year (see
S/PV.9233) at which the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
His Excellency Mr. Jean Victor Généus, was present to
report on the most recent developments in the overall
situation in the country. He took the opportunity to
reiterate the Government’s request to the SecretaryGeneral for robust support to assist the national police
in addressing the security and humanitarian challenges
facing the country.

S/PV.9247

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
report highlights some important progress made by the
Government despite the multidimensional crisis. In that
regard, at the political level, the signing on 21 December
2022 of the agreement entitled the National Consensus
for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections
is clearly a major achievement. That document, which
was adopted by the Council of Ministers and published
in the official newspaper Le Moniteur on 3 January,
represents a road map to guide the country out of the
serious crisis that it is experiencing. It provides for the
establishment of political structures, namely, the High
Transitional Council, comprising three members from
the private business sector, the civil society sector and
the political sector, and a Government oversight body,
comprising 21 members, to which the Government
will be accountable. In addition, a provisional
electoral council to organize the elections will soon
be established.
The road map of the High Transitional Council
and the Government oversight body sets out a clear
timetable leading to elections and the restoration of
State institutions in 2023. The focus is on the elections,
and the Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Ariel
Henry, made the announcement in order to reassure
participants in the upcoming polls. It should also
be noted that, under the terms of the agreement, the
Government will be open to new sectors.
The Government is pleased that its efforts were
successful and were recognized by many sectors, both
nationally and internationally. The private business
sector, the civil society sector and the political sector
all commended the Government’s efforts to build a
national consensus to put the country back on the
path to constitutional order. The same is true at the
international level, with the European Union and the
State Department of the United States welcoming
the 21 December 2022 agreement. The international
community encourages political actors to continue
that inclusive dialogue, which should lead to restoring
democratic institutions.
With regard to the rule of law, two significant facts
should be highlighted. The first concerns the appointment
of the President of the Court of Cassation — the highest
judicial body in the country — chosen from among the
most senior judges. Other judges will be appointed to
complete the composition of that important body and
make it functional again after having been inoperative
for more than 18 months. The second important fact,

23-0229915/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

a historic decision in terms of its scope, concerns the
recommendation of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
to remove a certain number of judges criticized by the
public from the judiciary.
Despite all those significant achievements, the
situation in Haiti remains very worrisome and fragile,
as the Minister for Foreign Affairs clearly emphasized
at the meeting on 21 December 2022. There should
therefore be no misunderstanding. The country
continues to face many challenges, particularly in
terms of security and humanitarian issues. Cases
of kidnapping in the capital and violence by armed
gangs persist; even the police are not exempt. In the
past week, several police officers were assassinated.
The movement of people and goods continues to be
disrupted at the northern and southern access points to
the capital. That contributes to a further crippling of
the country’s economy, which is falling into recession,
stuck in a slump with a negative growth rate for more
than three years and an inflation rate of nearly 47 per
cent. That is a catastrophic economic situation with
serious consequences for the physical living conditions
of the population, which has no purchasing power and
is already living in precarious conditions. The situation
has been exacerbated by the humanitarian crisis and
food insecurity affecting more than half the population.
In addition, the resurgence and spread of cholera is a
genuine public health threat for the country.
Restoring a secure situation in the country remains
an urgent priority for the Government. It is now more
necessary and urgent than ever to adopt robust shortterm solutions to re-establish a secure and stable
security climate as a prerequisite for creating the
conditions to move forward with the process under
way. Without security, there can be no hope of fair,
transparent and democratic elections or of restoring the
normal functioning of institutions in the country.
We support the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report:
“Despite the end of the siege of the Varreux
oil terminal, I reiterate the urgent need for the
deployment of an international specialized armed
force, as articulated in my letter dated 8 October
addressed to the President of the Security Council.”
(S/2023/41, para. 75)
With regard to sanctions, the Government welcomes
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti
16/19

24/01/2023

and the Panel of Experts, which, moreover, was due
to visit Haiti very soon. We hope that they will work
effectively to punish the real culprits.
We have said over and over again in this Chamber
that this is a critical time. We need much more
action. There is no room for complacency. We have
an obligation to act rapidly. We welcome the efforts
of Council members on the situation in Haiti, and we
take this opportunity to encourage them to work harder
to reach agreement on the Government’s 7 October
2022 appeal to the international community for the
immediate deployment of a specialized international
force to bolster the efforts of the Haitian National Police
to fight gangs. That is an urgent need, for it is a matter
of controlling the armed gangs and restoring order and
peace by implementing a national security plan. There
is no more time. The security situation threatens to
deteriorate every day, to the dismay of a people in need,
who are suffering bitterly. The failure to act means a
failure to understand the severity of the crisis.
The final goal set by Prime Minister Ariel Henry
is to return power to elected officials who are capable
of addressing the major political and socioeconomic
challenges facing the country. The Government of Haiti
reiterates its appeal for the international community’s
effective support in helping it to overcome the gang
problem and enabling it to complete the process of
restoring democratic order in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I take this opportunity to express to the
representative of Gabon our condolences for the
regrettable passing of the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, and we ask him to convey
our condolences to his family.
We thank all of the briefers for their presentations
this morning. In particular, we thank Special
Representative Helen La Lime for her tireless work.
We also thank and congratulate Ecuador, who is
taking on the role of co-penholder on this important
issue, alongside the United States — they can count on
our support.
In this new year, it is our hope that the many
outstanding issues can find definitive answers. The case
before us today, the Haitian crisis, is now a recurring
theme since its emergence last year and, despite the
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

attention given to it, is still awaiting a positive outcome
in terms of peace and harmony in Haiti.
On 21 October 2022, the Council adopted resolution
2653 (2022), which established a Sanctions Committee
for those who finance the criminal organizations
that sow violence and chaos in Haiti (see S/PV.9159).
However, the main demand of the Haitian authorities,
endorsed by the Secretary-General, the deployment of
a robust force to assist the Haitian National Police in
putting an end to the appalling violence affecting that
country, remains without a road map.
What are the real prospects that the Security
Council will finally take action on the protracted
Haitian crisis on the basis of the concrete proposals in
the hands of this organ? The Dominican Government
is aware of the questionable legacy of previous
United Nations missions in Haiti and understands the
legitimate need to consider and adequately plan any
response in order to avoid past mistakes and, above all,
to avoid a solution that ignores the will of the Haitians.
But, as direct witnesses of the human tragedy in the
neighbouring country, we also know that every minute
of waiting means further disruption of the situation and
suffering for innocent citizens.
We have always recognized that a national pact
leading to fair, free and transparent elections is an
essential element to restore stability in Haiti through
the legitimacy of its authorities. However, we must
emphasize that this national pact and these elections
must be accompanied by an urgent process of
pacification, something that is not in sight today.
We reiterate, without flippancy and with the utmost
firmness, that our neighbour’s situation represents not
only a source of consternation for us, but a national
security threat to the Dominican Republic. We are the
only country that shares a land border with Haiti, on
a relatively small island. Our economies and trade are
intertwined. Haitians are the main immigrants to the
Dominican Republic.
As formalizing adequate border management
systems with shared responsibility has become
impossible, the border has become a source of
problems, such as human trafficking, trafficking in
arms and illicit substances, as well as the smuggling
of goods — scourges that our Government fights tooth
and nail, with the help of our international partners, but
under increasingly difficult conditions. The governance
of such a border is virtually unmanageable when one

S/PV.9247

side is unable to guarantee the rule of law. There is also
the challenge of providing basic services to the irregular
migrant population and its impact on the social policies
of the Dominican State.
This reality is not motivated by an anti-immigrant
attitude. The Dominican Republic is a net emitter
of migrants, and our history is marked by human
movements in both directions. But when the flow of
people does not occur within legal channels, in an
orderly and safe manner, it implies political, social,
economic and security risks, and it is difficult to
guarantee the corresponding rights. Many of the
Governments represented here, particularly the
permanent five members of the Council, even as highincome countries, have also shown deep concern about
the difficulty of adequately managing growing waves
of irregular migration. Imagine that challenge in the
Dominican-Haitian context, given Haiti’s humanitarian
and institutional crisis.
We therefore clarify once again that the Dominican
Government is compelled to take the necessary measures
to curb any impact that Haiti’s violence and institutional
deterioration might have on our territory. Our country
is supportive and respectful of international law,
especially as Haiti is a friendly country with which we
are bound by a treaty of peace and perpetual friendship.
As we have repeated countless times, we are willing to
continue to play a good-neighbourly role.
But our involvement would be very different if
there were concrete support from the international
community to restoring peace and security in Haiti.
Since 2019, as a member of this organ, the Dominican
Republic has expressed and reiterated its concern that
the scope of the mission in Haiti could be reduced,
and we insisted that a strong mission with broad
capabilities and sufficient funding was necessary to
truly bring peace and lasting stability to Haiti. Today
the situation in our brother country, far from improving,
is worsening. That is why we continue to warn of its
constant deterioration.
If we agree that humankind is facing a turning
point — a “tectonic shift of the times”, a Zeitenwende,
as the German Chancellor Olaf Scholz put it, referring
to the crisis of multilateralism, which no longer
responds to the current reality — then this Organization
needs to be modernized so that it can serve as a tool
for safeguarding universal security and upholding the
values of its founding document, the Charter of the

23-0229917/19

S/PV.9247

The question concerning Haiti

United Nations. That is a vision shared by President
Xi Jinping and the recent United States National
Security Strategy.
Given this striking commonality of global
leadership, it is clear that the future calls for a more
empowered Organization, one that will resolve with
equal vigour and perseverance the smaller-scale armed
conflicts that generate so much suffering today while
continuing to strive to rid humankind of weapons of
mass destruction. But that is possible only if world
Governments and citizens have a high degree of
confidence in this venerable institution.
The President of the General Assembly asserted in
this Chamber last month that deadlock in our task of
maintaining international peace and security “translates
to a dead end for the millions of children, women, men
and families who are all suffering the consequences”
and “are putting their trust in us to step beyond power
dynamics” (S/PV.9220, p. 5).
How can we hope to forge that trust if we fail to
act in a timely manner in the face of a crisis as unique
as that of Haiti? Until there is firm action against the
criminals who impede Haiti’s sovereign future, I do not
believe, with all due respect, that we can ask the Haitian
people and the other peoples who are witnessing this
tragedy to place their trust in the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to join in
today’s discussion.
(spoke in French)
I hope that my colleague from Gabon understands
how very saddened each and every one of us was to
hear the news of Minister Adamo’s passing, and I want
to assure him that our thoughts are with him during
this very difficult time, both for him personally and for
his country.
(spoke in English)
As we heard from Ms. La Lime, whose ongoing
work and briefing today we very much appreciate, the
multifaceted crisis that is facing Haiti remains serious.
As others said, the situation is still very fragile. Many
children are out of school and are being recruited by
gangs. There are many young women who live in daily
fear of being sexually assaulted. Workers who leave
18/19

24/01/2023

their homes in the morning do not necessarily know
whether they will be kidnapped during the day. And
there are communities facing famine-like conditions.
That is the reality being lived by Haitians every day. It
is clear that we need to do more, and I think it is equally
clear that we need to do things differently than in the
past. I would therefore like to make four points.
First, we need to learn from the history of large
outside military interventions in Haiti because they
actually failed to bring about long-term stability
for Haitians. Canada believes profoundly that all
the solutions we look to must be led by Haitians and
Haitian institutions. That is the only way we are going
to be able to create an impact on the current violence
that will be sustainable and will actually last. I think
we all share the common view that achieving security
in Haiti is a priority not only for the people of Haiti
but also for the region. As we heard today, it is also
clearly a priority for Haiti’s neighbours. I did not hear
any statement today that did not refer to it as a priority.
From Canada’s perspective, we are not simply
thinking about what to do. We are actually doing some
things that we think need to be done. Over the past
several months, we have been working with the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to understand the crisis better
and how additional help will actually make a difference
in solving the problem. We are committed to working
with other partners to make progress in that regard.
We look forward to working with the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the Security
Council. As I speak, we are deepening our ties and
assistance to the HNP. We are continuing to work with
them in providing training — and we are not merely
talking about training and financing, we are doing it.
We are also providing better equipment, because that is
required, and we must make sure that the police force
has the capacity to deal with the level of violence being
experienced in the country. We will continue to work
with the Council to see what else must be done, and we
look forward to that.
We are also pleased that a number of countries
have joined us in contributing to the security basket
fund, whose purpose is to increase the capacity and the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police, and
we encourage others to do the same. Many have done so
but not everyone has, and it is still very necessary. We
believe that all of us need to walk the talk. In addition,
it is critical to support Haitian actors to rebuild the
country’s justice and correctional systems in order
23-02299

24/01/2023

The question concerning Haiti

to strengthen the rule of law and combat corruption
and impunity.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, we need to continue to exert pressure
on the gangs and the elite that supports them. We
understand — and in listening to Ms. La Lime’s words
earlier I was pleased to hear — that the sanctions the
Council moved swiftly to establish are having an effect.
Canada has imposed autonomous sanctions against 15
members of the Haitian elite to date in response to acts
of significant corruption and other egregious conduct,
including providing illicit financial and operational
support to armed gangs. Canada will continue to
engage with the Council and with other countries to
explore how we can do more. We also look forward to
reports from experts that can specifically tell us what
else we can do.
Thirdly, to break the cycle of crises, we need to
support Haiti to revitalize its economy and undertake
genuinely sustainable socioeconomic development.
That is what is missing right now. We believe that Haiti
deserves our solidarity and predictable support. Young
Haitians need to have hope that there is a future for
them in their home country. And as many members of
the Council said, we will of course continue to work to
address the ongoing humanitarian crisis, especially in
the context of the cholera pandemic.

S/PV.9247

Fourthly, Canada encourages Haitian stakeholders
to broaden their consensus even further — because
disagreement will always exist. For example, there
are days when we do not always quite agree with the
Government of China, but I think the statement today
by my colleague Ambassador Zhang Jun was important,
in that he spoke about the need to have all civil society
groups in Haiti involved in the discussions and for them
to play an important part in the national consensus.
Much remains to be done in that regard. Moreover, it is
very important for women and young people to play an
integral role in shaping Haiti’s future.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, that
Canada will remain absolutely committed to addressing
the current crisis in a positive way and providing
suggestions so that the necessary decisions can be
reached, both for the Council and, especially, for the
people of Haiti. I continue to express my solidarity
with my colleague the Ambassador of Haiti. We will do
everything possible to respond to the ongoing crisis and
will continue to put forward positive proposals to find
better solutions.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-0229919/19
