F
i
i

SECURITY' COUNCIL

o FFI C I.Al RECO RDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VER~BAUX

OFFICIELS

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No.. 102
216eme et 217eme seances
31 octobre 1947

Flushing- Meadow "_
New York
( 51+ p.)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Two hundred and sixteenth meeting

Deux-cent-seizieme seance

Page

Pages

400. Provisional agenda

2671

400. Ordre du jour provisoire

401. Adoption of the agenda

2671

401. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

402. Continuation of the discussion on
2671
the Indonesian question

402.

Two hundred and seventeenth meeting
403. Continuation of the discussion on·
the Indonesian question
2690

2671
,.

2671

?uite?~ la discussion de la question
mdoneslenne
2671

Deux-eent-dix:-septieme seance
403.

?uite?~ la discussion de la question
mdoneslenne
2690

Documents

Documents

The following document, relevant to the two
hundred and sixteenth meeting, appearS as follows:

. Le document se rapportant a la deux-centseizieme seance figure dans la publication suivante:

Proces-verbau~ officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuzieme Annee, Supplement special No 5:
Rapport de 'la Commission consulaire a BataReport by the Consular Commission at BataI via au ConseiI de securite.
via to the Security Council.

Official Records of the Security Council, S econd Year, Special Supple111,ent Np. 5:

2690
present meeting. The substance of this new seil de securite qu'au cours de la presente sean~e.
proposal cons"
in this, that a Security Council Cette nouvelle proposition te..."1d essentiellement a
commission should be set up .to watch over the creer une eommission du Conseil de securite
situation in Indonesia and the withdrawal of the chargee d'observer la situation en Indonesie et
de veiller au retrait des troupes neerlandaises.
Netherlands forces.
I do not know what the President thinks about
. Je ne connais pas l'opinion du President
this. I do not know when we shall discuss this. ce sujet. Je ne sais pas quand nous examiner.ons
new proposal of the Government of the Indo- cette nouvelle proposition du Gouvernement de
nesian Republic, but since the proposal has la Republique d'Indonesie. Mais puisque cette
been made, it must be discussed. I should, of proposition existe, it faut l'examiner. I1 va sans
course, like to hear the Indouesian representa- dire que je voudrais entendre 1'0pinion du repretive on this question. He will probably explain sentant de l'!ndonesie sur cette question. Sans
doute, nous fournira-t?il des explications a prohis Government's new proposal.
pos de la nouvelle proposition de son Gouvernement.

a

The PRESIDENT: We shall 'adjourn at this
time and meet again at 3 p.m. today.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
allons lever la seance maintenant et nous nous
reunirons de. nouveau aujourd'hui a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 20.

TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH
MEETING'

DEUX-CENT-DIX-SEPTIEME SEANCE

Held at Flushing M eadow, New York,
on Friday.. 31 October'1947, at 3 p.m:

Tenue a Flushing Meadow, New-York,
le vendredi 31 octobre 1947, a15 heures.

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(United Kingdom).

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(Royaume-Uni).
.

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil,· China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

403. Continuation of the discussion on
the Indonesian question

403. Suite de la discussion sur la qv.estion indoliesienne

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pillai,
representative of India; Mr. van Kleffens,representative of the Netherlands; General Romulo,
representative of the Philippines, and Mr. Palar,
representative of the Republic of Indonesia; took
their places at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Pillai, representant de l'Inde, M. van Kleffens, representant
des Pays-Bas, le general Romulo, representant
des Philippines et M. Palar, representant de la
Republique d'Indonesie, prennent place a la table
du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: Towards the end of this
morning's discussion, at the two hundred and
sixteenth meeting, the representative of the
USSR put a question to me as to when and
how we should discuss the letter from the representative of the Republic of Indonesia which
was received yesterday and circulated this morningas document S/590. My answer is that it is,
of course, open to any repr~sentative in the
course of discussion to refer to that letter and
the proposal made therein. In the general discussion which is now drawing to a close, or subsequently, if any discussion arises on parti,cular
resolutions, any representative may, of course,
refer to that letter in so far as it may bear
upon any of the resolutions under discussion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Vers la
fin de la discussion de ce matin, a la deux-centseizieme seance, le r~presentant de I'URSS m'a
demande a quel moment et dans quelles conditions notts discuterions la lettre dtt representant
de la Republique d'Indonesie que nous avons
rel;ue hier et qui a ete distribuee ce matin en
tant que document S/590. Je repondrai qu'il est
naturelIement loisible tout representant de mentionner cette lettre et la proposition qu'elle contient au cours de la discussion. Tout representant
est libre de se re£erer cette communication au
caurs de la discussion generale, qui touche maintenant a sa fin, ou ulterieurement, si l'on discute certaines resolutions, dans la mesure ou
il y aura un rapport entre cette lettre et l'une
qpelconque des resolutions soumises a la discusSIOn.

an international commission composed of representatives
of the Security Council to obserVe and investigate conditions in· and to supervise territories which ;ire handed
back to Republican control after ·withdrawal of Netherlands forces. The Government of the Republic of Indonesia believes that this provides the .only method of restoring these territories to their· former status 3.'1d of
guaranteeing peace and security in them."

a nommer une commission intemationale composee de

a

a

representants du Conseil de securite, qui exercerait des
fonctions d'observation, d'cnquete et de controle dans
les territoiresqui seront rendus aux Republicains apres
le retrait des forces neerlandaises. Le Gouvernement de
la. Republique d'Indonesie estiitfe que c'est la le seul
moyen permettant de rendre aces territoires leur ancien
statut et· de leur assurer la paix et la securite."

2691
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netnerlands): I raise a
point of order. I do not know if that letter has
been circulated, but I certainly shall have to
make some comment on that matter if the letter
is to be discussed here. I have not been able
to ascertain the .views of my Government in
full, so I find myself in a difficulty here. I shall
say no more than that.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays~Bas) (traduit de l'anglais): J'ai une motion d'ordre a presenter. Je
ne sais paE' si cette lettre a ete distribuee. mais
si elle doit >;:~re discutee ici, j'aurai certainement
des observations a faire a son sujet. Je n'ai pas
ete en mesure d'obtenir sur tous les points l'avis
de mon Gouvernement, de sorte que je me trouve
la' devant une difficulte. C'est tout ce que j'ai
a dire pour le moment.

The PRESIDENT: I am not quite clear about
this. Has the representative of the Netherlands
not received a copy of this letter?

Le PRESIDENT. (traduit de l'anglais): J e ne
suis pas certain d'avoir bien compris. Le representant des Pays-Bas n'a-t-il pas rel$u copie de
cette lettre?

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands) : Some kind
spirit gave me a typewritten copy. I do not
know where it came from. It was not on the
yellow paper of the Secretariat. This paper is
being handed to me at this moment. I do not
want to stand on a mere technicality. I refer
to the substance, and that is the object of my
remarks.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'anglais): Dne personne certainement hien intentionnee m'a remis 11Ile copie dactylographiee. Je
ne sais pas d'o)! cile venait; cile n'etait pas tapee
sur le papier jaune utilise par. le Secretariat.
Quant au document lui-meme, on vient de me
le remettre a l'instant. Je ne tiens pas a insister
sur une question de detail. C'est le fond du probleme qui m'interesse et qui a fait l'objet de
ma remarque.

The PRESIDENT: The document should, of
course, have been distributed to those around
the table here who are not ordinarily members
of the Council. I hope they have now all received a copy and, of course, it will be open
to them, if there is discussion on any of the
resolutions, to refer to the contents of that letter
and the proposals made therein, in relation to
any of the resolutions, as they come under discussion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ['anglais): Il est
certain que le document aurait dl1 etre distribue a tous ceux qui sont assis autour de cette
table, meme s'iIs ne sont pas membres du Conseil de securite. J'espere que tout le monde en
a maintenant re<;u un exemplaire et il est natureUement loisible a chacun de mentionner le contenu de cette lettre et les propositions qu'eUe
formule, et ce a propos de chacun des projets
de resolution au fll!.' et a. mesure qu'ils seront
discutes.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): In my last intervention
in this debate, at the two hundred and tenth
meeting of the Council!, I called the attention of
the Council to the advantage of utilizing the
services of the Committee of Good Offices to
give effect to the cease-fire order. I further stated
that we ought to ask the military attaches in
Batavia to assist the Committee in supervising
the implementation of the cease-fire order.

"Both sides admit that a cease-fire order
should normally be followed by contact between the two parties in order to arrange
details for the satisfactory observance of the

M. MUNIZ (Bresi!) (traduit de l'anglais) : Au
cours de ma derniere intervention dans cette
discussion, a la deux-cent-dixieme seance! j'ai
attire l'attention du Conseil sur l'avantage qu'il
y aurait a recourir a. la Commission de bons
offices pour donner effet a l'ordre d~ cesser le
feu. J'ai declare de plus que nous devrions demander aux attaches militaires a. Batavia d'aider
la Commission a controler l'execution de l'ordre
de cesser le feu.
II m'a toujours semble qu'en agissant autrement
nous ferions preuve d'un manque total de realisme. J'estime qu'il est impraticable; sinon nuisible, d'essayerde regler la question ici sans
~ucun contact direct avec la situation telle qu'elle
a evolue en Indonesie. Aucune des directives que
nous donnerions aux parties interessees ne peut
aboutir au m'aximum de resultat si cUe ti'est
pas appliquee par un organe se otrouvant sur
place.
Apres la lecture du rapport des consuls, qui
m'a semble une appreciation objective et realiste
de la situation, je suis convaincu de l'opportunite des remarques que je viens de formuler.
Si les membres du Conseil veulent bien se reporter all paragraphe 9 du .Chapitre Il du rapport
de la Commission consulaire a Batavia, ou le
probleme central de cette situation nous apparait dans toute ·sa signification, ils y trouveront
le. passage suivant:
"Les deux cotes admettent qu'un ordre de
cesser le feu doit normalement etre suivi par
un contact entre les deux parties, destine a
regler ks details d'une observation satisfai-

' See Offidul Records of the Security Cou~cil, Second
Y ear, No. 96.

1 Voir les Proces-verbau.'r officiels du Conseil de seeurite, Deuxieme Annee, No 96.

It has always seemed to me that we should
be adopting a completely unrealistic attitude.if
we did otherwise. I hold it to be impracticable,
if not harmful, to try to settle that 'question
here, without any direct contact with the situation
as it has developed in Indonesi 4 . Any directive
we may give to the parties concerned cannot
have a full effect if it is not properly acted
upon by some organ on the spot.
After having read the report of the consuls,
which seemed to me an objective and realistic
appraisal of the situation, I am convinced of the
property of these considerations. If the members will look at chapter Il, paragraph 9 of the
report of the Consular Commission at Batavia,
where the gist of the situation appears in its
full significance, they will see the following:

~""",-.

2692
order. No attempt was made by either to make
such contact, largely, if not entirely, because
of this lack of confidence."

sante de l'ordre. CJest en grande partie,sinon
exc1usivement en raison de ce manquede confiance, qu'aucun des deux cotes n'a fait de
tentative pour etablir un te1 contact."

If that is the situation as seen by the consular
Si telle est la situation, vue par les autorites
authorities, who have inv~stigated it in all its consulaires, qui 1'ont examinee dans tous ses
complexities, it is only too clear that any attempt aspects les plus complexes, il est manifeste que
to bring about the complete cessation of hostilities tQute tentative pour. aboutir a. la cessation comwithout using the services of an organ on the spot 'plete des hostilites' sans avoir recours a. un
organe se trouvant sur place serait vaiue.
would be futile. '
L'ordre de cesser le feu n'ayant pas ete entieSince the cease-fire order had not been entirely
complied with, the Security Council proceeded rement execute, le Conseil de securite a procede
to the examination 'of the several- resolutions a. l'examen des dffferentes resolutions traitant
dealing' with the ·withdrawal of. troops to a given du retrait des troupes sur une ligne determinee,
line, on the assumption that a decision on that estimant qu'une decision dans ce domaine aurait
subject would eventually bring about thecom- finalement pour effet la cessation complete des
plete cessation of hostilities. I believe, however, hostilites. Toutefois, a. la lumiere des faits etablis
in the light of the facts. ascertained by the con- par les autprites consulaires, je crois .qu'une telle
sular authorities, that such a decision .would decision subirait le meme sort" que l'ordre de cesbe doomed to'the same fate as the cease-fire, ser le feu. Nous n'obtiendrons pas le retrait'des
order. Withdrawal of troops will not be achieved troupes par un ordre du Conseil si nous ne veilby an orderQf the Council if we do not provide Ions pas au controle de son execution.
for the supervision of its implementation.
C'est n'avo~r aucun sens des realites que de
It is highly unrealistic to. suppose' that irregular
troops will ever comply with such a decision supposer que des troupes irregulieres veuillent
and retreat to a line on which we may agree here. , jamais se conformer a. une telle decision et se
Such' a theoretical approach is, to our mind, the retirer sur tine ligne. etablie par nous ici. A
.main objection' to the proposals . sl1bmitted by notre avis,' ce qu'on peut surtout objecter aux
propositions de I'URSS1, de l'Australie2 et de
the USSR\ Australia2 and Polandll •
la Polognell, c'est d'aborder ainsi la question de
fac;on trop theorique.
Nous 'avons maintenant a. Batavia la' ComWe now have in Batavia the Committee of
Good Offices, and it is for. the Committee to see mission de bons offices et c'est a. cette Commishow the Council's cease-fire order may best be sion qu'il appartieilt de trouver le meilleur moyen
observed, so that the hostilities may cease and de faire observer I'ordre de cesser le feu emis
the Committee may assist both parties in reaching ,par le Conseil de' securite, afin que les hostilites prennent(fih et que la Commission puisse
a~al agreement.
preter son· assistanceaux deux parties· en vue
d'un accord definitif.
I cannot see why we should not use the means
Je ne vais pas pourquoi nous ne pourrions pas
available to. us, and the Committ~e is undoubtedly utiliser les moy~ns qui sont a. notre disposition
the best means at our. disposal. .I have referred et la Commission .est indubitablement le meilleur
here to the experience we have had in these mat- . dont nous disposions: rai mentionne id I'expeters in' Latin Ainerica in similar cases. We have rience que nous avons acquise dans ce domaine,
always had .recourse, with great success, to an dans des cas analogues, en Amerique latine. Nous
organ of mediation to which military authorities avons toujours eu recours; avec succes, a. un
were attached. FQr theSe reasons, and because organe mediateur auquel etaient attachees des
it represents, in our opinion, t.1lebest approach autorites militaires; c'est parce que, a. notre avis,
'to the· solution of. this question, we give our it constitue la' meilleure maniere d'arriver a la
full support to the United States draft resolu- solution de cette question, que nous appuyons
tion\ the maiD. purpose of which is to co-ordinate sans. reserve le projetde resolution des Etatsthe efforts of the Committee of Good Offices. and Unis', qui vise essentiellement a. coordonner les
the consular and military authorities in Batavia efforts de la Commission .de bons offices et des
for the. purpose of establiShing contact with, the ~uto~ites consulaires et militair~s a. Batavia pour
parties, bringing about consultation between them etabhr le contact avec les parties, amencr des
and obtaining complete cessation of hostilities as consultations entre eUes et obtenir la cessation
a prerequisite Ior the pacific settlement of the complete des hostilites, 'conditions prealables au
reglement pacifique du conflit.
dispute.
We cannot share the view that this is not
Nous ne pouvons nous rallier a. l'opinion selon
within the competence of the Committee of Good laquelle ceci depasse la competence de. la ComOffices, since its ultimate goal, which is to bring m.ission de bons offices,etant donne que son
the parties to .a final' agreement, cannot be but ultime, qui est d'amener les parties a un
obtained without first securing complete cessation accord definitif,ne peut etre attcint sans que
of.hostilities. Not before this initial step is taken" soit assureed'abord la cessation complete des
will the Committee be able to exercise .its essen- hostilites. Ce n'est qu'apres avoir pris cette pretial function, namely, to bring the parties to an miere mesure que la Commission pourra exer'agreement and a .final settlement of the dispute, cer sa fonction essentielle, qui est d'amener les
• See Official Records of the Security COuncil, Second
Year, No. 93.
• Ibid., Nos. 96 and 101.
• Ibid., No. 101.
• Ibid., Nos. 99 and 100.

'Voir les Proces-verbau% officiels du Conseil de secu'rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 93.
. • Ibid., Nos 96 et 101.
• Ibid., No 101.

• Ibid., Nos 99 et 100.

2693
which we hope will eventually culminate in bringing to the United Nations another Member State.
The political aspect of this question, with
which the Committee of Good Offices is primarily concerned, overshadows in importance all
other aspects, which are of a merely provisional
and temporary character, serious as they may
be. When the Security Council decided to create
the Committee of Good Offices, an important
step was taken in the right direction and the
proper instrument was devised to handle this
matter. A grave and complex problem is presented by this dispute, involving the emancipation
of a p!=ople and the establishment of ties of
economic, sociai and political co-operation with
the ex-metropolis; it is a problem that can be
sati'sfactorilysettled only by means of negotiation between the parties, brought about and
assisted by the friendly intervention of the
mediators.
.
In the delicate phases of the problem which
will follow the cessation of hostilities; the
Security Council, by reason of th€ character of
its intervention, will not be in a position to do
more than to give credit to the Committee of
Good Offices and keep a watchful attitude towards and interest in the development of the
. negotiations. The responsibility for the success
of the Folitical settlement rests, .in a large degree,
upon the mediators, upon their good judgment,
their effort and their resourcefulness in adjusting the conflicting interests of the parties· and
producing an organic formula capable of enhancing the cause of human solidarity and international co-operation in that vast region.
We earnestly hope that the work of this Com1l1i$sion will be crowned with the largest measure
of success.

parties it un accord et au regleme:nt definitif du
conHit, ce qui, nous.1'esperons, finira par amener
un nouvel Etat Membre it l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
L'aspect politique de cette question, qui constitue la preoccupation essentielle de la Commission'
de bons offices, depasse ~n importance tous les
autres aspects qui ont un caractere purement
provisoire et temporaire, queUe quepuisse etre
leur gravite. En decidant de creer la C'lmmission
de bons offices, le Conseil de securite a fait un
grand pas dansJa bonne direction et iI a cree
l'instrument qui convienf pour traiter cette question. C!= conflit constitue un probleme grave et
complexe, impliquant I'emancipation d'un peuple
et la creation de liens de collaboration· economique, sociale et politique avec I'ancienne metropole, probleme qui ne pour;:-a etreresolu d'une
maniere satisfaisante que par des negociations
entre les parties, grace aux bons offices et it
l'assistance fournis par I'intervention amicale des
mediateurs.
Au cours des etapes difficiles qui suivront la
cessation .des hostilites, .le Conseil de securite,
en raison du caractere de son intervention, ne
pourra que faire confiance it la Commission de
bons offices et suivre avec attention et interet
I'evolution des negociations. La responsabilitedu
sucees du reglement politique repose, dans une
large mesure, sur les niediateurs, sur leur sagacite, sur leurs efforts et sur I'ingeniosite dont
ils feront preuve pourconcilier les interets opposes des parties et pour mettre au point une formule organique capable de faire triompher la
cause de la solidarite humaine et de la cooperation internationale clans cette Vc\.Ste region.
Nous esperons bien sincerement que les travaux de la Commission seront couronnes du plus
grand succes.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais)·: Je vouThe PRESIDENT: I shall allow myself, in my
capacity as representative of the UNITED KING- drais, en tant que representant du ROYAUME-'
DOM, to say a few words on this question and to
tJNI, dire q~elques mots sur cette question et
comment on the resolutions which are before formule r 1.uelques observations· sur les resoluthe Council.
titms somnises au Conseil de securite.
In the first place, I must say I was sorry to I Tout d'abord, je dois dire que c'est avec
he.ar the representative of the. USSR complain I, regret que j'ai entendu le representant de l'URSS
thIS morning that the report of .the Consular se plaindre ce matin que le· rapport. de la ComCommission is one-sided, but I was somewhat mission consulaireetait partial. Mais j'ai ete
comforted by reflecting that he and the repre- rassure, dans une certaine mesure, par la pensee
sentative of Poland had both been able to select que le representant de l'URSS et celui· de 'la
unilaterally from the report of the Consular Pologne avaient pu, tous deux, choisir uniIateCommission a number of· points which seemed ralement dans le rapport de la CoI111ilission conto suit their case; I cannot help thinking, there- sulaire, un certain nombre de passages qui semfore, that the report is not as one-sided as blaient confirmer leur these; et, en consequence,
they would have us believe.
je n'ai pu m'empecher de penser que le rapport
n'est pas aussi partial qu'iIs voudraient nous le
fah'e croire.
It is undeniable that this report shows us that
n est ind~niable que ce rapport nous montre
the cease-fire order has not been entirely carried. que l'ordre de cesser le feu n'a pas ete pleine~ut; and that, of course, is a very bad situament execute et cette situation est certainement
tion. The immediate' and urgent thing to do is tout a fait regrettable. Ce qu'il faut faire immeto ~ry to put a stop to bloodshed in this unhappy diiatement et de toute urgence, est d'essayer de
reglOn. The first thing which we ought to try r;nettre fin a l'effusion de sang dans cette malto ensure is the effective carrying out of the heureuse region. La premiere chose que nous
cease-fire order. Failure to carry it out seems devons tenter d'assurer est l'executior..: effective
to have been due partly to differences of inter- de l'ordre de cesser le feu. Le fait qu'il n'ait
pretation as to its exact meaning and intention 'pas ete execute semble avoir ete dt1 en partie
and most of all, of course, to the extremely it la difference entre les interpretations donnees
confused situation which exists.
a son sens exact et a son but et, surtout, it la
situation extremement confuse qui regne ~ns
cette region.

2694
The complexity of that situation is clear enough
from the report of the Consular Commission,
and it is made clearer still from the rough maps
which have been submitted to us together with
the report. It is clear, with the present entanglement .of forces there, .that one cannot expect
to avoid incidents. They must occur and the only
way to prevent that is to find some .means of
disengaging the forces.

Le rapport de la .Commission consulaire fait
assez clairement ressortir la complexite de cette
situation qui devient encore plus manifeste si
1'0n regarde les cartes qui nous ont ete presentees avec le rapport. U est certain que l'enchevetrement actue1 des forces ne nous permet pas.
d'esperer qu'on evitera. des incidents. Its doivent se produire et la seule fa<;on de les empecher est de trouver des moyens de rompre le
contact entre les forces en presence.
A un stade precedent de notre discussion,
At an earlier stage of our discussion, when
there were only two proposals before us, neither lorsque nous ne nous trouvions en presence que
of which seemed to me to a:fford an ideal solution, de deux proposition~, dont aucune ne nous semI attempted to make a proposal1 whereby some- blait offrir une solution ideale, j'ai essaye de
how, with the assistance_ of authorities on the faire une proposition1 par laquelle, avec l'aide
spot, that is to say the Committee of Good d'autorites se trouvant sur place, c'est-a.-dire la
Offices, it might have been possible to draw a Commission de bons offices, il aurait ete possiprovisional line, as a first step. That was objected ble, a. titre de premiere mesure, de tracer une
to by some representatives, who said that it ligne de demarcation provisoire. Certains f',eprewould be premature and an unjust allocation sentants s'y sont opposes en disant que ceIa
of territory. I never had the least intention that serait premature et que ce serait une repartition
it should have that meaning. What I meant was injuste des territoires. Je n'ai jamais eu la mointhis. I do not see, in point of fact, how the dre .intention de donner a. ma proposition une
Council is going to disentangle the forces un- telle signification. Voici ce que j'entendais: je
less it draws an arbitrary line in the first place, ne vois pas comment, en fait, le Conseil pourra
and then calls upon the forces on one side to go separer les forces en presence s'il ne procede
to one side of that line, and upon. the forces pas en premier lieuau trace d'une ligne arbion the other side to go to the other side of that traire de demarcation, pour demander ensuite a.
l'un des adversaires ,de se ranger d'un cote de
line.
cette ligne et a. l'autre d'aller de l'autre cote.
The first step after that, of course, is to deCeci fait, la mesure suivante sera, naturelletermine when, where an<\ how far the forces ment, de determiner quand, en quels points et
. should withdraw. I realize that we could not jusqu'ou les adversaires devront se retirer. Je
do that here. We have not the information; me rends compte que nous ne pouvons pas le
we cannot dictate detailed movements. That faire ici. Nous ne disposons pas de renseignewould have to be left' to the Committee of ments; nous ne pouvons pas ordonner de mouGood Offices, with the assistance, possibly, of the vements de troupe precis. Cette tache appartient
Consular Commission and any of its military a. la Commission de bons offices, aidee eventuellement par la Commission consulaire et certains
advisers.
de ses conseillers militaires.
.Consequently, when at a later stage I saw
En consequence, lorsque plus tare j'ai vu le
the draft resolution submitted by. the representa- projet de resolution soumis par le representant
tive of the United States, the whole tendency des Etats-Unis, dont la tendance generale est
of which is to rely on the representatives on the de s'appuyer sur les representants qui sont sur
spot, I saw that my draft resolution perhaps les lieux, j'ai VU que mon projet de resolution
no longer had any utility, and I withdrew it. n'avait peut-etre plus aucune utilite et je l'ai
My resolution did ratner definitely lay down retire. ;M:a resolution enon<;ait plutot d'une fa<;on
one particular proposal, which was the drawing precise une proposition definie, qui tendait a ce
pf a line; but it may be that those on the spot, . qu'une ligne de demarcation soit tracee; mais il
who would· know much more than YITe can se peut que ceux qui sont sur place et qui en
know about the s!tuation there, may think dif- savent bien plus que nous ne pouvons en savoir
ferently. If the United States resolution were sur la. situation dans cette region, pensent autreadopted, it would be quite possible for the Com- ment. .S'i la resolution des Etats-Unis etait votee,
mitteeof Good Offices to take that line" if they la Commission de bons offices pourrait fort bien
thought it good, or if they did not follow any adopter l'idee de tracer une ligne de demarcation,
oth~r effective procedure whic.h recommended
au cas ou elle le jugerait bon, ou suivre une
itself to them.
aut~e procedure efficace qui lui semblerait conventr.
I do not want to take note of one point which
Je tiens a. signaler un fait que j'ai observe.
occurred to me the other day. I was very l'autre jour. J'ai ete tres frappe, au cours de
much struck at our two hundred and fifteenth notre deux-cent-quinzieme seance 2 , par le fait
meeting2 by the fact that the representative of que le representant de la Pologne, dans son disPoland, in his speech, which was very long and cours, qui etait tres long et tres complet, n'ait
complete, mad~ no reference whatever to the pas fait la moindre allusion a. la Commission de
Committee of Good Offices. The impression bons offices, Je pense qu'un auditeur qui aurait
which 1 think a listener who followed his case suivi ce discours en aurait _retire l'impression
would have obtained was that the Council had que le Conseil n'avait rien fait et n'avait pas
done .nothing and had been able to do nothing. ete capable de faire quoi que ce £Ut. En realite,
That is really not the case. As a result of the il n'en est rien. Un des resultats de la discus1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No: 96.
• Ibid., No. 101.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officicls du Conseil de secttrite, Deuxit:me Annee, No 96.
.
• Ibid., No 101.

2695
discussion in the Security Council, we now have
on the spot this Committee Good Offices. I
hope myself, that this Committee will somehow
be able to produce, first of all, compliance with
the cease-fire order and, secondly, a long-term
solution of the matter. Like the Chinese representative, I am not altogether pessimistic on that
count.
I should like to comment on the various resolutions which have been put before us. In the first
place, there is the USSR draft resolution, which
recommends that troops of both sides should be
immediately withdrawn to the positions which
they occupied before the beginning of military
operations. This is not the exact wording, but
of course if they were to reoccupy the positions
which they held before the beginning of military
operations, both sides would not withdraw; the
Netherlands forces would withdraw to the positions they held, and I suppose the forces of
the Indonesian Republic would follow them up.
I am not prepared to support a resolution of
that kind. I do not think that my delegation
can possibly share responsibility for requiring
the immediate withdrawal of the Netherlands
forces to the points which they occupied on 20
July, without risking very serious disorders. I
cannot take responsibility for voting in that sense.
I admire the courage of the representative of
the USSR, who is prepared to take that risk.
Apparently he is quite prepared to have a sort
of experimental withdrawal and then, if terrible things do happen, the Council could consider how to remedy them. But I cannot accept
that.
Similarly, there is another proposal, made by
the representative of Poland, which goes even
further, because it calls for the removal of the
Netherlands forces from Indonesia altogether.
For the same reason, a fortiori, I could not
support this proposal.
There is also the proposal made by the
representative of Australia, which calls upon the
Governments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia to w. thdraw their respective
forces at least 5 kilometres behind the positions
held at the date of the cease-fire order, 1 August.
I cannot believe this is very practicable at the
moment, because we can see from the map that
there are pockets of Republican forces far behind
any line one may choose to draw in the territory held by the Netherlands troops; and, because of such pockets, partial withdrawal- in
which direction I do not know - would not
really alter the situation effectively.
Finally, there is the United States draft resolution. In general I accept that resolution.
Various amendments have been suggested and,
when we come to its discussion, we shall see
whether we can agree on the final form. In
general, I like the resolution, because it entrusts
the enforcement of the ceas~-fire order and the
search for a long-term settlement to those in
Whom we have confidence, who are on the spot
an~ :vho are able to take into account all existing
P~hhcal conditions and to make, I should hope,
Wise recon;tmendations. I may say that the amendments whIch have been proposed this morning

sion au Conseil de securite est que nous avons
maintenant cette Commission de bons offices, qui
est sur les lieux. Personnellement, j' espere que
cette Commission reussira, en premier lieu a
faire executer l'ordre de cesser le feu et ensuite
a trouver une solution a longue ec.\heance au probleme. Comme le representant de la Chine, je
suis loin d'etre pessimiste a cet egard.
J'aimerais maintenant faire des observations
sur les diverses resolutions qui nous ont ete
soumises. En premier lieu, nous avons le projet
de resolution de 1'URSS, recommandant que les
troupes, des deux cotes, soient immediatement
retirees sttr les positions qu'elles occupaient avant
le debut des operations militaires. Ce ne sont pas
la les termes precis utilises, mais i1 est evident
que si les troupes devaient reprendre les positions qu'elles tenaient avant le debut des operations militaires, il n'y aurait pas retrait des deux
cotes; les forces neerlandaises se retireraient sur
les positions qu'elles occupaient et je suppose que
les forces de la Republique d'Indonesie les suivraient. Je ne suis pas dispose a appuyer une
resolution de ce genre. Je ne pense pas que ma
delegation puisse accepter, meme partiellement,
la responsabilite de demander le retrait immediat des forces neerlandaises sur les positions
qu'elles occupaient le 20 juillet, sans que cela
risque de causer de tres graves desordres. J e ne
puis assumer la responsabilite d'un vote dans ce
sens. J'admire le courage du representant de
l'URSS qui est pret a courir ce risque. I1 est
apparemment pret a faire effectuer un retrait a
titre d'experience; et ensuite, s'il en resultait
des consequences desastreuses, le Conseil pourrait toujours examiner les moyens d'y remedier.
Quant a moi, je ne puis accepter cela.
Dans le meme ordre d'idees, i1 existe une autre
proposition, faite par le representant de la Pologne, proposition qui va meme plus loin, parce
qU'elle exige que les troupes neerlandaises se retirent completement du territoire indonesien. J e
ne puis, pour les memes raisons, et a fortiori,
appuyer une telle proposition.
N ous avons egalement une proposition faite
par le representant de l'Australie demandant aux
Gouvernements des Pays-Bas et de la Republique
d'Indonesie de retirer leurs troupes respectives
a une distance d'au moins 5 kilometres en arriere
d~s positions occupees a la date du ler aoftt,
jour ou fut promulgue 1'ordre de cesser le feu.
Je ne puis croire que ceci sait faisable a 1'heure
actuelle, parce' que la carte 110US montre qu'il
existe des 110ts de forces republicaines bien loin
derriere toute ligne que 1'on pourrait tracer dans
le territoire tenu par les troupes neerlandaises,
et qu'a cause de ces 110ts un retrait partiel
- quelle qu'en soit la direction - n'aurait pas
pour effet de modifier sensiblement la situation.
Enfin, nous avons ete saisis d'un projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis. Cette resolution me
semble acceptable dans i'ensemble. Divers amendements ont ete proposes et nous verrons, au
moment ou nous discuterons cette resolution, si
nous pouvons nous mettre d'accord sur sa
forme definitive. Dans 1'ensemble, cette resolution
m'agree, parce qu'elle confie l'execution de 1'ordre
de cesser le feu et la recherche d'un reglement
a longue echeance a ceux en qui nous avons confiarrce, qui sont sur place, et qui sont en mesure
de tenir compte de toutes les conditions politiques existantes et de faire, je 1'espere, des

2696
by the representatives of. Belgium and China
are quite acceptable as far as I am concerned;
and indeed I think that if they were adopted,
they-might constitute an improvement on the
original United States draft as we have it.

recommandations prudentes. Je peux dire que les
amendements proposes ce matin par les representants de la Belgique' et de la Chine me paraissent tout a fait acceptables et je pense que s'ils
etaient adoptes, ils pourraient apporter une amelioration au texte . original du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis.

Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): I have no constructive suggestion to offer at this stage of our
discussion, but I have requested to be allowed
to say a few words because I should like to make·
the position of the Colombian delegation clear
as to two rather unimportant points.

Coming to this room this afternoon, I find
a letter, which has just been circulated, from
the representative of the Republic of Indonesia,
addressed to the President of the Security Council, calling upon the Council to appoint an "international commission composed of representatives of the Security Council to observe and
investigate conditions in and to supervise ter-'
ritories" to be handed back to the control of
the Republic after the withdrawal of the Netherlands forces. This is practically the point from
which we started. We tried to have a com-

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je n'ai aucune proposition concrete a presenter
ace stade de notre discussion, mais j'ai demande
l'autorisation de dire quelques mots parce que
j'aimerais precisef l'attitude de la delegation
colombienne sur deux points, d'ailleurs peu importants.
'
Le premier a trait a la question de savoir pourquoi la delegation colombienne, si desireuse, la
semaine derniere1 , de voir tenir une nouvelle
seance du Conseit a breve echeance pour discuter de ce probleme, n'a aucune proposition concrete a faire.
Le second point concerne la question de savoir si la delegation colombienne est fondee a
avoir l'attitude pessimiste que lui pretent certains membres du Conseil de securite en raison
de sa position a l'egard des diverses propositions.
'
Si nous souhaitions si vivement qu'une autre
reunion ait lieu a bref delai, c'est que nous partagions sincerement les vues du representant de
l'Australie, telles qu'illes a exprimees au momen~
ou it a soumis cette question a l'attention du Conseil de securite pour la premiere fois 2 , en declarant que l'autorite et le prestige du ConseiI
dependraient de sa capacite d'entreprendre une
action rapide et efficace dans l'interet de la paix
mondiale.N9us avons l'impression que trois
mois represerltent un delai bien long pour essayer,
sans succes, d'entreprendre une action rapide et
efficace.
Pour me servir d'une expression employee par
le President, qui pense que le plus indique serait
de trouver le moyen de desenchevetrer ou de
degager les forces adverses dans la region ou elIes
se battent, nous estimons qu'il est extremement
important de voir si nous pouvons nous degager
ou nous desenchevetrer de tant de propositions
et trouver un moyen d'entreprendre une action
efficace pour faire cesser les hostilites en Indonesie. Malheureusement, la premiere chose qui
me frappe est que nous ne semblions pas capables d'arreter les hostilites en Indonesie de queIque maniere que ce soit. Nous continuons a
faire des propositions, a introduire des amendements et a revenir sur nos premieres propositions, sans faire aucun progres vers notre objectif
principal.
En arrivant dans cette salle cet apres-midi
j'ai trouve une lettre, qui vient d'etre distribuee,
emanant du representant de la Republique d'Indonesie et adressee au President du Conseil de
securite; cette lettre invitait le Conseil a nommer une "commission internationale composee
de representants du Conseil de securite et qui
exercerait des fonctions d'observation, d'enquete
et de controle dans les territoires qui seront rendus aux Republicains apres le retrait des forces
neerlandaises". C'est la pratiquement notre point
de depart. Nous avons essaye de faire nommer

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 99.
• Ibid., No. 67.

1 Voir les Proces-verbau% officiels du Conseil de sec/Irite, Deuxieme Annee, No 99.
• Ibid., No 67.

The first point is why it is that the Colombian
delegation has no constructive suggestions to
offer, since it was so extremely anxious last
week1 that the Council should meet again without delay to to discuss this matter.
The second. point is whether or not we have
reason to be as pessimistic as some of the
members of the Security Council claim us to
be in view of our attitude vis-a-vis the different
proposals.
We were so anxious to have another early
meeting because we very earnestly shared the
view of the Australian representative, as he expressed it when he first brought this matter
to the attention of the Security Council2, that
the authority and prestige of the Council would
stand or fall accqrding to its ability to take
spirited and effective action in the interests of
world peace. We feel that three months is a
pretty long time to have to spend trying to take
spirited and effective action, without actually having succeeded in doing so.
If I may borrow an expression from the
President, just as he thi~s it. would be most
advisable to find ways of disentangling or disengaging the opposing forces in the area where
they are fighting, we believe it is extremely important to see whether we can disengage or disentangle ourselves from so many proposals and
find some way of taking effective action to stop
the fighting in Indonesia. Unfortunately, the first
thing which impresses my mind is that we do
not seem to be able in any way to stop the fighting in Indonesia. We continue making proposals
and amendments and coming back to our original
proposals, without making any headway towards
our main objective.

2697
mISSIon appointed by the Security Council on
which all the members should be represented,
and the proposal was vetoed by the French representative1 • That is why we had to accept the
Consular Commission, as suggested by the representative of the Netherlands Government.
This explains why, last week, my delegation
was so anxious to have another meeting. I
notice now that we have had not one but several
meetings and that we have still made no progress.
In fact the proposal of the United States delegation reads, in part, as follows:

"The Security Council, ...

par le Conseil de securite une commission a laquelle tous les membres devaient etre representes, et le representant de la France a oppose
son veto a cette proposition1 • C'est pourquoi il
nous a fallu accepter la Commission consuIaire
telle qu'elle a ete proposee par le representant
du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas.
Ced explique pourquoi la semaine derniere,
ma delegation etait si desireuse de voir tenir une
autre seance. Je constate maintenant que nous
avons eu non pas une, mais plusieurs seances,
et que malgre cela nous n'avons fait aucun progres. En fait, voici ce que 1'011 trouve dans la
proposition de la delegation des Etats-Unis:

"Le Conseil de securite, ...

. "Having taken note that, according to the
report [of the Consular Commission], no attempt was made by either side to come to an
agreement with the other about the means
of giving effect to that resolution;

"Ayant pris acte de ce que ce rapport [de
. la Commission consulaire] signale que les
deux parties n'ont fait aucune tentative pour
conclure un accord sur les moyens de donner
effet a cette resolution;

"Calls u,pon the parties concerned forthwith
to consult with each other as to the means
to be employed in order to give effect to the
cease-fire resolution ..."

"Invite les parties interessees a se consulter
immediatement sur les moyens a utiliser pour
donner effet a la resolution concernant la
cessation du feu ...".

It seems to me that we are moving in a vicious
circle, the more so since the representative of
the Netherlands, at this morning's meeting, again
called into question the competence of the
Security Council. When we first discussed this
matter, my delegation took the position, at the
hundred and seventy-second meeting 2, that if the
Councif had no competence, it should not take
this matter in hand; but, as I said at the two
hundr~d and eleventh meetingS, if the Council
did have competence, it should call upon the
parties to comply with its recommendations or
decisions. I still believe that is one of the points
we have to decide. What is the use of passing
new resolutions, if at every other meeting we
have the privilege of hearing the representative
of the Netherlands Government question the
competence of the Security Council in this regard?
The second point flows logically from the
first. I do not believe we are as pessimistic as
we appear to be. Quite to the contrary, I have
been wondering whether there is not ample
reason to be very optimistic about the efforts
of the Security Council, and the General Assembly as well. When we first made our remarks
regarding the unsuccessful work of the Security
Council, we had not yet added the Indonesian
question to our series of failures. Now I believe
we can add it to the list. The proposal of the
U~SR delegation calling upon the parties to
YVlthdraw their troops to their original positions
IS now one month old. The original cease-fire
order is three months old, and here we are, without having definitely established whether we can
actually confirm or renew our cease-fire order.
I should say, rather, the cease-hostilities order,
~ecause it was not a cease..fire order. As I say,
It was a cease-hostilities resolution, the one

I1 me semble que c'est la un cercle videux,
d'autant plus que ce matin le representant des
Pays-Bas a mis en doute, une fois de plus, la
competence du Conseil de securite. Lorsque nous
avons discute cette question pour la premiere
fois, ma delegation a declare, a la cent-soixantedouzieme seance2, que si le Conseil n'etait pas
competent pour traiter le probleme, it ne devait
pas prendre l'affaire en mains; mais, comme je
1'ai fait remarquer a la deux-cent-onzieme
seances, si au contraire le Conseil etait competent, il devait demander aux parties de se conformer a ses recommandations ou decisions. J e
continue a croire que c'est la un des points au
sujet desquels nous devons prendre une decision. A quoi bon adopter de nouvelles resolutions
si chaque fois que nous nous reunissons, nous
avons le privilege d'entendre le representant du
Go!wernement des Pays-Bas mettre en doute la
competence du Conseil de securite clans ce domaine?
Le second point decoule logiquement du premier. J e ne crois pas que nous soyons aussi pessimistes que nous le paraissons. Tout au contraire, je me demande si nous n'avons pas d'excellentes raisQns d'etre tres optimistes au sujet
des efforts tant du Conseil de securite que de
l'Assemblee generale. Lorsque nous avons presente pour la premiere fois nos remarques concernant le travail infructueux du Conseil de
securite, nous n'avions pas encore ajoute la
question indonesienne a notre serie d'echecs.
Maintenant, je crois que nous pouvons l'ajouter
a la liste. La proposition de la delegation de
1'URSS, demandant aux parties de retirer leurs
troupes sur leurs premieres positions a ete faite
il y a un mois deja. Le premier ordre de cesser le feu date d'il y a trois mois et void Oll
nous en sommes, sans avoir etabli d'une fa<;~n
nette si nous pouvons effectivement confirmer
ou renouveler notre ordre de cesser le feu. I1

y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
ear, No. 83.
I Ibid., No. 68
,
• Ibid., No. 97:

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 83.
I Ibid., No 68.
I Ibid., No 97.

~JY"::J.!..~"\.:"'-'::,r~., .. ,.--

2698
passed by the Security Council on I August!
without our competence to pass that resolution
being questioned.

Thus I am afraid we are not getting anywhere. I do not know whether or not we are
justified in feeling pessimistic about this matter
or, as has been implied, whether we should feel
optimistic. But I doubt very much that we shall
accomplish any result if, as we continue discussing resolutions, we do not come to the heart of
the problem, which seems to my delegation to be
whether we can expect the Netherlands Government and the Government of the Indonesian
Republic to comply with our resolutions when
we ask them to cease hostilities and to act
accordingly.
The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers in the
general discussion is now exhausted and therefore, in accordance with what was understood
at the two hundred and fifteenth meeting2, the
general discussion is closed. I do not think that
there has been any restraint on freedom of
speech, as that discussion has lasted through frequent meetings during the month of October.
I therefore find it difficult to believe that there
is much that remains to be said that has not
already been said at least once.
I propose, therefore, to put to the vote now
the various draft resolutions, with amendments
thereto, that are before the Council. In doing
that, I shall feel bound to follow the order of
present;J.tion of those resolutions. That is to say,
we shall begin with'the draft resolution submitted by the USSR representative. The draft resolution submitted by the USSR representative
reads as follows:

serait plus ju~te de dire 1'0rdre de cesser les
hostilites, parce qu'il ne s'agit pas, en fait, d'un
ordre de cesser le feu. J e dis done que la resolution adoptee par le Conseil de securite le
ler aouP, sans que notre competence ait ete
mise en doute, etait une resolution demandant
la cessation des hostilites.
Je craius done fort que nous n'aboutissions
nuIle part. J e ne sais pas si nous sommes en
droit ou non d'etre pessimistes ou, comme on
l'a laisse entendre, si nous devons nous montrer
optimistes. Mais ~je doute fort que nous arrivions
cl un resultat quelconque si, en poursuivant la
discussion des resolutions, nous ne parvenons pas
au cceur du probleme qui, de l'avis de ma delegation, consiste cl savoir si nous pouvons nous
attendre a ce que le Gouvernement des PaysBas et le Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie se conforment cl nos resoiutions lorsque
nous leur demandons de cesser les hostilites.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La liste
des orateurs pour la discussion generale est rnaintenant epuisee et c'est pourquoi, conformement
cl ce qui a ete convenu au cours de notre deuxcent-quinzieme seance2 , la discussion generale
est close. Je ne pense pas qu.'il y ait eu la moindre
restriction cl la liberte de parole, etant donne
que cette discussion s'est poursuivie au cours
de nombreuses reunions durant le mois d'octobre. C'est pourquoi il rn'est difficile de croire
qu'il reste beaucoup a dire qui n'ait pas deja
ete dit unc fois au moins.
En consequence, je propose de mettre maintenant aux voix les divers projets de resolutions
soumis au Conseil en meme temps que les amendements qui s,'y rapportent. En mettant ct's resolutions aux voix, je suivrai l'ordre dans lequel
elles ont ete presentees, c'est-a.-dire que nous
commencerons par le projet de resolution soumis
par le representant de I'URSS. Voici le texte
du projet de resolution soumis par le representant de l'URSS:

"The Security Council,
"Considers it necessary that the troops of
both sides, the Netherlands and the Indonesian
Republic, should be immediately withdrawn
to the positions which they occupied before
the beginning of military operations."

"Le Conseil de sec1~rite,
"Estime qu'il est necessaire que les troupes
des Pays-Bas et de la Republique d'Indonesie
se retirent immediatement sur les positions
qu'elles occupaient avant le debut des operations militaires."

A vote was taken by show of hands. There
were 4 votes in favour, 4 against and 3 abstentions. The draft resolution was not adopted,
having failed to obtain the affirmative votes of
seven members.
Votes for: Australia, Colombia, Poland, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.

/1 est procede au vote a main levee. Il y a
4 voiz pour, 4 contre et 3 abstentions. N'ayant
pas obtenu le vote alfirmatif de sept membres,
le projet de resolution n'est pas adopte.

Votes against: Belgium, France, United Kingdom, United States of America.

Votent contre: Belgique, France, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstentions: Brazil, China, Syria.

S'abstiennent: Bresil, Chine, Syrie.

Votent pour: Australie, Colombie, Pologne,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

The PRESIDENT: The next draft resolution, in
order of priority, is the Australian resolution,
which reads as follows:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le projet de resolution suivant, dans 1'0rdre de priorite, est le projet de resolution de l'Australie,
dont voici les termes:

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.
• Ibid., No. 101.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux o/ficiels du Conseil de Secllrite, Deuxieme Annee, No 68, 173eme seance.
• Ibid., No 101.

2699
ItThe Security Council,
ItIn order to ensure the observance of its
cease-fire order,

"Afin d'assurer le respect de 1'ordre de cesser le feu qu'il a lance,

"Calls upon the Governments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia to withdraw their respective forces· at least 5 kilometres behind the positions held at date of
cease-fire order of I August."

"Invite 1es Gouvernements des Pays-Bas et
de la Republique d'Indonesie a retirer leurs
forces a 5 kilometres au moins a l'arriere des
positions qu'e!1es occupaient le ler aout, date
a laqueUe cet ordre fut lance."

I think the Australian representative added, in
a subsequent proposal!, "and directs the military advisers on the Consular Commission. to
supervise .the withdrawal of the respective
forces".

J e pense que It': representant de l'Australie a
ajoute, dans une proposition presentee u1terieurementl: "et donne mission aux conseiIlers militaires de la' Commission consulaire de contro1er
le retrait des forces respectives".

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : I propose the following amendment to
the' draft resolution submitted by the delegation
of Australia: substitute "25 kilometres" for "5
kilometres".

M. GROMYKO' (Union des Republiques socialistes sovitetiques) (traduit de l' anglais) : J e propose 1'amendement suivant au projet de resolution soumis par la delegation de l'Australie :
remp1acer "5 kilometres" par "25 kilometres".

The PRESIDENT: The USSR representative has
proposed an amendment to the Australian draft
resolution, substituting 25 kilometres for 5 kilometres. I think that amendm.ent is ,so simple that
we need not have it circulated in writing.

~e PRESIDENT (traduit de ['anglais): Le representant de l'URSS propose Un amendement
au projet de resolution de 1'Austra1ie, tendant a
.remp1acer "5 kilometres" par "25 kilometres".
J e pense que cet amendement est si simple que
nous n'avons pas besoin d'en distribuer le texte
ecrit.
Le cq10nel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Z'anglais): J'aimerais poser une question au representant de 1'URSS, pour que 1'objet de son
amendement soit clair. Entend-il par la que les
forces devraient etre retirees a une distance d'au
moins 25 kilometres ou parle-t-il d'une zone de
25 kilometres? S'il entend par la une zone de
25 kilometres, c'est une zone tres etendue; mais
si son amendement tend a la creation d'une zone
de 50 kilometres, le contro1e en deviendrait extremement diffici1e.Toutefois, si le representant de
1'URSS parle d'une zone de 25 kilometres, je
suis pret a accepter cet amendement.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I should like
to ask the USSR representative one question in
order to make his amendment clear. Does he mean
that the forces should be withdrawn at least 25
kilometres, or does he mean a zone of 25 kilometres? If he means a zone of 25 kilometres, that
is a very wide zone; but if his amendment is for
a zone of 50 kilometres, that would be very, very
difficult to police. However, if the USSR representative is referring to a zone of 25 kilometres,
r should be prepared to accept that amendment.

.

"Le Conseil de securite,

]/Ir. GROMYKO (Union. of Soviet Socialist Republics): I do not propose to change the meaning of the Australian draft resolution, but just
to change the figures.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne
propose pas de ·modifier le sens du projet de
resolution de l'Australie, mais simp1ement de
modifier les chiffres.

The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative
of Australia if he accepts this amendment, or
does he wish it voted on? If he accepts it, we
shall put the Australian draft resolution, as
amended, to the vote.
If I may add a remark of my' own, it was
quite clear to me that all the representative of
the USSR proposed was to substitute the figure
25 for the figure 5. r am not quite clear as to
what the representative of Australia means by
a zone. I must confess to him that r have never
quite understood his proposal. Looking at the
map, I find that in the very wide and large area
now occupied by the Netherlands troops there
are indi~ated, by circles, at various places miles
apart, pockets of Republican forces; and when
the representative of Australia proposes that
those forces should be withdrawn - some of
them are right in the middle of the territoryat least 5 kilometres, I do not quite know ip.
what direction they should go, nor, indeed, how
the situation would be' much improved by their

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puis-je
demaJ?der au representant de l'AustraIie s'il accepte cet amendement ou s'il desire qu'il soit
mis aux voix? S'il l'accepte, nous mettrons aux
voix le projet de resolution de l'Austra1ie te1
qu'il est amende.
.
Si je puis me permettre une remarque personneUe~ il me semble que tout ce que proposait
le representant de l'URSS e~ait de substituer
le chiffre. "25" au chiffre "5". Je ne vois pas
tres bien ce qu'entend le representant de l'Australie lorsqu'il parle d'une zone. Je dois lui
avouer que je n'ai pas bien compris sa proposition. En regardant la carte, je constate que
dans la region tres etendue actueUement occupee par 1es troupes neer1andaises, des cercles
indiquent, a divers endroits distants 1es uns
des autres depItlsieurs miUes, des ilots de forces
republicaines, et si le representant de l'Australie
. propose que ces forces soient retirees d'au moins
5 kilometres - i1 y en a qui se trouvent au
centre de cette region - je ne vois pas tres
bien dans queUe direction eUes devraient se

1 See Official Records of the Security. COlmcil, Second
Year, No. 101.

1 Voir les Proces-verbau:1: officiels dn Conseil de seen:
.
rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 101.

~.

2700
removal to a distance of 5 kilometres from where
they are now. I never understood that there was
to be any zone at all.

However,· would the Australian representative accept the substitution of 25 for 5, as
proposed by the representative of the USSR?

deplacer; je ne v')is pa$ non plus en fait, comment !asituation se ttouverait sensiblement amelioree par leur retrait a une distance de 5 kilometres de l'endroit ou elles se trouvent actuellement Je n'ai jamais cru comprendre qu'il devait
y avoir une zone.
Neanmoins, je demanderai ail representant de
l'Australie s'il accepte la substitution de 25 a
5 proposee par le representant de I'URSS.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : Yes, I am prepared to accept that amendment. In effect, that
will mean 31 miles. That amendment will give
greater flexibility to the Australian proposal to
carry out a withdrawal from the area where
there is contact, which is causing all the difficuJty·
at the moment. I think it should overcome some,
of the difficulties which the President has just
mentioned.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Oui, je suis pret a accepter cet amendement. En fait, celi representera 31 mHles. Cet
amendement donnera plus de souplesse a la proposition de FAustralie et permettra de faire effeciuer un retrait dans la region ou il y a contact
entre les armees, ce qu: cause toutes les difficultes actuelles. Je pense que ced noUs permettra
d'ecarter certaines des difficultes que le President
vient de mentionner.

The PRESIDENT: The draft resolution which
is now before the Council is the Australian resolution, as amended, which now reads as follows:

Le .PRESIDENT (traduit .de l'anglais) : Le projet de resolution qui est maintenant soumis au
Conseil est la resolution australienne amendee,
dont void le texte actuel:

"The Security Council,

"Le Conseil de seeurite,

"In order to ensure the observance of its
cease-fire order,

"Afin d'assurer le respect de 1'0rdre de cesser
le feu. qu'il a lance,

"Calls upon the Governments of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia to withdraw their respective forces at least 25 kilometres behind the positions held at date of
. cease-fire order of 1 August and directs the
military advisers on the Consular CommissiQn
to supervise the withdrawal of the respective
forces."

"Invite les Gouvernements des Pays-Bas et
de la Republique d'Indonesie a replier leurs
forces a 25 kilometres au moins a l'arriere
des positions qu'elles· occupaient le 1er aout,
date a laquelle cet ordre fut lance, et donne
mission aux conseillers militaires de la Commission consulaire de controler le retrait des
forces respectives."

We shall now take a vote on this draft rt::solution.
.

Nous allons maintenant mettre ce projet de
resolution aux voix.

.

(

.

A vot~ was taken by show of hands. There . Il est proeMe au vote a main levee. Il y a
were 5 votes in favour, one against,an.d 5 absten- 5 voix pour, une eontre avee 5 ab$tentions.
tions. The resolution was not adopted, having N'ayant pas obtenu le vote affirmatif de sept
failed tb obtain the affirmative votes of .reven membres, le projet de resohttion n'est pas adopte.
members.
Votes for: Australia, Colombia, Poland, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent pour: Australie, Colombie, Pologne,
Syrie, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

Votes against: Belgium.

Vote contre: Belgique.

Abste.ntions: Brazil, China, France, United
Kingdom, United States of America.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to explain that,
as representative of the UNITED KINGDOM I
abstained because I still do not understand what
the effect of the Australian resolution would be.
We now come to the United States draft resolution, to which there are certain amendments.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I reserved my
right to speak on this resolution, but now that
the USSR and Australian proposals have been
defeated, my first observation is this. The question which was put to the representative of the
Netherlands this morning was a very pertinent
one. It may' be that this afternoon we shall finish
this matter for the time being, and we hope for a
considerable time. We should like, therefore, to
have that reply communicated to the President in
writing. Also, that reply will be of the utmost

S'abstiennent: Bresil, Chine, France, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d~Amerique.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de 1;anglais): J'aime~
rais dire que je me suis abstenu, en qualite de
representant du ROYAUME-UNI parce que je ne
comprends toujours pas quelles seraient les consequences de la resolution de l'Australie.
Nous en arrivons maintenant au projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis au sujet duquel on a
propose certains amendements.
Le colonel HODGSOt-r (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): J'avais reserve mon droit de prendre
'la parole sur ce projet de resolution, mais maintenant que les propositions de I'URSS et de
l'Australie ont ete rejetees, ma premiere observation sera celle-ci: la question posee ce matin
au representant des Pays-Bas etait parfaitement
pertinente. Il se peut .que cet apres-midi, nous
reglions cette question pour un certain temps, et,
nous l'esperons, pour longtemps. C'est pourquoi
nous aimerions que la reponse
cette questi:....

a

2701

importance to the Committee of Good' Offices.
The Committee should have the terms of that
reply communicated to it, because, as we see itand we agree with the representative of China
on this point - it will be, in effect, that the
Linggadjati agreementl, if it has not been
abrogated and if it is still regarded as being in
force, will be the very basis for the commencement of the work of the Committee.
The second point is this. It was the intention
of the Security Council, or at least it was the
intention of the Australian delegation, that the
Consular Commission, with its military advisers,
should continue to observe and report on the
cease-fire order. It seems to us that the Commission has interpreted that order to mean that
it was to submit one report and one report only,
and then dissolve. We understand that many of
the military observere have left and returned to
their own countries. The letter we received this
morning from the representative of the Republic
of Indonesia also seems to imply that there is
no body in existence to observe any of the
activities in connexion with the cessation of
hostilities.
It seems to me that there is extraordinary
confusion in the Council about the functions of
the Committee of Good' Offices and of the Consular Commission. As far as my recollection
goes, I think the representative of the USSR was
the only one who clearly expressed that difference
when, at our two hundred and thirteenth meeting2 , he indicated that we were proposing to
give to the Committee of Good Offices a function
which we did not bestow on it nor intend to
bestow on it, namely, ?.ny action in connexion
with the cease-fire order and the cessation of
hostilities.
Even this afternoon we have the representative of Brad saying, in effect, that it is for
the Committee of Good Offices to see how the
cease-fire order should be observed; that it is
for the Committee to bring about the cessation
of hostilities; that that is the function of the
Committee of Good Offices.
Well, with all respect, we made it very· clear
that the Committee of Good Offices' was to
attempt to bring about the settlement of the
long-term problem, that is, the problem of
peaceful settlement. We appointed the consuls
as our instruments - and they still call themselves, in this report, the Consular Commission
of the Security Council- as our agents in connexion with the cease-fire order. We still have
that confusion in the resolution before us; in
othel' words, we are now asking the Committee
of Good Offices to take certain action and even
to supervise the carrying into effect of the order
which we appointed another to supervise.

',See The Political Events in the Republic of lndonNesla'ypublished by the Netherlands Information Bureau,
ew ork.
y ~ SeeNOfficial Rtcords of the Security Council, Second

~.c

soit communiquee par ecrit au President. Cette
reponse sera aussi de la plus haute importance
pour la Commission de bons offices. Les termes
de cette reponse devraient etre communiques a
cette Commission parce que, selon nous, .et nous
partageons a cet egard le point de vue du representant de la Chine, ce sera l'Accord de Linggadjati1 , s'il n'est pas abroge et s'il est toujours
considere comme etant en vigpeur, quiconstituera. la base meme qui permettra a la Commission de commencer ses travaux.
Ma seconde observation est la suivante: le
Conseil de securite, ou tout au moins la delegation de l'Australie, estimait que la Commission
consulaire et ses conseillers militaires devraient
continuer a observer les conditions. dans lesquelles 1'ordre de cesser le feu etait respecte et a.
faire rapport a ce sujet. I1 nous semble que la
Commission a interprete cet ordre comme signifiarit qu'elle ne devait presenter qu'un seul rapport et qu'elle serait dissoute ensuite. N ous
croyons savoir qu'un bon nombre des observateurs militaires ont deja regagne leur pays. La
lettre que nous avons rec;ue ce matin du representant de la Republique d'Indonesie sembleaussi
constater implicitement qu'il n'existe pas d'organisme qualifie pour observer toute action entreprise en ce qui concerne la cessation des hostilites.
I1 me semble qu'il regne au sein du Conseil
une confusion extraordinaire au sujet des fonctions de la Commission de bons offi-:.es et de la
Commission consulaire. Pour autant que je m'en
souvienne, je crois que le :representant de l'URSS
a e1te le seul a exprimer clairement cette difference lorsqu'il a indique, au cours de notre deuxcent-treizieme seance2, que nous nous proposions d'oetroyer a la Commission de bons offices une fonction que nous ne lui avions pas
attribuee et que nous n'avions pas 1'intention
de lui attribuer, a savoir, toute action ayant
trait a 1'ordre de cesser le ieu et a la cessation
des hostilites.
Cet apres-inidi meme, le representant du Bre":
si! a declare en substance que c'etait a la Commission de bons offices qu'il appartenait de voir
comment on pourrait assurer le respect de I'ordre de cesser le feu; que c'etait a elle qu'i!
appartenait d'amener la cessation aes hostilites
et que telle etait la fonction de la Commission
de bons offices.
Je me permettrai de faire' remarquer respectueusement au Consei! que nous avons indique
tres clairement que la Commission de bons offices devait essayer d'arriver au reglement du .
probleme a longue echeance, c'est-a-dire du probleme du reglement pacifique. Nous avons nomme les consuls comme agents executifs - et ils
continuent a s~intituler, dans le present rapport
Commission consulaire du Consei! de securite en ce qui concerne 1'ordre de cesser ie feu. La
resolution qui nous est sOUmise reflete cette
meme confusion; en d'atitres terrnes,nous demandons maintenant a la Commission de bons offices de prendre certaines mesures et meme de
controler l' execution de l'ordre pour leque1 nous
avons nomme un autre organe' de controle. .
1 Voir "The Political Events in the Republic of Indonesia", document publie par le Bureau d'information des
Pays-Bas a New-York.
~ Voir les Proces-verbau:J: ofjiciels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 99.
.

2702
It might be argued, of course, that now that
On pourrait na:turellement faire valoir que,
it is on the spot, it has more weight and maintenant que la Commission de bons offices
authority. But what more authority can an organ est sur les lieux, elle .a pIus de poids et d'autohave than to be invested, as is the Consular rite. Mais peut-on imaginer un organe investi
Commission, with all the authority of the Secur- de plus d'autDrite que la Commission consula.ire,
ity Council? It is the agent of the Council.. a qui notre COl1seil a de1<~gue tous ses pOUVOi1'S?
Those consular officials , ~ very good and are Elle est l'agent du Conseil. Les fonctionnaires
experienced men, and for this particular short- consulaires sont des hommes de valeuT et d'expeterm problem I should think they were far more rience et it me semble que pour ce probleme particompetent than tb.e Committee of Good Offices. culier, a court terme, ils sont bien plus compeIt only derogates from the real work" of the tents que la Commission de bons offices. On ne
Committee of Good Offices to have it mixed fait que nuire ajJX travaux effectifs de la Comup in supervising the cease-fire order and the mission de bons offices en la melant au controle
cessation of hostilities, which is not its function de I'ordre de cesser le feu et a la cessation des
hostilites, qui ne font pas du tout partie de ses
at all.
fonctions.
Nous voyons a travers l'ensemble de ce rapRight through this report we see that two
of the main reasons given for the failure to port que deux des raisons principales invoquees
observe the cease-fire order were that there was pour expliquer le fait que l'ordre de cesser le
on both sides a lack of confidence in the good faith feu n'ait pas ete observe, etaient, des deux cotes,
of the other party to the dispute and, secondly, premierement un manque de confiance dans la
that there was no agreement as to the means bonne foi de la partie adverse, et deuxiemement,
by which that order could be enforced and no l'absence d'accord sur le moyen de faire executer
cet ordre et la possibiIite d'etablir un contact.
way whereby contact could be establish'ed.
Depuis ce temps, c'est-a-dire depuis trois
Since then, that is, three months ago, we read
!hat bitterness between the parties has increased mois, les ressentiments se sont accrus entre les
- and one could reasonably assume that would parties - et il etait d'ailleurs normal de supposer
be so after all this fighting. and bloodshed- qu'il en serait ainsi apres toutes ces luttes et
and it would now be far more difficult for those ces effusions de sang - et il serait maintenant
two parties to get together. Yet we find that bien plus difficile aux deux parties en presence
the United States proposal goes back completely d'arriver a un rapprochement. Malgre cela, nous
to three months ago, ignores all that and simply constatons que la proposition des Etats-Unis
calls upon the parties to do certain things. We revient a la situation d'il y a \:rois mois, ne
suggest that that is almost useless. Certainly, the tient aucun compte de tout ce qui s'est passe et
amendment Of the representative of China does demande simplement aux deux parties de faire
help by inserting the words "either directly or certaines choses. Nous pensons que cette fac;on
through the Committee of Good Offices". But de proceder. elit presque futile. It est certain que
again I fail to see. why that duty is given to l'amendementdu representant de la Chine amethe Committee of Good Offices and not to the liore quelque peu le- texte par l'insertion des
body whose real duty it is, namely, the Consular mots: "soit directement, soit par l'entremise de
Commission. In other words, the Committee of la Commission' de bons offices". Mais, la encore,
Good Offices is being made into an executive je ne vois pas pourquoi cette tache est confiee
body, which was never intended~
a la Commission de bons offices et non pas a la
Commission consulaire, organe auquel elle revieht
effectivement. En. cl'autres termes, la Commission
de bons offices est transformee en organe executif, ce qui n'a jamais ete I'intention qui a preside a sa creation.
.
Our main objection to this United States draft
Notre objection principale contre ce projet de
"resolution relates to the last paragraph. In that resolution-des Etats-Unis a trait au dernier pararespect, we agree largely. with what the. repre- graphe. A cet egard.? IlOUS sommes d'accord dans
sentative of the USSR said this morning. What une large mesure avec ce que le representant de
does it do? First of all, it says: "to alter sub- l'URSS a declare ce matin. Que dit ce paragrastantially the territory". In 'other 'words, it phe? Tout d'abord, it declare: "pour modifier
completely ignores t:.e fact, as the evidence in- substantiellement le territoire". En d'autres terdicates, that there has been a large alteration. mes, it ignore completement le fait, etabli par
There is some. evidence to the effect, as I in- les preuves fournies, qu'il y a eu une modification
dicated, that there has been an alteration ap importante. Il y a preuve, comme je l'ai indito 100 kilometres.
qlle, que la modification porte sur une distance
atteignant 100 kilometres.
To use a homely illustn..tion, 1 can say at . Pour me servir d'un exemple familier, je
lunch time that I had a meal. But if I say that peux dire apres le dejeuner que j'ai pris un
I had a substantial meal, it connotes a very large repas. Mais si je dis que j'ai pris un repas
meal; and a substantial extension of control substantiel, cela signifie un tres· grand repas;
means a very large extension of control. In. et une extension substantielle du controle signiother words, then, the Netherlands Government fie une extension tres imj:>ortante. En d'autres
is really given the authority of the COl1ncil. to " termes, le Conseil confere ainsi au Gouvernement
continue its operations, to contin.ue to extend neerlandais l'autorite necessaire pour poursuivre
its control, as long as it is not," according to its ses operations, pour continuer a etendre son conown interpretation, "substantial" jand one can in- trale sur "le territoire tant qu'il n'estimera pas
terpret "substantial" in a variety of ways.
que cette extension est "substantielleU ,et on
peut interpreter le mot "substantielle" d~ manieres tres diverses.

270~

The other point about the last paragraph is
this. What is meant by "under its control" ?
The whole report, as we indicated at the two
hundred and fifteenth meeting, shown that the
Netherlands interpretation of what is meant by
control is quite opposed to the intention of the
original resolution of the Council. And the
United States, as its resolution. now stands, is
accepting the Netherlands interpretation by
wording this paragraph in the way it has.
We therefore propose to amend the last
paragraph. We cannot accept the Chinese amendment, because the latter simply says that "the
use of the armed forces of either party by
military action ... is inconsistent with the spirit
of the Council resolution of 1 August". Who
is gqing to define the spirit· of our resolution?
We say straight out, it was not in conformity
with it - nothing to do with the spirit. It was
not in conformity with our resolution, so why
not say so? As the representative of the USSR
said, the Chinese amendment does not alter in
any way the substance of the United States, text.
./

The last point to whic.lt we have objection
in the United States draft resolution is· the
phrase "by military action". Control can be
extended otherwise than by military action, even
using "military" in its widest sense. That control can be extended by police action, by administrative action and. even by naval action.
So our amendment is to replace the last paragraph by:

L'au1-:;,' PO}. <
je desirerais mentioJ;l..ner
au sujet du
n.:r paragraphe est le suivant:
qu'entend-on 1)ar "soumis a leur controle"? L'ensemble u.ti rapport montre, comme nous l'avons
indique a la deux-cent-quinzieme seance, que
l'interpretation neerlandaise de ce que 1'0n entend
par controle estnettement opposee au but recherche par la premiere rbolution du Conseil. En
redigeant ce paragraphe de cette fac;on, les EtatsUnis, par la forme actuelle de leur resolution,
acceptent l'interpretatio!1 neerlandaise.
C'est pourquoi nous proposons d'amender le
dernier paragraphe. Nous ne pouvons pas accepter l'amendement de la Chine parce que dans cet
amendement on declare simplement que "le recours par l'une ou l'autre partie a la force armee
dans le cadre d'operations militaires, ... est incompatible avec l'esprit de la resolution du Conseil du.ler aofrt". Qui nous ~onnera une definition de l'esprit de notre resolution?' N0l,1S
decIarons simplement que ce recours n'etait pas .
conforme a la resolution - ceci .n'a rien a voir \
avec son esprit. Si ce recours n'etait pas conforme a notre resolution, pourquoi ne pas le
dire? Comme l'a declare le representant de
l'URSS, l'amendemenf de la Chine ne modifie
en aucune fa«;on le fond du texte propose par
les Etats-Unis.
Le del"Q.ier point de la resolution des Etats-'
Unis au sujet duquel nous ayons des objections
a formuler est l'emploi des mots: "dans le cadre
d'operations miIitaires". Il est possible d'etendre
le controle par des operations autres que militaires, meme si 1'0n emploie le terme "militaire"
dans son sens le plus large. Ce controle peut
etre etendu par des mesures de police, par des
mesures administratives, et meme par des operatio.ls navales. Notre amendement consiste done
a remplacer le dernier paragraphe par les mots
suivants:

"Advises the parties concerned, the Committee of Good Offices and the Consular Commission, that. any consolidation, control, or
acquisition of territory not occupied on 4
August 1947 would pot be in conformity with.
its resolution of 1 August."

"Fait connatt?"e aux partie~. interessees, a la
Commission de bons offices et a la COmmission
consulaire, qu'aucun controle ou acquisition de
territoires non occupes a la date du· 4 aofrt
1947, ou aucune consolidation de positions sur
de teJ.s territoires' ne serait conforme a sa resolution du ler aofrt."

That i~ a positive statement of fact, a positive
statement of the clear intention of the Council;
our proposal gives purpose and effect to that
intention.•

C'est la un expose net des faits, une declaration ouverte des intentions du Conseil; notre
proposition definit ces intentions d'une maniere
cliire et efficace.

'The PRESIDENT: I should like to try to deal
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J;aimewith one or two of the points raised by the rais essayer de traiter un ou deux 'des points sou.,.
representative· of Australia. He said that it ap- leves par le representant de l'Australie. Il a
peared that in the rendering of this one report, declare qu'il semblait qu'en nous remettant son
.the Consular Commission had discharge<l its unique rapport la Commission consulaire s'etait
duties, and that no further duties were ex-' acquittee de ses fonctions et qu'on ne s'attenpected of it. I agree that it may appear like dait pas a ce qU'elle accomplit d'autres taches
i?at. I should reca!!, however, that the resolu- que1conques. Je reconnais que les apparencey; peutIOn which the Security Council adopted on 25 vent justifier une telle interpretation. J e rappel- .
August requested the Governments, members of lerai totitefois que la 'resolution ac!optee ·par. le
!he Council, who had consular representatives Conseil de securite a la date du 2Sao'i1t demanl~ Batavia, to instruct them to prepare informa- , dait aux Gouvernements membres .du Conseil,
bona! reports on the situation1 • I should think, qui avaient des repres~ntants consulaires a"Batacertainly, that until the matter is cleared up, via, de leur donner pour instructions de prepawe should expect to have periodic reports.
rer des rapports d'information sur la situation1 •
Il me semble que, de toute evidence, nous devrions
nous attendre a recevoir des. rapports periodiques
jusqu'au mqnient ou la question serait eclaircie.
SeeNOfficial Records of the Security Council, Second
. ear, o. 83.

,\[1

"'_t~

1 Voir' les Proces-verbau:r o/ficiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 83.

2704
,Le representant'de' l'Australie a declare aussi
qu'it semblait y avoir une certaine confusion au
sujet des fonctions' particulieres de la Commission de bons offices., Je reconnais. qu'il peut y
avoir une certaine confusion, mais je ne suis pas
aussi pessimiste que d'autres a cet egard. Si mes
souvenirs sont exacts, void ce qui est arrive:
au mois d'aout" nous pensions, et nous y etions
tout. a fait fondes, que l'execution de l'ordre
de cesser le feu ou de cesser les hostilites etait
une question tres .9rgente et que, par consequent,
nous devions avoir recours aux services des
representants consulaires qui etaientdeja' sur
place. Effectivement, ils s'acquitterent' de lenr
tache avec beaucoup de diiigence. La Commission de bons offices etait naturellement destinee,
a l'origine, a un autre but; elle etait destinee
a assurer une solution a long terme. Mais je
ne vois pas pourquoi il faudrait l' empecher
d!exercer un controle sur la fa<.;on dont la Commission consulaire s'acquitte de sa tache.
Si la resolution des Etats-Unis etait adoptee,
If the United States resolution were adopted,
the situation would be cleared up to this extent, void dans quelle mesure la situation serait eclair··
that this resolution would definitely request the cie: aux termes de cette resolution, on demanCommittee of Good Offices to assist the parties derait, d'une maniere preci~e, a la Commission
in reaching an agreement on an arrangement de bons offices d'aider les parties a s'entendre
which would ensure the observance of the cease- en vue d'un accord qui permettrait d'assurer
fire resolution and would, request the Consular I'observation de la: resolution portant ordre de
Commission, with its military advisers, to make cesser le feu et qui demanderait a la Commission
consulaire et a ses conseillers militair'es de preits assistance available.
ter leur assistance.
.
The Security Council may think it right, or it
Le Conseil de securite peut estimer qu'il conmay think it wrong, that the Committee of Good vient ou qu'il ne convient pas que la Commission
Offices should occupy itself with the cease-fire de bons offices !)' occupe de l'ordre de cesser le
order. I should have thought, myself, that it feu. Personnellement, j'estime' que la Commiswould, be difficult· for the Committee to make sion pourrait l difficilement realiser des progres
much progress with the other, more important dans ses autres taches, plus importantes, avant
tasks before this first cease-fire operation had I'execution de la premiere mesure, I'ordre de cesbeen carried' out. I should have thought, myself, ser le feu. Persorinellement, j'inclinerais a. penthat this was a good proposal. I do ~ot really ser que c'<.~tait· la une proposition rationnelle. Je
see any objection to it. If it is agreed upon, ne vois vraiment rien qui puisse s'y opposer. Si
the Council would, under the penultimate para- elle est acceptee, le 'Conseil, d"apres I'avant-dergraph, from which I quote; request "the Con- nier paragraph,e, dont je cite le passage suivant,
sular Commission ... to make its services avail- prierait "la Commission consulaire de mettre
able to the Committee of Good Offices", and ses services . . . a la disposition de la, Commission
presumably the Committee would forward to de bons offices". Et I'on peut presumer que la
us the reports which the Consular Commission Commission de bons offices nous transmettrait
les rapports que redigerait la Commission conwould make.
sulaire.'
"
Le representant de I'Australie a mentionne un
The representative of Australia referred to a
very important matter, 'and that was the question point tres import.ant qui est la question posee .
put to the representative of the Netherlands this ce matin au representant des Pays-Bas. Ce dermorning. The representative of the Netherlands nier s'est engage a. repondre a. cette question.
undertook to answer that question. If we can Si nous pouvons achever l'examen'de ce point
finish with the matter at this sitting, I, as au cours de la presente seance; j'espere, en ma
President, should, certainly hope that the repre,.. qualite de President, que le representant des
sentative of the Netherlands will, whenhe makes Pays-Bas voudra bien, lorsqu'il !ormulera sa
his reply, let me have it in writing.. Then, if reponse, m'en donner communication par ecrit.
I am·still President, I shall circulate it to the Si je suis toujours President, je la distribuemembers of the Council and see that it is for- rai aux membres du Conseil et vei1!erai 11. ce
warded immediately to the Committee of Good qu'elle soit transmiseimmediatemcl1t a. la ComOffices. Happily, in about seven hours I shall mission de bons offices. Fort he~lreusement, je
no longer be occupying this position, and if we ne rempliraiplus ces fonctions que pendant envido not fit.rlsh this evening, it would be the re-. ron sept heures encore et si· nous ne terminions
sponsibility of the United States, representative pas, ce soil', il appartiendrait au representant des
to say how he will conduct this matter.
Etats-Unis d'indiquer de quelle fa<.;on il traitera
,
'.
'.
ce probleme.
The representative of, Australia also said that
some confusion seemed to exist about the specific
functions of the Committee of Good Offices.
I agree that there may be some ,confusion,' but
I, do not think it is quite as bad as others do.
1£ I remember rightly, th{s is, what happened.
In August we thought quite rightly that, the
carrying out of the cease-fire order, or the ceasehostilities order was a very urgent matter and
that we should therefore avail ourselves of the
services of consular. representatives who were
already on the spot. In fact they did get through
with their work very quiCkly. The Committee
of Good Offices of course, primarily designed
for a different purpose, for the purpose of
obtaining a long-term settlement; but I do not
see why it should be debarred from controlling
and supervising the ConsUlar Commission in
the carrying out of its task.

\

I

General ROMULQ (Philippines): I should like
to make a very brief intervention' concerning'
two aspects of the United States draft resolution
as revised, and in support of the Australian
amendment.

Le general ROMULO (Philippines) (tyaduit de
l'anglais): J'aimerais faire une tres courte cieclaration concernantdeux aspects du texte revise
du projet de resolution des 'Etats-Unis et en
raveur de l'amendement propose par l'Australie.

2705
En premier lieu, il est clair que la resolution
s'appuie sur la supposition que nous avons tous
les moyens d'amener les parties adverses a observer la resolution portant ordre de cesser le
feu. Cette resolution parle de rappel, a leu'r
adresser pour qu'elle!i procedent a des consultations sur les mesures necessaires pour donner
effet a I'ordre et de l'aide que la Commission
de bons offices pouvait apporter aux parties afin
de faciliter la conclusion des accords necessaires.
Much as we should like to believe that such I
Pour grand que' soit notre desir de croire que
an assumption is correct, there is abundant evi- cette supposition, est fondee, il y a des preudence, both in the report of the Consular Com- yes nombreuses, a la fois dans le rapport de la
mission ,and in the statements recently made Commission consulaire et dans les declarations
here by the representatives of the Republic of recemment faites ici par les representants de
Indonesia and the Netherlands, that the spirit, la Republique d'Indonesie et des Pays-Bas, que
which alone would make the projected solution l'etat d'esprit qui rendrait 'possible la solution
possible, seems to be entirely lacking-. The de- envisagee semble faire entierement de£aut. L'attifiant attitude of the Netherlands Government is tude de defi du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas est
.. well-known to the Council, while the leaders of ' bien connue du Conseil, tandis que les dirigeantsthe Republic of Indonesia have made it very de la Republique d'Indonesie ont declare tres
clear that they consider arbitration to be the only nettement qu'ils consideraient l'arbitrage comme
answer to the conflict in Indonesia. This being la seule solution au conflit survenu en Indonethe case, it is difficult to see how the consultations sie. Dans ces conditions, il est difficile de voir
proposed in the United States draft reso 'on comment. les consultations envisagees dans le
inspired through 'the proposal is by the u,-'st projet de resolution des Etats-Unis peuvent proquire les resultats desires, bien que cette proof intentions, can produce the desired results.
position 'soit inspiree des meilleures intentions.
Ce que je desire faire remarquer est que la
What I wish to point out is that the resolution, however well-meaning it may be, does not resolution, quelle que soit la valeur de l'intenmeet the whole problem before the Council. tion qui l'inspire, ne tient pas compte de l'enThat problem is the evident unwillingness of semble du probleme dont est saisi le Conseil.
the parties voluntarily to deal directly with each Ce probleme' est pose par l'absence manifeste
other· concerning the enforcement of the cease- du desir des parties d'entrer volontairement en
contact direct au sujet de l'execution de l'ordre
fire order.
de cesser le feu.
Apres avoir entendu la declaration faite lundi
After listening to the statement made by
the Indonesian representative at the Council's dernier au cours de la deux-cent-quatorzieme
two hundred and fourteenth meetingt, in which seance du Conseilt, par le, representant de 1'1nhe pleaded once again for the outright arbitration donesie qui plaidait une fois de plus en faveur
of the conflict and solemnly pledged his Govern- de l'arbitrage immediat du conflit et donnait, au
ment to the faithful observance of any decision nom de son Gouvernement, la promesse solenwhich might result from such arbitration; and neIle d'observer fidelement toute decision qui
after considering the report of the Consular resulterait de cet arbitrage,' et apres avoir ~xa­
Commission, I fcel that the employment of mine le rapport de la Commission consulaire, je
measures somewhat more vigorous and the use pense qu'il pourra etre necessaire de recourir
of force greater than that proposed in the United a des mesures un peu plus energiques et d'emStates resolution may be necessary. Arbitration ployer plus de force qu'il n'est pt:'evu dans
by the Council" or the transformation of the la. resolution des ,Etats-Unis. Je crois qu'une
Council or· Committee of Good Offices into a reponse· pourrait etre trouvee dans, un arbitrage
du Conseil ou dans la transformation du Concornmis~ion of arbitration, might well prove to
be the answer.
'
seil ou de la Commission de bons offices en une
commission d'a~bitrage.
My second point relates t~ the last paragraph
Mon second point porte sur le demier paraof the revised United States draft resolution, graphe du texte revise du projet de resolution
discussed here a few minutes ago by the rep- presente par les Etats-Unis, texte qu'a deja
resentative of Australia. My first impression, discute ici, il y a quelques instants, le repre-.
~pon reading this paragraph, is that it virtually
sentant de l'Australie. Ma premiere' impression
condemns the advances made by the armed forces en lisant ce paragraphe est qu'il condamne virof either party to this dispute primarily the tueIlement les progressions realisees apres le,
Netherlands· .forces, after 4 August 1947 and, 4 ·aout 1947 par les forces armees de rune et
by implication, would justify the withdrawal of de l'autre des parties au differend, et surtout par
troops to the points and lines they occupied les forces neerIandaises, et qu'il motiverait donc
at that date.
implicitement ie retrait des troupes SUT les, points
et les lignes qu'e1les occupaient
'te date.
In other words, while the phrasing is someEn d'autres termes, bien que la redaction prewhat am~i~ous - in keeping, "I think, with the sente quelque equivoque, ce qu'expliquent, semcharactenshc mildness of the resolution and ble-t-il, le ton modere qui caracterise la resolu,~wing to the necessity of adhering to the nicetion et la necessite de se plier aux stlbtilites de
hes of diplomatic language - I cannot but feel la lan&Ue diplomatique, je ne puis cependant
In the first place, it is clear that the resolution
is based on the supposition that there is every
possibility of bringing the two parties to the
dispute to terms regarding the observance of
the cease-fire resoh.1tion. It speaks of calling upon
them to consult with each other on the steps
required t? give effect to the orde~, .and of
the Commlttee of Good Offices asslstmg the
parties in reaching the necessary agreements.

a

11hz0;
Y

'SeeNOfficial Records of the Security Council, Second

100.

.

'

• Voir Ies Proces-11erbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme 'Anne<l, No 100.

2706
that it expresses an opmIon which is gammg
ground in the Council, to the effect that there
has been a wilful violation of the cease-fire
,order, and that this violation consists in the
advance of· armed forces, principally of the
Netherlands, 'beyond the lines existing on 4
August.

m'empecher de constater qU'elle exprime une opinion qui gagne du terrain au sein du Conseil,
savoir que l'ordre de cesser le feu a ete enfreint
volontairement, et que cette infraction,est constituee par l'avance des forces armees, notamment
des forces neerlandaises, au dela des positions
tenues le 4 aout.

If this interpretation is correct, it remains only
to be asked what, concretely, the bodies concerned - the Commission of Good Offices and
the Consular Commission - are supposed to do
about the principles embodIed in the revised draft
resolution of the United States.

Si moll. interpretation est correcte, il ne reste
qu'a demander quelles mesures concretes les organismes interesse~ c'est-a-dire la Commission de
bons offices et"""Ia Commission consulaire, sont
censes prendre a l'egard des principes formules dans le te:x;te revise du projet de resolution
soumis par les Etats-Unis.

I do not believe that it is the intention of
the United States to hav~ the Security Council
merely express an opinion or voice a pious hope
and stop there. Hence the Australian amendm.ent
presented today, which replaces the last paragraph
of the United States resolution, prevents that
resolution. from being a mere .expression of
pious hope; and for this reason the Philippines
delegation believes that the amendment should
be approved by this august body.

Je ne pense pas que les Etats-Unis tiennent
a ce que le Conseil de securite se contente d'exprimer une opinion ou un espoir tout platonique
et s'en tenir ta. Aussi l'amendement propose
aujourd'hui par la delegation de l'Australie, et
qui vise a remplacer le dernier paragraphe du
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis, empechet-il cette resolution d'etre l'expression d'un espoir
platonique, et c'est pourquoi la delegation des
Philippines estime que le Conseil de securite devrait approuver cet amendement.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): We
are dealing here with a provisional measure. We
have called it the cease-fire order and the ceasefire resolution of I August, and we have been
informed that it has not .been observed because
of a different understanding of its meaning by
the parties.to which it was addressed. As a matter
of fact, it was not a cease-fire order. It was a
provisional measure which did not mention the
word !'cease-fire'~. It mentioned the word "hostilities". That provisional order was supplemented on 26 August by another provisional
order1 ; and the formation, on 25 August, of the
Committee' of Good Offices2 , and the request
to the Governments concerned to offer the services of their consular officials; had for their
chief purpose the achievement of the aims stated
in the preamble to the resolution setting up
the Consular Commission2 • But those measures
also aimed at a permanent solution of the political question. The cessation of hostilities was a
military question and it is the paramount question which concerns us. That is why we have been
debating it for a few days.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'ang1ais) : Nous nous occupons en ce moment

I should . like to read to the Council the relevant part of the preamble to the resolution
of 25 August establishing the Consular Commission:

"And whereas it is' desirable that steps should
be taken to avoid disputes and friction relating
to the observance of the cease.,fire orders,
and h; .~reate conditions which will facilitate
agreunent between the parties."

a

d'une mesure de caractere provisoire.· Nous
l'avons appelee ordre de cesser le feu et resolution du ler aout tendant a faire cesser le feu,
et on nous a fait savoir qu'elle n'avait pas ete
suivie d'effet parce que les parties auxquelles
s'adressait cette 'resolution en donnaient des interpretations differentes. En fait il ne s'agit pas
d'un ordre de cesser le feu. Il s'agit d'une mesure
de caractere provisoire; le texte ne contenait
pas l'expression "cesser le feu". Le terme employe etait "hostilites". Cet ordre provisoire s'est
trouve complete, le 26 aout, par un autre ordre
provisoire1 ; et la constitution de la Commission
de bons offices; le 25 Mut2, ainsi que l'invitation
adressee aux' pays interesses de preter les services de leurs representants consulaires, devaient
servir la fin principale definie par le. preambule
de la resolution portant creati:m de la Commission consulaire2 •. Mais ces mesures tendaient egalement a la solution permanente du probleme
politique: La' cessation des hostilit€s etait une
question d'ordre .militaire, et c'est celle qui nous
interesse ail premier chef. C'est pourquoi noUS
en discutons' ici depuis quelques jours.
J e voudrais donner lecture au Conseil de la
partie du preambule de la resolution du 25 aout
porjant creation de la Commission consulaire:

. "Et attend1t qu'il est souhaitable que des
mesures soient prises pour eviter tout differend
et ,tout desaccord a propos de l' execution des
ordres de cesser le feu et pour creer des con·
ditions qui faciliteront la conclusion d'un accord entre les parties." .

That· was put into the preamble to the resolu-'
L'insertion c!e cette clause dans le preambule
tion in order to characterize it and illuminate its de la resolution av~it pour objet d'en souligner
purpose. Accordingly, further on, in that part le caractere et d'en preciser les fins avec nettete.
of the resolution which relates to the consular En consequence, nous trouvons plus bas dans
1 See Official Records of the Security CoUncil, Second
Year, Ne. 84, 195th meeting.
S Ibid., ifo. 83.

:J'. '

• > VOir. Ies Proces-verbaux officiels du c;nseil'.de.. s.e.c.
rite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 84, 195eme seance.
. . .
'Ibid., No 83.
.
.

2707
officials, we find a reference to the question of
withdrawal; it reads as follows:
".. , such reports to cover the observance
of the cease-fire on;lers and the conditions prevailing in areas under military occupation or
from which armed forces now in occupation
may be withdrawn by agreemen~ between the
parties;".
I draw the attention of the members to that
point: The' Security Council did not give an
order to the effect that the forces should withdraw. The Security Council did not make any
finding of facts. The Security Council did not
charge one side or the other with guilt. This was
a pr0visional measure, aimed at that final substantial settlement between the parties, and it
gave priority in point of time to the military
question. The Committee of Good Offices which
was sent over there was sent there primarily in
order to assist in the settlement of the political
question. The Committee of Good Offices was
not concerned, under the resolution' establishing
the Consular Commission, with finding or reporting or doing anything with respect to that
part of the provisional measure taken on 1
August. But - and this is where we are today
'-the report of that body of investigators which
did have a specific commitment with respect to
the cease-fire order, namely, the Consular Commission, has come in to us, and it shows beyond
question that cease-fire order is not being carried
out. It assi!!'ns as one of the reasons for this
situation th~ fact that there was a misunderstanding between the two sides. The cease-fire
order was not understood alike by both sides.
ThE. representative of Colombia therefore
called attention to the matter and observed, at
the two hundred and eleventh meeting of the
Security Council, that that fundamental trouble
should be cleared up immediately. That interests
the representative of the United States very
much, and the pending resolution here' offered
by the United States is intended to clarify that
situation and expedite the carrying out of that
original provisional meaSUre. This is not a final
measure. This is not a finding of facts. This
is not a finding of guilt. This is nothing but a
provisional measure designed to supply the defect which was said to be the cause of the
f~ilure of the original provisional measure.

The Council will notice from the Chinese
at,nendment the contrast between the point of
VIeW held at the date we off€red this draft
resolution and the point of view now held by
us. As originally drawn up, the United States
resolution was completely within the four corners of the provisional measure adopted on 25
August in the resolution establishing the Cons~lar Commission. That resolution contemplated
wIthdr~wal _by agreement between the parties,
and saId so. It also requested'the various Membel' States to have their consular officials watch
.that withdrawal and report bacl{. to 11S. But it
was _a withdrawal to be made by agreement
between the parties., When the original draft
~solution of the United States came before
~ci1, therefore, ~t did not refer to any-

la partie de la resolution qui a trait aux representants consulaires une mention de la question
du retrait des troupes, qui est redigee dans les
termes suivants:
"... ces rapports devant porter sur 1'execution des ordres de cesser le feu et sur les
conditions 'regnant clans les regions occupees
militairement ou- desquelles pourront etre retirees, par accord entre les parties, des forces
armees actuellement en occupation ;".

Je ferai simplement remarquer ceci. Le Conseil
de securite n'a pas ordonne le retrait des forces
armees. I1 n'a pas constate de faits. I1 n'a pas
jete de blame sur 1'une ou 1'autre partie. La
mesure envisagee. avait un caractere provisoire
et visait a. un reglement definitif et pratique du
differend entre les parties, mais donnait priorite,
dans le temps, au probleme militaire. La Commission de bons offices qui a ete envoyee sur les
lieux devait essentiellement aider au reglement
de la question politique. Elle n'etait pas chargee, aux termes de la resolution portant creation
de la Commission consulaire, de constater les
faits, de faire rapport, ni de participer en quoi
que c~ soit a l'execution de celles des mesures
provisoires, prises le ler aout. Mais, sur ces
entrefaites - et c'est la OU nous en sommes
aujourd'hui - le rapport de cet organe charge
de 1'enquete, qui avait un mandat particulier en
ce qui concerne 1'ordre de cesser le feu, a savoir
la Commi~sion consulaire, nous est parvenu, et
il prouve, d'une maniere indiscutable, que 1'ordre
de cesser le feu n'est pas observe. It donne,
entre autres, com..'11e raison de cette situation,
un malentenduentre les deux parties. L'ordl'e
de cesser le feu an'a pas ete compris de la
meme maniere par ks deux' antagonistes.
C'est pourquoi le representant de la Colombie
a attire 1'attention sur ce point et a fait observer,
dans l'allocution qu'il a prononcee au cours de
la deux-cent-onzieme seance du Conseil de securite, qU'il y aurait lieu de dissiper immediatement ce malentendu de premiere importance. Ced
interesse au plus haut point le representant des
Etats-Unis et le projet de resolution en instance,
soumis ici par la delegation des Etats-Unis, vise
a eclaircir la situation et a hater l' execution de
la premiere mesure provisoire. Il ne s'agit pas
d'une mesure de caractere definitif, ni d'une
constatation des faits non plus que de la preuve
de laculpabilite d'une des parties. It ne s'agit
de rien d'autre. que d'une mesure de caractere
provisoire destinee a pallier la lacune qui, dit-on,
a cause l'echec de la premiere mesure prov.isoire.
Le Conseil remarquera dans l'amendement de
la Chine la' difference qui existe entre notre
point de vue a la date ou, nous avons soumis
ce projet de resolution, et le point de vue qui
est le notrea1'heure actuelle. Sous sa forme
initiale, la 'resolution des Etats-Unis s'en tenait'
rigoureusement aux termes des mesures provisoires approuvees le 25 aout dans la resolution
port~nt creation de la Commission consulaire.
Celle-ci envisageait le retrait des troupes, par
ac~ord entre les parties et en faisait expressement mention. Elle invitait egalement l~s divers
Etats' Membres a donner pour instructions a
leurs representants:..unsulaires de surveiller le
retrait et de nOlls ,faire rapport a ce sujet. Mais
le retrait des troupes etait soumis
un accord
entre les deux p~r~ies. Ainsi, quand le projet

~1j;}~"'~i'~~';;~h~:;h~Jrfi~qtllf:Ll.ILiI
• • 11:::1&

a

illll.i- '-'.'"

1

Xl

2708
thing except withdrawal "by agreement". It
called upon the parties concerned forthwith to
consult· with each other. Now., they had admitted
that, they had not consulted with each other.
Hence the resolution states:

initial de resolution des Etats-tJnis a ete presente au Conseil,il ne mentionnait rien d'autre
qu'un retrait "par accord" mutuel. Le projet
invitait les parties interessees a se consulter immediatement. Or, les parties adinettent qU'elles
n'ont pas procede a cesconsultations. La resolution precise done que le Conseil les invite:

"... to consult with each other as to the
means to be employed in order to give effect
to the cease-fire resolution and, pending agreement, to cease any actbities which contravene that resolution;".
.

"... a se consulterimmediatement sur les
moyens a utiliser pour donner effet a la resolution concernant la cessation du feu, et en
attendant la realisation d'un accord, a mettre
fin a toutes les activites qui vont a l'encontre
de cette resolution;".
.
.

Next it calls upon the Committee of Good
Offices to do something which it has not previously been asked to do. If we had any authority
to make the original request, asking the Com~
mittee to intervene and perform good offices in
this matter, so we have that authority here. In
the United States draft resolution it is provided
. that the Security Council:

Ensuite de quoi, e11e' prie la Commission des
bons offices de prendre certaines mesures, ce
qu'on n'avait pas fait auparavant. Si notts avons
eu le droit de l'inviter initialemerit a intervenir
et a preter ses bons offices,' nous avons, en l'occurrence, un droit identique. I1 est dit dans le
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis:

"Requests the Committee of Good Offices
to assist the parties in reaching agreement
on an arrangement which will ensure the
observance of the cease-fire resolution;".

"Prie la Commission de bons offices d'aider
les parties a arriver a un accord sur les dispositions qui permettront d'appliquer la resolution concernant la cessation du feu."

The draft resolution thus adheres strictly to
the position taken by the Security Council on 25
August.
Next, since we have the Consular Commission
there, with its military assistants, who have the
speciaf knowledge and skill and experience that
we knew were necessary in order to carry such
agreement into effect, it is possible in the draft
resolution that the Security C::ouncil:

Le projet de resolution se confortne ainsi
rigoureusement a la position prise par le Conseil de securite le 25 aottt.
Ensuite, tenant compte du fait que la Commission consulaire se trouve sur place et beneficie
du concours de ses adjoints militaires, dont les
connaissances specialisees, l'habilete et l'experience etaient, nous le savions, indispensabies
pour donner 'effet· a un tel accord, il a ete precise dans le projetde resolution des Etats-Unis
que le Conseil de securite:

"Requests the Consular Commission, together with its military assi~tants, to make
its services ,available to the Committee of
Good Offices;".

"Priela' Commission consulaire de mettre
ses services, ainsi que ceux de ses adjoints
militaires, a la disposition de la Commission
de bons offices ;".

Pas un mot dans cette resolution n'a un caractere obligatob~. Aucun brdre n'est donne aUX
parties en cause. C'est encore une mesure de
caractere provis9ire, destinee a corriger l' erreur
que contenait la mesure provisoire initiale.
Autre chose: si cette resolution avait ete adopAnother thing - if this resolution were passed
as originally drafted, it would co-ordinate the tee dans' sa forme originale, elle servirait a.
work of those two bodies, and it would co-or- coordonner les tra'vaux de ces deux organismes et
dinate them in the direction taken by the re- cela dans le seris prevu par la resolution du
solution of 25 August setting up the Consular 25 aout portant' creation de la Commission conCpmmissiQn,. namely, the direction of an agree- sulaire, a savoir aux fins de realisation d'un
accord entre les parties.
ment between the parties.
N'est-il pas exact que le Conseil cherc.1,.e a
Is it not true that the Council seeks -to have
this b11siriess settled by peaceful means, without regler cette affaire par des methodes pacifiques
going into enforcements and sanctions and that sans recourir ni a des mesures de coercition,
sort of thing? Is it· not true that we are all ni a des sanctions, ni a aucune forme de penaIite?
trying to throw our· moral weight into the N'est:-il pas vrai, que nous nous effot<sons tous
scale on. the side of a pacific settlement of this de jeter ·le poidsde notre autorite morale dans
affair? And how can one achieve that by coer- la balance, afin de regler cette affaire de maniere
cion or by an order or by a judgment? We. pacifique? Comment done pourrait-on y arriver
know we cannot achieve it in that way. If we en recourant aux mesures de coercition, en donare to have a· pacific settlement, it will be only nant des ordres ou en portant un jugement?
by the way of agreement. That is why the Nous savons que nous ne pouvons y re11ssir de
Council took the course of offering good offices, cette fac;on. Si n011S devons regIer l'affaire padin order to aid in the mediation of this matter. fiquement, nous n'y arriverons qu'au moyen d't1~
accord. C'est pourquoi nous avons pris le part!
de faire demander au Conseil d'offrir ses bons
offices .pour aider a regler 1'affaire par voie de
mediatidn.
There is not a word here of compulsion. This
is nota command to the parties. This is another
provisional measure designed to cure the defect
in the original provisional measure.

ps

2709
Or, comme je l'ai deja signate, it y a eu confusion dans l'interpretation de l'ordre donne.
Aussi la substance de notre resolution est-elle
renfermee dans le dernier paragraphe du projet. Dans sa forme' originale, a laquelle onpeut
encore s'en tenir -'- car je ne retire rien de
notre resolution par mes declarations de ce soir
- ce paragraphe, tel qu'il etait redige, essayait
d'indiquer de maniere parfaitement nette et sans
qu'aucun doute soit permis, le sens de l'ordre
de cessation des hostilites; il precisait que cet
ordre signifiait l'arret des troupes sur une position determinee. Mais ceci ne signifie pas, comme
il me semble l'avoir Qeja declare depx fois,' que
des troupes qui se sont heurtees en combats peuvent demeurer sur leurs positions sans qu'intervienne aucun incident, aucun changement du a
des circonstances particulieres et speciales. L'ordre donne n'est pas a ce point deraisonnable. On
n'a jamais eu l'intention d'en faire quelque chose
d'aussi arbitraire et d'aussi rigide. C'est pourquoi
nous avons employe le terme "substantieUement".
Ce mot ne designe pas une grande etendue de
terrain, mais, comme j'ai essaye de l'indiquer,
une modification significative, une modification
profonde des positions militaires.
Je voudrais preciser Un autre point que voici:
I should like to clarify another point. That is,
if we should accept the text in the form proposed si nous acceptons le texte sous la forme que
by the representative of China, and strike out propose le representant de la Chine, en suppriin one place the words "its resolution of I mant a un endroit les mots "qu'elles doivent
August should be interpreted as not permitting", interpreter sa resolution du ler aout comme
substituting for it, at the end of the paragraph, interdisant a l'une ou l'autr,e partie de recourir",
the phrase "is inconsistent with the spirit of the et en les rempla~ant a la fin du paragraphe par
Council resolution of I August", I should under- les mots "est incompatible avec l'esprit de la
stand the purpose of that language to be to resolution du Conseil du ler aout", ceci voudrait
remedy the defect there is i.n the use of the dire, a mon sens, qu'Oti se propose par ce chanwords "cease hostilities",
. gement de redaction de corriger l'insuffisance
du texte initial, qui employait les mots "cesser
les hostilites".
The resolution of I August says nothing else.
La resolution du ler aout ne dit, en effet,
It states in part:
rien d'autre. Elle dit entre autres:
Now, as I said, there was obscurity about the
construction placed upon the order. Therefore
the meat of this draft resolution is in the last
paragraph.. As it was odginally drafted, and
may yet be adhered to - I am not withdrawing
any part of the United States resolution in
saying what I have to say tonight - it undertook
to make perfectly clear, and without any question, what the cease-hostilities order meant,
namely, that it meant to stand fast at some
place. But that does not mean, as I said, I think,
twice before, that men who have met each other
in combat can stand absolutely fast,. with. no
break, no slight change, no event occurring that
is dependent upon peculiar and special circumstances. The order is not as unreasonable as
that. It never was intended to be as arbitrary
and fixed as that. That is why we used the
word "substantially". "Substantially" does not
mean a great big piece of land. It means, as I
have tried to say, a significant change, a significant alteration of position.

tiNoting with concern the hostilities in progress between the armed forces of the N etherlands and the Republic of Indonesia,
"Calls upon the parties
" (a) To cease hostilities forthwith ..."
It does not say anything more. It does not
say to cease firing, it does not say to stand fast
and, of course, it does not mean the cutting off
of lines of communication that keep bodies of
troops on both sides supplied with food and keep
them alive. It has to be interpreted in its realistic
sense. That is why I rather like the language
p~oposed by the Chinese representative, namely,
"IS inconsistent with the spirit of the Council
resolution of I August". By that, it-is made clear
tha~ the intention of the Security Council in
takmg that provisional measures was to terminate
hostilities and yet that there was no intention to
be unreasonable j that it meant not merely to
ceas~ . ~re, but all those things which constitute
hoshhhes between opposing armed forces.
~

~ow, the draft resolution as offered by the
l!mted States does not purport to discuss or conSIder the fundamental problem,. the ultimate
p~oblem. It is a military situation that is dealt
W.l~ here, and the resolution is only a promeasure which, as I have said since the

liii;al

"Constatant avec inquietude que des hostilites sont en cours entre les forces armees des
Pays-Bas et celles de la Republique d'Indonesie,
"Invite les parties

a

"a)
cesser immediatement les hostilites..."
Elle ne dit rien de plus. Elle ne commande pas
de. cesser le feu, ni de rester sur les positions
'occupeeset evidemment elle ne peut pas commander non plus de couper les lignes< de communication qui permettent aux corps de troupes
des deux parties de se ravitailler et de subsister. It faut l'interpreter dans son sens. realiste.
C'est pourquoi j'aime assez le texte propose par
le representant de la Chine, savoir: "est incompatible avec l'esprit de la resolution du Conseil
du ler aout". I1 est ainsi precise que 'le but
envisage par le Conseil de securite en prenant
cette mesure pl'ovisoire etait de mettre fin aux
hosfilites et gu'il n'avait pourtant pas l'intention
d'etre deraisonnable; qu'il ne voulait pas simplement donner l'ordre de cesser le feu, mais quil
avait en vue tottte action constituant des hostilites entre forces armees antagonistes.
Le projet de resolution soumis par les EtatsUnis ·ne vise pas
discuter ou
examiner le
probleme fondamental et ultime.Nous nous occupons, ici, 'de la situation militaire et la resolutionn'est qu'une mesure provisoire qui, comme
je le repete depuis le debut, ne doit pas modi-

a

a

a

2710

beginning, must not alter the position or the fier l'attitude, 'ni compromettre les droits des
rights of the parties on both sides in the ulti- deux parties en ce qui concerne la solution defimate solution of this question. My interpretation nitive du probleme. L'interpretation que je donne
of those words is, also, that it must not be so aces mots est egalement que la mesure envisaserious in· its consequences ~s to do more harm gee ne doit pas avoir des consequences telles 'qu'iI
than good.'
.
en sorte plus de mal que de bien..
Now, I have tried earnestly to come to an . Je me suis efforce serieusement de faire abouinformal agreement - and I do not give up hope tir un accord amiable, et je n'abandonne pas l'esthat it is possible - about the text of .this poir d'y reussir avec le texte de notre resolution.
resolution. I think it would be wise for the J'estime qu'il serait sage de la part du ConseiI
Security Council to pass this provisional measure, de securite de vd'ter cette mesure provisoire, mais
but it seems apparent to me that unless an it me semble evident que, si nous n'avons pas
opportunity is given to consider further dif- la possibilite d'etudier plus a fond differents
ferent views relating to that last paragraph, points de vue'exprimes au sujetde ce dernier
we shall ~ave a failure of the Security Council paragraphe, le Conseil de securite risque de ne
to act, a futile waste of all this precious time pouvoir agir, de perdre en vain tout le temps prethat we have expended here. We enter upon deux que nous avons passe id. Nous nous engatomorrow in a spirit of conciliation, having in geons dans l'avenir avec un esprit de conciliaview the major purpose of the United Nations, tion, les yeux fixes' sur l'objectif principal de
which is to abolish war and to maintain peace, l'Organisation des Nations Unies, qui est de metand we never forget that purpose. Having that tre fins aux guerres et de maintenir la paix, et
in view, I think it is worth while to take some nous ne perdons jamais cet objectif de vue. Aussi
action that may tend to bring these opposing pensai-je que cela vaut la peine de faire un geste
destine a condlier les points de vue opposes.
views together.
C'est pourquoi je suggere qU'avant d'examiI therefore suggest that before we take up
seriatim these four amendments suggested by ner a part chacun des quatre amendements sugthe Chinese delegation to the United States text, geres par la delegation de la Chine au texte des
the President should appoint a small sub-com- Etats-Uriis, le, President devrait designer un
Olitee - I do not undertake to name the number sous-comite restreint, dont je n'entreprendrai pas
or the' members - with a view to reconciling d'indiquer la composition, ni le nom des memthese different texts. I have a feeling that wc bres qui le constitueraient, sous-comite qui aurait
who have offered different texts on· this last pour mission de concilier les divers textes. J'ai
paragraph are entirely agreed as to the sub- l'irilpression que nRus tous, qui avons presente
stance of our purpose and as to our object, des textes differents pour ce dernier paragraphe,
and that we are disagreeing only because of a sommes entierement d'accord quant au fond de
matter of semantics, a matter of phrases and ·notre proposition et a l'objectif que nous visons
words, and that with the aid of ~. sub-committee . et que nous '-ne s'ommes en desaccord que sur
we might be able to compose these differences la semantique, que sur les expressions et Ies
before we get into debate about the other parts mots; et je crois enfin qu'ave:c le concours d'un
of the Chinese amendment.. I therefore, suggest tel sous-comite nous pourrions concilier ces points
that a sub-committee should be formed for this de vue divergents avant d'engager la discussionsur les autres partie~ de l'atnendemenf propose
purposcr·
par la defegation de la Chine. Je suggere done
que nous constituions un sous-comite a cet dIet,
The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard the
suggestion made by the representative of the
United States, namely, that a small sub-committee of the Council should be appointed to try· to
reach agreement on a number of texts that are
stl1lbefore the Council.
Rule 33 of our rules of procedure states: "The
following motions shall have precedence in the
order named over all principal motions and draft
resolutions relative to the subject before the
meeting:" Among "the following motions" is:
"to refer any matter t9 a committee, to the
Secretary-General or to a rapporteur!'. I therefore feel bound to consult the CoUncil in regard
to this suggestion.
Personally, I should think it would be a good
thing to do. We have a number of rather similar,
to some extent ,overlapping amendments toa
draft, arid it is very difficult 'to. discuss them. in
a large gathering. I should 'hope a smaller sub:'
committee might be able to reach agreement on
them.
If the Council agrees to that procedure, I
shall make a proposal with regard to the composition of the sub-committee and its terms of
reference.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l~anglais): I : representant des Etats-Unis a sugger.e au Cc. 'seiI
de nommer un sous-comite restreint du COllseiI
qui s'efforcerait d'aboutir a un accord sur un
certain nol:nbre de textes dont le ConseiI est
encore saisi.
'L'article 33. de. notre reglement interieur stipule: "Ont priorite dans l'ordre ou elles figurent ci-dessous, sur toutes les propositions principales et projets de resolution vlsant la question
en discussion, les propositions·tendant ..." entre'
autres: "a renvoyer une question a un coniite,
au Secretaire general ou a un rapporteur". Je
me vois donc dans l'obligation de prendre l'ayis
du Conseil en ce qui concerne cette suggestion.
Personnellement, je pense qu'il serait bon .de
s'y conformer. Nous sommes saisis d'un certain
nombre d'amendements qui se ressemblent ass~z!
qui .dans une certaine mesure font double empIOl
les uns avec les autres' et qu'it est diffidle de
discuter dans 'Une reunion trop nombreuse. J'espere qu'un sous-comite restreint pourrait arriver
a un accord. sur les textes.
Sicetteprocedure~ convient au Conseil, je
soumettiai une proposition relative a la composition et au mandat de ce sous-comite.

..................
2711
If I hear no objection, I shall assume that
the Council agrees.

S'il n'est formule aucune objection, je considererai que le Conseil se rallie a ce point de
vue.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je crois
que la formation d'un sous-comite charge de
regler cette question ne serait qu'une perte de
temps, puisqu'on propose de constituer un souscomite dont les travaux s'inspireraient du projet
de resolution des Etats-Unis. En adoptant ce
projet de resolution, le Conseil de securite donnerait a penser qu'il est sous la coupe du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, qu'il se fait son complice et qu'il aide les Neerlandais dans leurs
sinistres agissements en Indonesie, tout cela bien
entendu aux depens des Indonesiens.
, La resolution des Etats-Unis ne permet pas de
regler la question indonesienne d'une fac,;on satisfaisante. Elle ne fait que compliquer la situation,
car elle encourage les N eerlandais a engager des
operations militaires.
.
Cela est tont particulierement vrai en ce qui
concerne le dernier paragraphe de la resolution,
paragraphe que le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique ne veut point modifier. On nous propose done de creer un sous-comite qui, dans
ses travaux, s'inspirerait de la resolution des
Etats-Unis et qui examinerait certains amendements, notamment l'amendement de 1'Australie.
Je n'avais pas 1'intention de parler de cet amendement, mais puisqu'il en est question, je dois
dire quelques mots a son sujet.
At first sight this amendment improves the
A premiere 'vue, cet amendement semble ameUnited States text, because it does not contain liorer le texte des Etats-Unis, puisqu'il en elithe phrase whic..h provides t.hat insignificant ter- mine la phrase qui indique que meme au cas ou
ritorial changes may be made in Indonesia, even cette resolution serait adoptee, il pourrait y avoir
if the resolution is adopted. The Australian en Indonesie des cl1angements territoriaux peu
amendment does not contain this phrase. It importants. Cette phrase ne figure pas dans le
reads as follows:
texte de l'amendement de l'Australie ainsi cont;u:

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): It seems
to me that the establishment of a sub-committee
on this question will lead only to loss of time,
since it is proposed to set up a sub-committee
which will base its work on the United States
draft resolution. The adoption of the United
States resolution would imply that t~e Security
Council was under the thumb of the Netherlands
Government, was conniving in its actions and was
helping the Netherlands to carry out its dark
deeds in Indonesia - and all this, of course, at
the expense of the Indonesians.
The United States resolution will not lead to
a proper solution of the Indonesian question. It
will only complicate the situation, because it gives
the signal to the Netherlands to start military
operations.
This applies especially to the last paragraph
of the resolution, which the representative of the
United States of America does not intend to
alter. It is proposed, therefore, to set up a subcommittee which will work on the basis of the
United States resolution and will consider certain amendments, including the Australian
amendment. I did not intend to speak about this,
but in passing I must say a few words about this
amendment.

"Advises the parties concerned, the Committee of Good Offices and the Consular Commission, that any consolidation, control, or
acquisition of territory not occupied on 4
August 1947 would not be in conformity
with its resolution of 1 August."

"Fait connaitre aux parties interessees, a
la Commission de bons offices et a la Commission consulaire qu'aucun controle ou acquisition de territoires non occupes a la date du
4 aout 1947, ou aucune consolidation de positions sur de tels territoires ne serait conforme
a sa resolution du 1er aout."

It follows that the Australian amendment indirectly legalizes Netherlands control and consolidation of the positions captured by N etherlands troop before 4 August 1947. That is the
implication of the Australian amendment.

Il en resulte que 1'amendement de l'Australie
enterine, d'une fac,;6n indirecte, le controle exerce
par les Pays-Bas ainsi que la consolidation des
positions que les troupes neerlandaises avaient
occupees avant le 4 aout 1947. Voila ce qui ressort de l'amendement propose par l'Australie.
Nous ne pouvons accepter un tel amendement,
meme si, a premiere vue, il semble ameliorer le
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis, car ce n'est
la qu'une apparence; en realite il ne 1'ameliore pas
sensiblement. La resolution des Etats.,Unis egare
l'opinion publique, car e1le fait naitre 1'impression
que le Conseil de securite agit, alors qu'en realite il ne fait rien. En adoptant la resolution
des Etats-Unis, nous adopterions - je l'affirme
a nouveau - rune des propositions les plus deshonorantes qui aient jamais ete soumises au Conseil de securite, car dIe donne le signal a rune
des parties en confHt de continuer ses actes
d'agression.

We cannot accept such an amendment, altho?gh at first sight it appears to improve the
UnIted States draft resolution. This is only at
~rst sight, however; it does not substantially
unprove the text of the United States resolution.
The United States resolution misleads public
opini~n, since it creates the impression that the
Secu~Ity: Council is doing something, whereas in
fact It IS doing nothing. If this United States
resolution is adopted, I repeat that we shall hil.Ve
accepted one of the most shameful proposals
~ver. submitted to the Security Council, since
I~ gIves one of the parties "to this dispute the
SIgnal to continue aggressive action.

.,e

The.PRESIDENT: I just wish to say something

t~ clarI.fy the situation. We are, at this moment,

dI~CUSSlllg this proposal to set up a sub-comtOL:~~ .. unifY these amendments. We

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais simplement ajouter quelques mots ~fin
d'ec1aircir la situation. Nous discutons en ce
moment la proposition tendant a instituer un

2712
are not discussing these amendments. The situation is that the United States draft resolution
is now before the Council and, whether any
individual member likes it or whether he dislikes
it, it has to come before the Council for decision, and it has to be voted upon, just as the
USSR draft resolution came before the Council
and was voted on, and as the outstanding Polish
draft resolution will have to come before the
CG~ncil and be voted upon.
The whole point is that the United States
resolution comes before us now with a series
of amendments - or rather some of themon the same lines, overlapping each other. I am
sure it would be for the convenience of the
Council as a whole, in the judging of this United
States resolution, if the proposer and those who
have put forward amendments could get together
and see whether they could put before ~s one
text for our decision. \Ve should have an extremely confused discussion here around the
Council table if we spoke to all these documents
which are now before us. For that reason I still
think, and I believe the members of the Council
will think, that it is wise to set up a sub-committee.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): My delegation
does not see any need for a sub-committee to be
formed at this stage of our discussion. I believe
that we have a certain draft resolution which
has been described by several and discussed by
all the members here. I referred to it in my
statement. We have some amendments now
which, in my opinion, are not even amendments,
but are simply drafting changes. We do not want
to change the sense of the resolution in the
slightest manner. As I stated before, that would
not make the resolution acceptable to my delegation, just as it was not acceptable before the
drafting changes were introduced.

If there was an appropriate time for the subcommittee, it was this morning, after we had
finished the general discussion. We had several
resolutions with several divergent views expressed
in them. It was the duty of the Council to take
up all these views in an attempt to conciliate
them. The United Nations is built on a principle
of conciliation and not on a principle of voting
through important matters by a majority vote.
At this moment I do not see any reason for the
creation of the sub-committee and I shall vote
against it.

Should the establishment of the sub-committee
be passed however, I should ask the President
to put my draft resolution to a vote, today if
possible, because I believe that several members
of the Council, speaking prev:ously, expressed
the same feelings and opinions as are contained
in that resolution. In any case~ generally speaking, there was nobody who denied the condusion
to which the Polish delegation came, namely,
that there was a defiance of the recommendation
on the part of the Netherlands Government. The

sous-comite charge de concilier ces amendements. Nous ne discutons pas des amendements
eux-memes. Le fait est que le Conseil est maintenant saisi du projet de resolution des EtatsU nis et - que cela plaise ou non a tel ou tel
membre - il incombe au Conseil de prendre
une decision a ce sujet; il y a lieu de le mettre
aux voix, tout comme le projet de resolution
de l'URSS a ete soumis au Conseil et a fait
l'objet d'un vQte, tout comme le projet de resolution de la Pologne, encore en instance, devra
etre soumis au Conseil et mis aux voix.
Tout le probleme reside dans le fait que la
resolution d...s Etats-Unis qui nous est soumise,
est accompagnee de toute une serie d'amendements - ou plutot de quelques-uns - qui tendent aux memes fins et se chevauchent. Je suis
certain qu'il serait de l'interet de l'ensemble des
membres du Conseil, avant de prendre position
sur la resolution des Etats-Unis, de permettre
a l'auteur de la proposition et a'jX auteurs des
amendements de se reunir et d'examiner la possibilite de nous soumettre un seul texte aux fins
de decision. La discussion autour de la table du
Conseil serait extremement confuse si nous examinions l'ensemble de tous les documents dont
nous sommes saisis. C'est pourquoi, je persiste 11 .
penser, et je crois que les membrc3 du Conseil
feront de meme, qu'il serait sage d'instituer un
sous-comite.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de ['an,qlais): Ma delegation ne voit pas pourquoi, au
stade actuel des debats, il serait necessaire d'instituer un sous-comife. It me semble que nous sommes saisis.d'!ID certain projet de resolution qui
a ete developpe par plusieurs membres presents
et discute par tout le Conseil. J e m'y suis moimeme refere dans mon expose. N ous sommes
maintenant saisis d'un certain nombre d'amendements qui, a mon avis, ne constituent pas de ~l
veritables amendements, mais de simples modi- .;tl
fications de forme. Nous ne desirons pas, quant .~
a nous, changer le moins du monde le sens de ,~.•'.',.j.
la resolution. Aucun changement, comme je l'ai!~
signale auparavant, ne rendrait cette resolution '.~~
plus acceptable pour ma delegation qu'elle ne
l'etait avant toute modification de redaction.
S'il y a jamais eU un moment opportun pour
creer un sous-comite, c'etait ce matin, apres que
nous en avions termine avec la discussion generale. Nous nous trouvions en presence de piusieurs resolutions qui exprimaient divers points
de vue differents. Il incombait au Conseil de
securite de recueillir toutes ces manieres de voir
et de s'efforcer de les concilier. Le principe qui
anime l'Organisation des Nations Unies, c'est de
rechercher la conciliation et non de regler purement et simplement des questions importantes par
un vote majoritaire. Je ne vois pour le moment
aucune raison valable d'instituer un sous-comite
et je voterai contre cette proposition.
Toutefois, si le Conseil vote la creation de ce
sous-comite, je demanderai au President de mettre mon projet de resolution aux voix, aujourd'hui si possible, car je crois que plusieurs me~'
bres du Conseil qui ont pris la parole avant mal,
ont manifeste des sentiments et expose des vues
identiques a ceux qu'exprime ladite resolution.
En tout cas, -l'tme maniere generale, personne
n'a refute: <:!J; •. lxttat;ol1 faite par la delegation
de la Polog-r!:'. a sa-tToh- que le Gouvernement
des Pays-Has '" brav,c la recommandation du

p

2713
only denial was an attempt to impute similar . Conseil. On n'a tente de nier le fait qu'en
essayant de faire peser la meme accusation sur le
guilt to the Government of Indonesia.
Gouvernement de I'Indonesie.
J e serais donc reconnaissant au President, au
I should be grateful, therefore, in the event
that such a sub-committee - a drafting sub- cas ou un sous-comite de ce genre, que je pourcommittee, I may call it - is established, if the rais appeler sous-comite de redaction, serait cree,
President would put the Polish draft resolution de bien vouloir mettre aux voix aujourd'hui le
projet de resolution de la Pologne.
to a vote today.
Le PRESIDENT (iraduit de I'anglais) : J e reponThe PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of Poland, I should say that my original drai au representant de la Pologne qu'a 1'0riintention was to suggest to the Council that the gine, j'avais l'intention de proposer au Conseil
sub-committee might be continued as follows: de composer eventuellement le sous-comite de la
the representative of the United States, who is maniere suivante: le representant des Etatsthe proposer of the resol:ution with which. we ~re Unis, auteur de la resolution qui nous occupe;
dealing; the representatlve of Poland, m VIew le representant de la Pologne, en raison du fait
of the fact that Poland already has a draft reso- que nous sommes egalement saisis d'un projet
lution outstanding; and then the representatives de resolution soumis par sa delegation; enfin
of the three delegations which have moved the les representants des trois delegations qui ont
amendments to the United States resolution, propose des amendements a la resolution des
namely, the delegations of China, Belgium and Etats-Unis, a savoir la delegation de la Chine,
Australia. But if the Polish delegation is against celle de la Belgique et ce11e de l'Australie. Mais
having a sub-committee at all, of course I should si la delegation de la Pologne s'oppose a l'instinot include the Polish delegation in the sub-com- tution d'un sous-comite, je ne puis evidemment
mittee. I had also intended to propose that the pas lui proposer d'en faire partie. J'avais egalesub-committee should consider not only the ment l'intention de proposer que le sous-comite
United States draft resolution, but also the out- examinat non seulement le projet de resolution
standing Polish draft resolution. However, if des Etats-Unis, mais aussi celui de la Pologne,
it is the final decision of the Polish delegation dont nous ne nous sommes pas encore occupes.
that it is opposed to the sub-committee, I cannot, Toutefois, si la delegation polonaise decide cateof course, ask the Polish delegation to partici- goriquement qu'elle s'oppose a la constitution
d'un sous-comite, je ne puis evidemment lui
pate in it.
demander de participer a ses travaux.
Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The President
mentioned that in view of the fact that I was
opposed to the formation of a sub-committee,
I should not participate in that sub-committee.
I cannot agree with that view. If that were so,
sub-committees and committees would be formed
only by members of a certain majority in a
certain body. I understood that it would be a
sub-committee which would have as a basis for
discussion the United States proposal, as well
as the amendments submitted by the various
delegations to the United States proposal, However, I do not know the terins of reference of
the sub-committee. My final attitude on the
matter would depend upon the terms of reference
proposed for the sub-committee. Should the President propose that my delegation should be
included in the sub-committee and that the
Polish proposal should be discussed along with
the United States proposal, in a certain middleof-the-way manner, we might review our attitude
towards it.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): Le President a laisse entendre que, du
fait que je m'opposais a la constitution d'un souscomite, je ne devrais pas prendre part a ses travaux. Je ne suis pas d'accord avec cette fac;on
de voir. S'il en etait ainsi, les sous-comites et
commissions ne seraient jamais composes que des
membres d'une majorite dormee appartenant a
un groupe donne. J'avais cru comprendre qu'il
s'agissait d'un sous-comite qui prendrait pour
base de discussion la proposition des Etats-Unis
ainsi que les amendements presentes par les
diverses delegations a la proposition des EtatsUnis. Je· ne connais toutefois pas le mandat du
sous-comite. Mon attitude definitive a cet· egard
dependra du mandat qu'on entend lui confier.
Si le President propose que ma delegation fasse
partie du sous-comite, et que la proposition de la
Pologne soit discutee dans un esprit de conciliation en meme temps que la proposition des EtatsUnis, nous poufrions modifier no.tre attitude a
son.egard.

The PRESIDENT: Under the rules of procedure I am bound to put to the vote, first of all,
the proposal made by the representative of the
United States to the effect that a sub-committee
should be set up to consider his draft resolution
and the amendments thereto. If that were
approved, I should subsequently ask the Council
whether it could agree that the terms of reference of that sub-committee should extend also
to the outstanding Polish draft resolution. If
that were agreed to, I should then submit to the
Council the list of those whoD,1 I should propose
for membership of the sub-committee.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'angtais): Conformement a notre reglement interieur, je we trouve
dans 1'0bligation de mettre aux voix en tout
premier lieu, la proposition emanant du representant des Etats-Unis, tendant a l'institution
d'un sous-comite charge d'examiner le projet de
resolution des Etats-Unis et les amendements y
proposes. Si cette proposition est adoptee, je
devtai ensuite demander au Conseil s'il serait
d'accord pour confier egalement au sous-comite
mandat d'examiner le projet de resolution de la
Pologne en instance d'examen. Si le Conseil en
decide ainsi, je lui presenterai ensuite la liste
des membres avec lesquels je proposerais de
composer le sous-comite.

~r. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland) : I wish to raise a
pomt of order. Would it not b~ l"rJ.ore suitable

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): J e voudrais presenter une motion de

2714
first to define the terms of reference of the subcommittee, and then to vote on the sub-committee? It is very difficult to vote on a subcommittee first and to vote on its terms of
reference later. It means" in the first instance,
that we should be voting on a sub-committee
the aim o~ which is not yet known.

procedure. Ne conviendrait-il pas mieux de deftnir en premie r lieu le manda t du sous-comite .
et de voter ensuite sa creation? Il est tres difficile de voter d'abord la constitution d'un souscomite et de voter ensuite son mandat, c'esta-dire de se pronon cer sur la creation d'un souscomite dont on ne connait pas encore les buts.

The PRESID ENT: I do not see very great
difficulty myself. I put it that way because, as
a matter of fact, the only proposal before t.he
Council was the proposal made by the representative of the United States. I do not see why
we could not agree, first of all- if we do agree
wIth the representativ\:: d the United States that it is necessary to have a sub-committee to
examine the United States draft resolution and
the amendments thereto, and then agree, if we
will, that its terms of reference should be
extended. I think it is the logical and simple
way of proceeding.

Le PRESID ENT (trad'ttit de l'anglais) : Pour ma
part, je neV:e1s pas de grande difficulte. J'ai
presente les choses de cette maniere parce que,
en fait, la seule proposition dont le Conseil fut
saisi etait celle qU'avait faite le representant -les
Etats-U nis. Je ne vois pas pourquoi, si nous
nousra ngeons cl l'avis du representant des EtatsUnis, nous ne poUrric.lls nous mettre d'accord en
premier lieu sur le fait qu'il est indispensable
de confier a un sous-comite manda t d'examiner
le projet de resolution. des Etats-U nis et les
amendements y proposes, puis decider en second
lieu, si tel est notre desir, qu'il convient d'elargir ce mandat. J e pense que cette procedure est
cl la fois logique - et simple.
Il me semble que le representant de la Syrie
a demande la parole. S'agit-il d'une motion
d'ordre relative a la procedure que je viens
d'indiq uer?

I think the representative of Syria asked to
speak. Is it on a point of order in connexion
with this proced ure?

Mr.. ARSLA N (Syria ) \ translated from French) :
I should like to ask the Preside nt whether the
sub-committee will be empowered to interpr et the
words "cease hostilities" or "cease fire". That
point will deternline my decision to vote for or
against the establishment of the sub-committee.
For this is a situation which may recur at some
future time. I do not want to go into the details
of the various proposals which have been submiLted to the Council, but in my opinion the
construction which has been placed upon the
term "cease hostilities" is incorre ct; that term
means nothiIlg other than "cease fire". But
"cease fire" is a militar y command; only tt'1e
commanders-in-chief can give iliat order~ Thus,
if the Council's decision was transmitted to the
two commandeI-s of thetwo armies throug h their
respective Governments, they should have given
the order to cease fire. I do not think the word
"hostilities" has a political connotation in this
instance.

M. ARSLA N (Syrie ): Je VoUClralS poser au
Preside nt la question de savoir si le sous-comite
aura la faculte de donner une interpretation aux
termes "cesser les hostilites" ou "cesser le feu".
D'apre s cela, je voterai pour ou contre la creation du sous-comite. En effet, il y a la une situation qui peut se repeter dans l'avenir. Je ne'
veux pas entrer dctns le detail des diverses propositions soumisef3 au Conseil, mais l'interpretation donnee a l'expression "cesser les hostiIifes"
me semble errone e; pour moi, elle ne veut pas
dire autre chose que cesser le feu; mais, "cessez
le feu" est till commandement militaire; seuls les
commandants en chef peuvent donner cet ordre;
c'est:-a -direqu e; si la decision du Conseil a ete
transmise aux deux cominl:mdants en chef des
deux armees, par leur Gouvernement respectif,
ils auraien t dii' donner l'\ordre de cesser le feu.
Je ne crois pas que le mot "hostilites" ait id
un sens po]itique.
'

I
The PRESID ENT : I reply to .the point just
, Le PRESID ENT (traduit 4e l'anglais) : Je vouraised by the representative of Syria, I must drais faire
point out that the original resolution of 1 Augus t tion souleveremarquer, pour repondre a la quescalled upon the parties "to cease hostilities". la Syrie, e cl l'instan t par le representant de
que la resolution initiale en date du
That is the exoression used. I do not think that ler aoiit invitait
les parties "a cesser immediateany formo t sub-committee which we are now I ment les
hostilit
es".
Telle est l'expression emcontemplating would. undertake any clarification ployee. J
e ne pense pas que, queUe que sait la
of that, but I do not know what the author of nature du sous-co
mite dont nons envisageons en
the resolution thinks. I think the purpose of ce momen
the sub-<;ommittee is pri!narily to try and sim- donner dest la creation, celui-ci entreprenne de
plify, unify, if possible, a text that the Council rnot!:1) mars eclaircissf'tUents sur le sens de ces
je ne sals pas ce qu'en pense l'aucan subsequently consider. If, when we reach teurde la resolut
that point, the representative of Syria still feels comite consiste ion. A mon avis, le but du soustout d'abord a essayer de simpIithat there is a considerable difficulty, he can no fier une
question complexe et d'arriv er si possib!e
doubt r..ise the matter again.
a· un tex.:(~ unique que le Conseil puisse examIner dlSt,:t:: . Si, quand nous en serons cl ce point,
le rtfi··"'swtr;;;'· de la Syrie voit encore la une
diffic'lh.,;: uJOsiderable, it lui sera loisible, sans
aUCUlJ doute,
poser a nouve;;tu la question.
I shall put the· proposal made by the repreJe m'en vais maintenant mettre aux voix la
sentative of the United States to the vote.
proposition formulee par le representant des
Etats-'!J1118.
.

ac

2715

a

A vote was, taken by show of hands, and the
proposal was adopted .by 7 votes in fo,vour, none
against and 4 abstentzons.

II est procede azt vote main levee; Par 7 voiz
pour, zb-o contre, avec 4 abstentions, la proposition est adoptee.

V fJtes Nr: Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia,
France, United Kingdom, United States of

Vatent pour: Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-U nis'
d'Amerique.

Abste1Ztions: Austra.lia, Poland, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'abstienne1Lt: .f..ustralie, Pologne, Syrie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques..

Americ a~

The PRESIDENT: The next point is whether the
terms of reference of this Sub-Committee should
be extended to include consideration of the
Polish draft resolution. If any formal motion
to that effect is required, I should make a motion
myself.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) :. N ous
devons maintenant. examiner s'il convient d'elargir le manda t duSou s-Com ite de maniere a y
faire figurer l'examen du projet de resolution
de la Pologne. S'il est besoin de deposer une
motion formelIe a cet effet, je le ferai moi-meme.
Mr. KATZ-SucrTY (Polan d) : I want to ask th~
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Polog ne) (traduit de l'anPresident what he means by the the words glais): J e tiens a savoir. que! sens
le· Preside nt
"should be extended to include", becaus e. he . donne aux mots "il convient d'elargir'
le mandat
said before that the basis· of the Sub-Com- de maniere a y faire figurer" parce qu'il
mittee's work should be the United States draft que precedemment que la base de travail a indiresolution. If the. words "should be extended Comite serait le projet de resolution du Sousto include" are used, the Sub-Committee would· Unis. Si 1'0n emploi el'expr ession des Etats"Il convient
have two bases for discussion, nam~ly, the Polish d'elarg ir le manda t de maniere ay fairefi
gurer" ,
draft resolution and the United States draft le Sous-Comite aura deux bases de
discussion:
resolution.
le projet de resolution de la Pologne et celui
des Etats-U nis.
The PRESIDENT: My hope was that it might
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J'espebe possible to :reach some compromise between rais que 1'0n pourra itevent uellem
ent arriver a
the Polish draft resolution and the United States un compromis entre le pr::>jet
de.
draft resolution, either in its original form or as la Po16gne et le projet de resolut resolution de
ion des Etatsit is amended.
Unis. soit sous sa forme primitive, soittel qu'il
a ete modifie.
Mr. (;.ROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublics): It would be interesting to know whe- listes sovietiques) (tradtti
ther the Polish representative prefers the re- interessant de savoir si t de I'anglais) : Il serait
solution to go to the Sub-Committee or to be Pologne pre£er equ'on rer:le representant de la
Jie la resolution· au
voted on here in the Securit y Council.
Sous-Comite ou qu'elle fasse 1'0bjet d'un vote
du Conseil de securite.
The PRESIDENT: I apologize to the Polish
Le PRESIDENT (trCului
representative. I failed to answer a question le represe ntant de la t de·l'angldis) : Je prie
he put to me earlier which was: if it was de- m'excuser. Je n'ai pas Polog nede bien vouIoir
cided to set up a sub-committee, should we pro- qu'il m'a posee un peu repondu a une question
plus tot et qui etaitcelIe:'
ceed to vote on his draft resolution now ? That ci: si' l'on decidait d'instit
uer un Sous-Comite,
would not be strictly in aQcordance with the devrions-nous mettre
atlx
voix
des mainte nant ·le
rules of procedure. Rule 32 of our provisional projet qe resolution
de la delegation polonaise?
rules of procedure says that: "Princ ipal motions Ceci ne. serait pas rigouse
and draft resolutions shall have precedence in notre reglement interieu usement· conf6rme a
r. L'article 32 de notre
the order of their submission"; but of course, reglement interie
ur
proviso
ire stipule que "les
if the Council wishes to vote on the Polish propositions princip
ales
et
les·
projets de· resoludraft resolution, I am in its hands. 1 have no tion {lut priorite
objection to putting it to the vote, but should sentes" ; toutefo dans l' ordre ou lis sont prewe' not vote first on the extension of the terms desire se pronon is.evid emmen t, .si le Conseil
cer sur le projet de resolution
of reference of the Sub-Committ~e?
du represe ntant de la Pologne, je me conformerai
a la decision. J e ne suis nullement oI'Pose a l'idee
de mettre ceproj et de resolution aux voix, mais
neconv iendrai t-il pas que nous nous prononcions
d'abord sur l'elargissement duman dat du SousComite?
Co~onel HODGSON (Austr alia) : I wish to raise
Le colonel HODGSON (Austr alie) (tradu it de
a pomt of order. I think it would simplify l'anglais):
Je desire presen ter une motion d'ormatters, and probably avoid the vote, if the dre. Je
penseq
ue·la que~'.:ion se trouver ait simr~presentative of Poland would answer the quespIifiee,
tIOn put to him by the representative of the sentant et un voL:c probablement evite, si le repre-.
de la Pologne voulait bien reporrdre a la
l!SSR, namely, whet4er he prefers his resolu- questio
tIon to go to the Sub-Committee which has I'URS n que lui a posee. le represe ntant de
now been established or whethe r he desires a soit S: a savoir, prMer e-t-ilq ue sa resolution
renvoyee au Sous-Comite que nous venons
.vote o~ it this evening.
.
de creer ou desire-t-il que le Conseil Sf.:.' prononce a son sujetc e soir?
.
1

0.'- .-..-

2716

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): That was what I
wanted to answer· after the representative .of
the USSR asked me a .question and before
the representative of Australia raised the point
of order.
First of all, my position depends on whether
the Polish resolution were to be submitted for
discussion by that Sub-Committee on an equal
basis with the United States resolution, in order
that the Sub-Committee might find some solution
satisfactory to both parties, that is, both members who have put draft resolutions berore the
Security Council.
Of course, I agree that the Polish resolution
cannot be voted on today. The Polish delegation has always been very reluctant to ignore
or avoid any rules which have been accepted,
and we shall m~ke no special difficulties on the
question of voting today. Our attitude towards
. this matter will depend on whether t)1e Polish
resolution would be treated equally as a basis
for discussion with the United States resolution.

I understand the usual procedure is that
should the Sub-Committee, in accepting the
Polish resolution as a basis for discussion, come
to no conclusion satisfactory to my delegation,
the Polish draft resolution will be put to the
vote at the usual time. .

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne)
Iglair):
C'est a cela que je me proposais de repondre apres la question
m'avait posee le
(traduit de ['Oin-

qt~e

representant de I'URSS et avant que le representant de l'Australie· nepresentat sa motion
d'ordl'e.
Tout d'abord, je nepourrai prendre position
que lorsque je saurai si la resolution de la Pologne sera, oui QW non, soumise au Sous-Comite
sur un pied d'egalite avec la resolution des EtatsUnis, afin de permettre a. ce Sous-Comite de
trouver une solution satisfaisante pour les deux
parties, c'est-a.-dire pour I'un et I'autre des mem.bres qui ont soumis des projets de resolution au
ConseiI de securite.
J'admets evidemment que 1'0n ne puisse mettre'
aux voix aujourd'hui le projet de resolution de
la Pologne. La delegation de la Pologne a tou- .
jour:s eprouve beaucoup de repugnance a. negliger
ou tourner les regles admises, et nOus ne souleverons aucune difficulte particuliere a. propos de
la question devote aujourd'hui. Nous reglerons
notre attitude vis-a.-vis de cette question lorsque
nous saurons si, oui ou non, la resolution polonaise sera, en tant que base de travail, placee sur
un pied d'egalite avec la resolution des EtatsUnis.
J e crois que, d'ordinaire, on suit la procedure
suivante: au cas ou le Sous-Comite, apres avoir
accepte la resolution polonaise comme base de
travail, n'aboutirait PflS a une conclusion donnant
satisfaction a. ma delegation, le projet de resolution de la Pologne serait mis aux v6ix en temps
utile.

The PRESIDENT: The Council has already. apLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le Conproved the original United States proposal for . seil a deja. approuve la proposition initiale des
the creation of a sub-committee. I now propose Etats-Unis tendant a la creation d'un Sousthat the terms of reference of that Sub-Com-. Comite. Je propose maintenant que 1'0n elargisse
mittee should be extended in this way: that it le mandat dudit' Sous-Comite en le chargeant
should examine both the United States and cl'examiner sur un pied d'egalite les projets de
Polish draft resolutions on a:p equal footing-, resolution des Et<;lts-Unis et de la Pologne, ainsi
together wth the amendments which have al- que les amendements a. 'la proposition des Etatsready been submitted to the United States Unis qui ant deja. ete deposes.
proposal.
Evidemment, si le representant de la Pologne
Of course, if the Polish representative is not
satisfied with the results of the labour of the n'est pas satisfait des conclusions du SousSub-Committee, he has the rjght to put his draft Comite; il est· fortde a. demander que, par la
resolution to the vote in the Council subsequently. suite, son projet de resolution soit mis aux voix
au Conseil.
Nous allons maintenant mettre aux voix l'elarWe shall now take a vote on the extension I
gissement du mandat que je 'liens de proposer.
have just proposed.
A vote was taken by show of hands. There
'were 5 votes in favo.ur, 2 against and 4 abstentions; The proposal 'was not adopted, having
failed to obtain the affirmative votes of seven.
members.

11 .est procede au vote a main levee. Il y a
5 voix pour, 2 contre avec 4 abstentions, N'ayant:,
pas obtenu le ,[.Iote affirmatifde sept membres, \
la proposition n'est pas adoptee.

Votes for: Australia, Colombia, Poland, United
Kingdom, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

V o~ent pour: Australie, Colombie, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Union des Republiques so'cialistes sovietiques.

Votes a.qainst: Beigium, United '$tates of
. ~I\merica.

Votent contre: Belgique, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstentions: Brazil, China, France, Syria.

S'abstiennento' Bresil, Chine, France, Syrie.

The PRESIDENT: We are left, therefore, with
a. Sub-Committee to examine the United States
draft resolution and the amendments which have
been moved to it. .
In these cir<;umstances, I suggest that :<!.s this
is merely a mechanical,; uangement to try t6

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Il noUS
reste donc un Sotis-Comite charge d'examiner .le
projet de resolution des Etats-Unis ainsi que les
amendements dont il a fait,l'objet.
Dans ces· conditions, je crois, du fait ~u'j[
s'agit sunplement ici d'un arrangement pratique

2717
facilitate the examination of the Unit~d States 'destin~ a faciliter rexamen du projet de resoludraft resolution, the SUb-Committee should tion des Etats-Unis, que le Sous-Comite ne delogically be restricted to the mover - the rep- . vrait logiquement se composer que de l'auteur
resentative of the United States - and to the du projet, c'est-a-din iU representant des Etatsrepresentatives of those delegations which have Unis et des representants des delegations qui ont
proposed amendm~nts, namel;y, the Chinese, Bel- propose des amendements, a savoir l:::s delegations
gian and AustralIan delegatIOns.
de la Chine, de la Belgique et de l'Australie.
I think it is important that the discussion in
A mon avis, i1 importe que la discussion au
that Sub-Committee should begin as soon as sein de ce Sous-Comite commence le plus tot
possible. I do not know whether the unfortunate possible. J e me demallde si les malheureux memmembers of that Sub-Committee would be ready bres de ce Sous-Comite seront en mesure de conto proceed with the work tonight, so that there tinuer leurs travaux ce soir, de maniete que le
might .be a meeting of the Council tomorrow C;onseil puisse se reunir demain matin pour examiner leurs conclusions.
mo!ning to examine the resultso
Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): After the taking of the vote I should like to make a shoI:t
comment.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de 1'anglais) : Apres qu'on aura procede au vote, j'aimerais ajoliter un bref commentaire.

The PRESIDENT: First 'of all I must put to
the vote the composition of the Sub-Committee
which I have indicated.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): le dois
tout d'abord mettre aux voix la composition du
Sous-Comite, telle que je l'ai proposee.

A votes was taken by show of hands, and the
motion was adopted by 7 votes in favour, none
against and 4 abstentions.

11 est procede au vote a main levee. Par 7 voix
pour, zero contre, avec 4 abstentions, la motion
est adoptee.

Votes for: Australia, B.elgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, United Kingdom, United States
of America.
.

V otent pour: AustraIie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstentions: France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'abstiennent: France, Pologne, Syrie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le SousComite se compose des representants de l'Australie, de la Belgique, de la Chine et des EtatsUnis d'Amerique.
Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): I simply wanted
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anto comment on the vote which was taken pre- glais): Je tenais simplement a formuler quelques
viously, as to the broadened terms of reference observations en ce qui concerne le vote preceof the Sub-Committee to include the Polish , dent relatif a l'elargissement du mandat du Sousdraft resolution. I wish to state that the result Comite, dt: maniere a ce qu'y figure egalement
of this vote is another case where an attempt l'examen du projet de resolution soumis par la
towards conciliation has been frustrated by a delegation de b Pologne. Je tiens a signaler
certain group of the members of the Council. que les resultats de ce scrutin constituent un
autre exemple d'une tentative de conciliation rhise
en echec par la faute d'uncertain groupe de
membres du Consei!.
The PRESIDENT: I understand that the repreLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je crois
sentative of the Netherlands wishes to speak.
que le' representant des Pays-Eas demande la
parole.
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): That is
. M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'anso, but I should like all the voting that can be glais): C'est exact, mais j'aimerais que l'on prodone to be done this afternoon, and not to cede cet apres,-midi a autant de scrutins qu'il
proceed with the Polish draft resolution sub- est possible et que 1'0n ne passe pas ensuite a
sequently. I am quite prepared to speak after l'examet:l du projet de resolution de la Pologne.
that. However, I leave myself in the President's Je suis tout dispose a prendre la parole. Toutchands.
fois, je m'en remets entierement au President.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): This is just a
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
formality. I shall request the President to, ask l'anglais): 11 s'agit d'une simple formaIite. Je
the representative of the United States if he prierais le President de demander au represenwould be good enough to accept the respnllsibility tant des Etats-Unis de bien vouloir prendre la
of convening this Sub-Committee.'
responsabiIite de convoquer ce Sous-Comite.
The PRESIDENT: I trust the representative of
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : ]'espere
the United States will accept that.
que le representant d.es Etats-Unis acceptera de
s'en charger.
: -~,
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : Yes.
M. AUSTIN (Et,
;Tn~s d'Amerique) (traduit
de 1'anglais): Cer- __ ,-,uent.
Mr.PARODI (France) (translated from
M. -PARODI (France): Je "mudrais faire une
French): I should like to say just one word in seule remarque au sujet de la declaration du
connexion with the remarks of the representa- representant de la Pologne.
tive of Poland. .
The PRESIDENT: The, Sub-Committee consists
of the representatives of Australia,' Belgium,
China and the United States.

IIrrn 'hr,',...

2718
I wish to state that, for my part, do not
agree with what he has said. I cannot accept his
interpretation of the vote and, in my opinion,
it.is totally unrelated to !he facts.
The PRESIDENT:· I am 'still not quite clear -on
one point. Does the representative of Poland
maintaiu the position he stated earlier in the
afternoon-to the effect that we should vote on
his resolution ? As I explained then, it would
not be strictly -in accordailce- with the rules.
However, with the Council's permission, I can
put the draft resolution to a vote. \

Je tiens a affirmer que,.--peur ma part, je
n'admets pas sa these. J e fais toute reserve sur
l'interpretation qu'il a donnee au vote et qui,
a mon avis, n'a aucun rapport avec la realite.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): In this respect,
I am prepared to accept a.ny ruling made by
the President.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (tradttit de l'anglais) : Je suis, a cet egard, pret it me conformer
a toute decision du President.

The PRESIDENT: I can give only the ruling
that is correct, which is to wait until the United
States draft resolution has :been voted upon.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne
puis prendre qu'une decision conforme au regIement, c'est-a-dire- qu'il convient d'attendre jusqu'a ce que nous nous soyons prononces sur le
projet de re~olution des Etats-Unis.

Le PRESIDENT (trad1tit de· l'anglais): Il est
encore un point qui reste obscur pour moi. Le
representant de la Pologne insiste-t-il encore,
comme il I'a fait plus tot dans la journee, pour
que nous votions, sur sa resolution? Comme je
l'ai explique alars, cette procedure ne serait pas
tout a fait conforme au reglement. Toutefois,
avec la permission du Conseil, je puis mettre ce
projet de resolution aux voix.

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): I have
M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'anthree points which I shall endeavour to state glais): I1 est trois points que je vais m'efforcerd'exposer tres brievement:
very brieflyo
In the first place, lest it should be thought
En premier lieu, de crainte que l'on ne voie
that my silence hitherto with regard to the dans le silence que j'ai observe jusqu'ici en ce
various amendments that have been presented qui concerne les divers amendements proposes au
to the United States draft resolution shows a projet de resolution des Etats-Unis une certaine
certain indifference on my part, I want to state indifference de ma part, je tiens a declarer nettequite clearly that I am very deeply interested ment que, j'y attache--tm interet profond ; le seul
in .them and that -the only reason I do not think motif qui me pousse a penser qu'il n'y a pas lieu
I should comment on them at this stage is that de formulerd~3 observations it .leur sujet pour
I do not wish to add anything that might lessen ' le moment, est que je tiens a ne rien ajouter
the chances of conciliation ar.d of arriving at qui puisse amoihdrir les chances de €onciliation
a result satisfactory to everybody, ourselves 'et restreindre. les possibilites d'aboutir it une
included.
conclusion satistaisante pOUf' tous, nous y compris.
.
Voici le deuxieme point. J e suis desole de ce
The second point is this. I am _very sorry
that the representative of the Philippines. has que le representa~t des Philippines ait quitte la
left, because he spoke of what he termed my seance, car il a parle de ce q~'il a qualifie
"defiant attitude" or our "defiant attitude". I "d'attitude de defi" de ma par~, ou de notre part.
am getting used to pretty strong language being J e .commence a prendre l'habitude de m'entendre
hurled at me, b1;lt I must raise a word of adresser des paroles assez peu lllesurees, mais
protest here. When one sees the reality of the il me faut ici eIever une protestation. Quand
situation, one· must realize how unjustified· such on considere la situation en face, on doit voir
language is. I may say that under great pto- a quel, point ce la.ngage est injustifie. Je puis
voc.ation we have acted as much as was pos- dire que, en depit de violentes provocations, noUS
sible in accordance with the letter and the spirit nous sommes conformes, dans toute la mesure
of the cease-fire order, as I think nobody. else du possible, it l'esprit et it la lettre de l'ordre de
.in such circumstances would ha.ve done. We cesser le feu, comme, je pense, pei-sonne d'autre
have helped the Consular Commission wherever ne l'aurait fait dans les memes conditions. Nous
we .could and we have been thanked for the avons prete notre concours a la Commission conhelp we have rendered. vVe are now preparing sulaire totites les fois que neus l'avons pu, et
to use the good offices of the Committee of· the l'on nous a remercies de l'aide que nous lui
Security Council-in order to reach a settlement, avons apportee. Nous nous preparons ma~ntenant
and I have already stated that we shall do it recourir aux bons offices de la Commission
whatever we possibly can to enable these labours du Conseil de securite afin d'arriver it un regIeto be fruitful for the common good.. These ment et j'ai deja signale que nous ferions tout
facts, I think, speak for thems~lves, and I do ce qui est en notre pouvoir pour permettre acesnot want. to hear words like "defiance".
efforts (le r'ot-ter leurs fruits dans l'interet de
tous. Cc.-;fa.its, nous semble-t-il, se justifient
d'eux-m:;'(,CS,:t It, ne veux pas entendre prononcer (kc' mut~,. tels que celui de "defi".
The third point is this. I have now been asked
Enfin, V{.lki l..~ troisiem~ point. On'vient deto state to the Council what we think about, me demander de faire connaitre au Conseil nOS
the Linggadjati Agreement, whether it is still vues sur l'Accord de Linggadjati; et si le Gou~
considered valid by the Netherlands Govern- vernement des Pays-Bas le considere comme enment. I have no objection to asking my Govern- core en vigueur. Je ne vois aucune objection a
ment. In fact, I have ;:tlready asked my. Govern- poser cette question a mon Gouvernement. E!1'
ment wh;:lt its position is, but I do not want fait, j'ai deja. - demande a celui-ci -queUe etal~

2719
to have here again the use of two weights and
two measures. I shall therefore suggest to my
Government that the giving of an answer shculd
be made dependent upon the Republic of Indonesia equal(y disclosing its hand on this important point; and I should be grateful if the
President would be so good as to ask the representative of the Republic of Indonesia whether
he is prepared to submit an identical question
to his Government.
The PRESIDENT: In regard to the first point
made by the representative of the Netherlands,
he would of course have an opportunity of
commenting on anything that may come out of
the Sub-Committee.
In regard to the second point, it is true that
we are unfortunately becoming accustomed to
language :md phrases here that were not heard
twenty or twenty-five years ago. I am ~frai~
that has become a tendency, and I WIsh it
could be checked. It may be thought that it is
the fault of the President for not checking it,
but is is sometim{'..s very difficult, when presiding
over an international gathering, to' interrupt and
to keep order. In particular, I think that I have
hardly ever seen a text that would not be improved by the removal of all adjectives that do
not add very much to the sense.
With regard to the third point of the representative of the Netherlands, I hope that the
representative of the Republic of Indonesia will
be good enough to do as was suggested and
obtain a statement from his Government similar
to that asked from the Netherlands Government.

sa position, mais je ne veux pas voir id 'employer a nouveau deux poids et deux mesures.
Aussi, suggererai-je a mon Gouvernemellt de
poser, comme condition a sa reponse, q'.1e la
Republique d'Indonesie abatte egalement son jeu
dans cette partie importante, et je serais reconnaissant au President de bien vouloir demander
au representant de la Republique d'Indonesie
s'il est dispose a transmettre a son Gouvernement une requete analogue.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): En ce
qui concerne le premier point souleve par le
representant des Pays-Bas, je dois dire qu'il
aura loisir de formuler ses observations sur toutes les conclusions que pourra soumettre le SousComite.
En ce qui concerne le deuxieme point, il est
exact,et je le deplore, que nous nous habituons
ici a un vocabulaire et a un langage que l'on
n'aurait pas entendus il y a vingt ou vingt-cinq
ans. Je crois que c'est la une tendance facheuse
et je souhaiterais qu'on puty mettre un frein.
On pourrait penser que c'est la tache du President et qu'il est fautif s'il manque a le faire,
mais il est parfois tres difficile, lorsqu'on preside une reunion internationale, d'interrompre
l'orateur et de le rappeler a 1'0rdre. En particulier, il me semble que je n'ai guere rencontre
de texte qui ne se trouverait ameliore par la
suppression de toutes les epithetes qui n'ajoutent pas beaucoup au sens.
En ce qui concerne le troisieme point souIeve
par le representant des Pays-Bas, j'espere que le
representant de la Republique d'Indonesie aura
l'amabilite d'agir comme on l'a suggere, c'esta-dire d'obtenir de son Gouvernement une declaration analogue a celle que le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas a ete invite a fouinir.

Mr. PALAR (Republic of Indonesia): I have
only one thing to say and that is this, that by
the Netherlands Government's abrogation of the
Linggadjati Agreement my Government is now
free to be bound or not to be bound by that
Agreement.

M. PALAR (Republique d'Indonesie) (traduit
de l'ang1ais): Je ne puis donner qu'une reponse:
du fait de la denonciation par le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas de l'Accord de Linggadjati,mon
Got1vernement est maintenant libre de juger s'il
est ou non lie par cet Accord.

The PRESIDENT: I thought it was not established that the Netherlands Government had
abrogated the Agreement, and that the point
of the request made to the representative of the
Netherlands, who has undertaken to put that
request to his Government, was to ascertain
whether the Netherlands Government had or
had not abrogated the Agreement. Could not the
representative of the ReJ:>1 tblic of Indonesia ask
his Government whether it still adhered to the
Agreement, on the understanding, of course,
that the other party adhered to it also?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais) : Je pensais qu'il n'etait pas prouve que le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas avait denonce cet Accord, et que
l'objet de !'invitation adressee au representant
des Pays-Bas, qui s'est engage a transmettre
cette invitation a son Gouvernement, etait de
savoir si oui ou non le Gouvernement des PaysBas avait denonce ledit Accord. Le representant
de la Republique d'Indonesie ne pourrait-il pas
demander a son Gouvernement si celui-ci s'en
tient toujours aux dispositions de l'Accord, dans
l'hypothese evidemment ou l'autre partie observerait toujours, de son cote, ces memes dispositions?
.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): In that ase, I
should suggest that the enquiry of the representative of the Netherlands should also cover
the question as to whether the Netherlands
Government had abrogated the Agreement or
~ot, b:cause if I understood the previous queshon, It was whether the Netherlands Government is bound by the Agreement or not. If it is
bound by the abrogated Agreement, that Agreement does not have much force.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (iraduit de l'anglais): Dans ce cas, je me permets de suggerer
que le representant des Pays-Bas s'inquiete aussi
de savoir si le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a ou
non denance cet Accord, car, si j'ai bien compris
la question precedente. il s'agissait de savoir si
le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas etait toujours lie
par l'Accord. S'il est lie par un accorJ. qui a
ete denonce, cet accord n'a pasune tres grande
force d'obligation.

The PRESIDENT: I do not know what the
representative of the Netherlands thinks about

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Te ne
connais pas l'opinion du representant des 'Pays-

2720'
that· question; but of course one could not be
bound by an agreement which one had abrogated.
I do not know in what way the representative
of Netherlands has put the question to his
Government.

Bas en ce qui concerne cette question, mais evidemment, si l'on a denonce un accord, on ne
peut se considere lie par luL Je ne sais pas com-,
ment le representant des Pays-Bas a pose la
question a son ·Gouvernement.

Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands): I asked
the question in what I hope was in intelligent
way. In. that sense then, the answer will, I trust,
disclose whether my Government does or does
not consider itself still bound by the Linggadja.ti
Agreement. I have no more to say 1:l'lan that.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'an"
glais) : J'ai pose la question sous une forme que
j'espere intelligente. En ce sens, la reponse, je
crois, indiquera ~sir mon Gouvernement se considere ou non encore lie par l'Accord de Linggadjati. Je n'ai rien a ajouter a ceci.

Mr.PALAR (Republic of Indonesia): I think
that the q\lestion is this : has the Netherland::;
Government abrogated the Linggadjati Agreement or has it not?

M. PALAR (Republique d'Indonesie) (traduit.
de l'anglais): J e pense que la question est la
suivante: le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a-toil
ou non denonce l'Accord de Linggadjati?

The PRESIDENT: I cannot see any great difference'myself. If the Netherlands Government
consider' itself bound by the Agreement, presumably it has not abrogated the Agreement.
I think we must wait to see what the reply of
the Netherlands Government is. Meanwhile, I
hope that the representative of the Republic of
Indonesia will try to get some parallel declaration· fmm his· Government.

Le PRESIDENT (trad1.tit de l'anglais): J ene
vois pas grande difference moi-meme entre les
deux questions. Si le GO~1Vernement des Pays-Bas
se considere lie par l'Accord, il est a presumer·
qu'il ne l'a pas denonce. Je crois que nous devons
attendre la reponse du Gouvernement des PaysBas. Entre temps, j'espere que le representant
de la Republique d'Indonesie s'efforcera d'obtenil' de son Gouvernement une declaration paralWe.
J e pense que nous ne pouvons pas faire plus
a cet egard ce soil'. Je suggere que le Conseil
se reunisse de nouveau id demain a 11 heures.
Le Sous-Comite a l'intention de se reunir plus
tot. J'espere qu'il aura fini ses travaux en temps.
utile pour en faire rapport au Conseil a 11 heures.
Soit dit en passant, cette procedure est tout
a fait anormale, etant donne que j'ai oublie de
demander au prochain President du Conseil de
securite s'il est d'accord pour cette prochaine
seance.

I think· there is nothing more we can do on
this subject tonight. I suggest that the Council
shon!d. meet here again tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The intention of the Sub-Committee is to meet
earlier than that. I hope that the Sub-Committee will have finished its labours in time
to' report· to this Council at 11 a.m.
Incidentally, this procedure is entirely out of
order; since I forgot to ask the next President
of, the Security Council whether he agreed to
this next meeting or not.

Mt. AUSTIN (United States of America) : Yes,
I agree.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): Entieremelit.

The PRESIDENT: As there is no objection, the . Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Puisque
Council will 'meet again tomorrow, 1 November, personnen'y voit d'objection, le Conseil se
at 11 a.m.
reunira a nouveau demain ler novembre a 11
lleures.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 h. 40.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
,~

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONSUNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AmEs_
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY. N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Persil
BRuxELLES
BOllVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientffica y Literarla
Avenida 16 de JuIio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA--CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Lihreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA.
COSTA RICA-COSTAmRICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA
. CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F.. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DENMARK--DAN~R~

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13. rue Soufflot

PARIS. Ve

GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA.
HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A laCaravelle"
BOlte postale 11l·B
PORT-AU·PRINCE
ICELAND-!SLANDE
BokaveX'zlun Sigfusar Eymundwnnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK
INDIA-INDE
Oxford 'Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
-TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The< Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LIBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMr.OURG

Einar Munksguard
N9lrregade 6
Kj2lBENHAVN
DOMINiCAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR--EQUATEUR
Iviuiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

NETHERLAND5-PAYS·BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE

EGYPT~GYP'!'E

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Puhlicaciones
MANAGUA. D. N.

Librairie "La Renaissance d'E~ypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO
.ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de puhlicite
P.O.Box8
ADDIS·.AnEBA
.Printed in Canada

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NORWAY:-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt '.l'anum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Prke in the United States: 50 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacional del Peru,/
.S.A.
.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILIPPINES
D. P. Pe.'rez Co.
--132 Riverside
SAN JUAN. RIZAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.·B. C. E. FritZes Kungl.
Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE. GENEvE, VEVJ::Y.
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE. BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZID 'CH I
SYRIA~SYRIS
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

TlJllKEY.-:r'URQUIE
Lihrairie Hachette
469. Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU'!sTANBUL
UN1PN. OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION· SUD·AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts. .
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETO'WN
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H.l\f. Statione!'Y Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON. S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHEST
CARDIFF, BELFAST. BmMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press·
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27. N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. I
MONTEVIDEO
VE~~EZUELA

Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE .
Drzavno Preduzece
'
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
t4
April 1949
