S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7096th meeting

Monday, 20 January 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Estreme
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cho Tae-yul
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nibishaka
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-21027 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1421027*

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to start by congratulating Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I would
also like to commend the Permanent Mission of France
for its excellent stewardship of the Council in December.
(spoke in English)
Last July, when we spoke before this Council,
we commended the efforts of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry towards the resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in the hope that they
would lead to a just and lasting peace, which in our
view can be based only on the principles and rules of
international law, the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative. However, we also said — and I
apologize for quoting from our own statement:
“Still, let us state it loud and clear: the
main danger facing such negotiations is the
continuation of provocative Israeli actions capable
of undermining them. To protect the negotiations,
those actions ought to be completely stopped.
Obviously, there is no better example of such
actions than the unabated construction in the past
months of Israeli settlements at an unprecedented
rate, let alone the approval of new settlement units.”
(S/PV.7007, p. 31)
In October, we sounded the alarm anew, drawing the
attention of the Council once more to the dangers of the
unrelenting Israeli settlement activities to the prospects
for the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, and we called
on the Council to condemn them in the strongest terms
(see S/PV.7047). While the Council remained silent,
the roar of the Israeli bulldozers destroying Palestinian

2/39

20/01/2014

homes in Jerusalem and uprooting olive trees in the
West Bank to pave the way for yet more settlements
could be clearly heard. As has already been mentioned,
the Israeli authorities announced earlier this month
their intention to build 1,400 new housing units in the
occupied territories.
We are sure that you, Mr. President, realize that we
are at a historic crossroads. To say the least, the future of
the negotiations has undoubtedly been put in jeopardy
by the unabated settlement activity. The silence of the
Council does not serve the cause of peace. To save the
prospects for peace in our part of the world, the Council
ought to make itself heard. For the sake of peace, we
urge it to act without delay.
Let me turn now to another challenge facing the
Council. Last week, on 15 January, at the second
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, hosted by the Government of Kuwait, the figures
spoke for themselves with regard to the magnitude
of the Syrian tragedy — over 120,000 people killed,
including about 11,000 children; 9.6 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance; 6.5 million internally
displaced; and 2.2 million refugees in neighbouring
countries. It is a humanitarian catastrophe that is
unprecedented in recent history. Lebanon welcomes the
generous pledges made during the Conference and will
continue to work closely with the donor community to
alleviate the suffering of the refugees and their host
communities.
As the conflict unfolds in Syria, the flow of
refugees into Lebanon continues unabated at an
average rate of 3,000 a day. Months ago, the number
of refugees exceeded 1 million, which is almost a
quarter of the population of my country. Clearly, that
has begun to have an existential dimension in Lebanon,
which is the smallest of the host countries but has the
highest number of refugees, whether in relation to the
population of those countries or in absolute terms.
The suffering of the Syrians in Syria must end, and
the flow of Syrian refugees must stop. It is high time that
the international community assume its humanitarian
responsibilities and act with one voice so as to ensure
humanitarian corridors for the delivery of aid to Syria
and establish camps within Syria and on its borders.
That could allow for the dignified and gradual return
of Syrian refugees from the host countries to their own
nation. To all those who may believe that approach to
be unrealistic, allow me to say the following. Aware of
its humanitarian responsibilities and legal obligations,
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lebanon has kept its borders open to all those fleeing
the horrors of violence and destruction in Syria and
will continue to do so. It is unrealistic here not to
acknowledge that Lebanon can no longer cope alone
with the pressures and burdens resulting from that
situation.
Moreover, since the Council succeeded in
unanimously adopting resolution 2118 (2013) on
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, is it
unrealistic to hope that it could still show a similar
commitment in addressing the humanitarian situation
there? More importantly, on the eve of the date set for
the second Geneva Conference on Syria, is it unrealistic
to also hope that that same international leadership
will be renewed to ensure the full implementation
of the June 2012 Geneva communiqué and its action
plan (S/2012/522, annex) in order to help fulfil the
aspirations of the Syrian people and put an end to their
ongoing ordeal?
Despite all the challenges facing my country,
Lebanon remains committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) and stresses the need for
the Council to act swiftly so as to put an immediate
end to the systematic Israeli violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty by land, air and sea. My delegation has
kept the Council informed of those violations and has
requested that its letters to that effect be circulated as
official documents of the United Nations.
The most recent of those letters was dated 9 January,
when we submitted a complaint against Israel for
launching electronic warfare on Lebanon. We informed
the President of the Council that Israel had increased the
number of sites, towers, antennas and other monitoring,
espionage and surveillance devices installed along the
Lebanese border. We called on the Council to assume
its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace and
security by condemning such blatant violations of
international law and by taking the necessary measures
to put an end to them.
Recently, my country was also the victim of several
terrorist attacks, from the targeting of the Iranian
Embassy to the assassination of former Minister
Mohamad Chatah, the car bomb in the southern suburbs
of Beirut and the attack in Hermel. Time and again, the
Council condemned those attacks and stressed the need
to bring the perpetrators to justice. Lebanon expresses
its deep appreciation for the Council’s continued
support for its stability and security.

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

Furthermore, last week, the Council welcomed
the beginning of the trial proceedings of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon and stressed the vital importance
of combating impunity so as to strengthen the longterm stability and security in Lebanon. In turn, the
President of the Republic of Lebanon, General Michel
Sleiman, clearly stated that the start of the trials was
a sure step towards uncovering the truth behind the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and would ensure that the perpetrators did not think
that they could evade justice.
Finally, the launching of the International Support
Group for Lebanon in September was based on the
consensus expressed in the presidential statement
adopted in July by the Council (S/PRST/2013/9), which
stressed “the need for strong, coordinated international
support for Lebanon to help it continue to withstand
the multiple current challenges to its security and
stability”. In that respect, the Group also underlined the
importance of Lebanon’s policy of disassociation and
the Baabda Declaration of 12 June 2012.
Today, more than ever, such support is needed to
help shield Lebanon from the spillover of the Syrian
crisis and from my country being turned anew into a
battlefield of regional rivalries and proxy wars.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the Kingdom of Jordan on its
accession to the Security Council and on its assumption
of the presidency in the first month of its tenure. I would
also like to congratulate Chad, Nigeria, Lithuania and
Chile on their joining the Council. I would like to thank
His Excellency the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning and to reiterate Egypt’s support for the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The Palestinian question remains unresolved,
despite the many efforts by the international community,
including the Security Council, since the establishment
of the Organization, with serious repercussions for the
Palestinians and all countries of the region, as well as
international peace and security. That is most clearly
reflected in the recent atrocities at the Yarmouk refugee
camp in Syria, where Palestinian refugees are dying
of starvation in the second decade of the twenty-first
century. That also applies to Gaza, where the population

14-210273/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

still suffers from an illegal blockade. It also applies to
Israel, which continues to feel threatened despite its
sophisticated arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
and its superiority in traditional weapons and their
means of delivery.
The past quarter has seen a number of important
developments that reflect how critical the situation in
Palestine has become.
The first development is the relentless commitment
of the United States to help both sides to reach agreement,
including consecutive high-level visits by the Secretary
of State to the region to secure that goal. We strongly
support those efforts and look forward the achievement
of a just solution that guarantees the establishment of a
fully independent and sovereign Palestinian State on all
the territories occupied in 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living in peace and security side by side with
the State of Israel.
Secondly, statements were issued by senior Israeli
officials that questioned the two-State solution and
the availability of a real partner for peace. The same
officials raised new and controversial issues that could
complicate the prospects for reaching an agreement.
The Prime Minister informed his party’s Cabinet
members that he would not accept any reference to
Jerusalem in the framework agreement, and insisted on
the acknowledgement of Israel as a Jewish State and
on keeping additional illegal settlement blocks under
Israeli sovereignty. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
proposed a plan to exchange and transfer populations,
in addition to the exchange of land. The Minister of
Defence criticized the security plan proposed by the
United States, and insisted on keeping Israeli troops
in the Jordan Valley for security reasons. The former
chief of the Mossad recently reaffirmed that the Jordan
Valley was not essential to Israel’s security.
Thirdly, the third batch of Palestinian prisoners
have been released. That is a welcome development.
However, it was followed by a call for bids to construct
thousands of new units in settlements in occupied
East Jerusalem and the West Bank. France, the United
Kingdom, Spain and Italy conveyed to the Israeli
Ambassadors in their respective capitals messages that
such steps did not help the peace process. The Israeli
Government ignored those messages and summoned
its Ambassadors from those countries in protest to
the messages, which were aimed at implementing
international law and Council resolutions. Egypt looks
forward to action by the Security Council aimed at
4/39

20/01/2014

halting all subversive attempts to undermine the peace
process, and to further measures by the European
Union. We welcome the suspension of the Dutch water
company’s cooperation with its Israeli counterpart
because of Israel’s illegal settlement activity, and its
suspension of further investments in Israeli banks that
finance settlements.
Fourthly, Palestinians remain subject to attacks
by settlers and Israeli security forces in the occupied
territories. Israel’s continued retaliatory air raids and
shelling of Gaza have resulted in a number of injuries
and casualties. A number of short-range missiles
were fired into Israel as well. However, there were no
reported injuries or casualties.
Pressure was also exerted on the Palestinians to
give up their rights, which have been recognized under
international law and endorsed by both the General
Assembly and the Security Council, in exchange for
promises to slow down Israel’s abuse of those rights.
The events of the past three months prove that
the security of Palestine cannot be achieved without
guaranteeing the security of Israel, and vice versa.
Security is indivisible and can be achieved only through
a peace that respects the right of others to exist and
provides a fair opportunity to live a normal life. We
hope that all efforts will lead to the establishment of
a peace based on mutual interests, not on a balance of
power.
I now turn to the situation in Syria, which has
become extremely urgent. Egypt reaffirms the need
to reach a political solution through dialogue. Egypt
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in coordination with Russia and the United
States, to convene the second Geneva Conference on
Syria. We also commend the brave decision of the
opposition to participate in the Conference. We urge
opposition members not to change their minds.
We call upon both the Government and the
opposition to participate seriously in developing the
necessary arrangements for a transitional period that
secures the territorial integrity and social cohesion of
Syria, in accordance with the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex), which was endorsed by the
Security Council. We also reaffirm that the events in
Syria should not divert the attention of the Security
Council from implementing its resolutions on the

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

illegality of the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan,
and on the withdrawal of Israel from the Golan and
other Arab-occupied territories.
Before concluding, I would like to commend the
efforts of Ms. Angela Kane, Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special Coordinator of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Mission on eliminating Syria’s
chemical weapons programme. The Council has only
partially implemented resolution 687 (1991) on Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction. It has not followed up on
the implementation of paragraph 14, which noted that
such actions would represent steps towards the goal
of establishing in the Middle East a zone freee from
weapons of mass destruction.
Chemical weapons were used in Syria last August.
Should we wait for another tragedy to occur before
the international community seriously and impartially
deals with the real sources of danger in the Middle
East? Egypt has reiterated its commitment to ridding
the Middle East of all weapons of mass destruction, and
launched an initiative in that regard on 28 September.
We call on all States of the region and the five permanent
members of the Security Council to respond positively
to our initiative. We also call on the Secretary-General
and the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to redouble their efforts to convene
the long-awaited conference on declaring the Middle
East a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction, so as to ensure that the region is
free from all sources of danger for future generations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend to you,
Mr. President, our congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council this month and to
wish the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan every success.
I am also pleased to congratulate the Jordan on its
membership of the Council, as well as the other new
members. I wish to emphasize our absolute support
for you and our preparedness to extend all possible
support to bring about the success of your mission. I
also thank you for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, and wish to express my
delegation’s support for the statements to be made on
behalf of the League of Arab States, the Organization of

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

Islamic Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
I would first like to welcome the designation of
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. It expresses the solidarity of the
human conscience and international will with the
Palestinians’ rights to equity and justice. The Palestinian
people have been deprived of those rights for more than
six decades. Israel continues to dash the remaining
hopes towards achieving a just and comprehensive
peace that would end the occupation and give rise to
the birth of an independent State of Palestine within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital.
Peace-loving peoples still cherish the hope that
solidarity with the Palestinian people will translate into
a tangible reality, to be experienced by the Palestinians
in security, freedom and peace, thereby fulfilling the
resolutions of the Security Council. Unfortunately, they
are still trampled upon by the Israeli occupation forces
with no fear of any deterrence or punishment.
As we move into 2014, is it possible that we forget
the hopes attached to the advent of last year, 2013, and
the efforts deployed to revive negotiations to achieve
a just and final resolution to the Palestinian question.
Despite the impetus, endeavours and anticipation,
Israel continues to flout the will of the international
community, defying all international resolutions,
including those adopted by the Council. We are
now witnessing the expansion of the settlements, in
contravention of international law. There is also the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the continuing
collective punishment of the Palestinian people and the
blockade against Gaza.
While the forces of the occupying Power have
released some Palestinian prisoners, they have at the
same time continued to detain hundreds of others,
including some aged between 15 and 18 years. That is
in addition to the recurrent attacks by settlers against
the Palestinians. At the same time, in some cases the
victims are being urged to absolve the culprits of
responsibility.
The coercive policies of the occupying Power have
deprived the Palestinian people of their basic right
to live in peace, dignity and freedom and exercise
their right to self-determination. Any attempt to
hold the Palestinians responsible for the increased

14-210275/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

tensions — by resorting to the flimsy pretexts for the
continuing blockade policy or for the preparations
for further attacks — is completely unacceptable. No
one should be deceived by such distortions of reality.
The occupation is the crux of the matter. Ending the
occupation will allow peace, justice and stability to
prevail. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Custodian of
the Two Holy Mosques, strongly deplores the recurrent
attacks and provocative actions in Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound.
We condemn all attempts to alter the historic and
religious identity of the holy sites and call for the
immediate cessation of any attempt to demographically
alter East Jerusalem, including the campaign to
destroy Palestinian homes, strip Palestinians of
citizenship and evict them by forceful measures that
violate international humanitarian law. We deplore the
declaration to build 1,400 more residential units east of
occupied Jerusalem and in other occupied Palestinian
territories, including the construction of settlements
in southern Al-Quds, which cut off historic lines of
continuity between Jerusalem and Bethlehem.
Will 2014 witness the long-awaited moment of
truth, namely, the two-State solution? I recall the
statement made by the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, that the
continuation of settlement activities does not conform
with the two-State solution, as well as the statement
made by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, that the situation has
become very complex in the light of Israel’s continuing
settlement activities. He emphasized that the United
Nations cannot reconcile settlement expansion with
achieving the two-State solution.
Achieving the two-State solution may be impossible.
We have only to recall and heed the statements made
by the Prime Minister of Israel in December 2013, that
Israel would not stop, not even for one moment, its
ongoing settlement project.
Saudi Arabia emphasizes the statement made on
behalf of the League of Arab States and its resolution
7719 of 21 December 2013, underscoring the importance
of abiding by the Arab Peace Initiative and of holding
the Israeli Government responsible for hampering the
progress towards peace. The resolution also called on
the United States, as the sponsor of the current peace
negotiations, and the other permanent members of the
Security Council to compel the Israeli Government to

6/39

20/01/2014

halt settlement activities and to fully lift the blockade
against Gaza. We also emphasize that final status issues,
including Jerusalem, the borders, refugees, security
and water, must comply with relevant United Nations
resolutions and not violate any rights guaranteed by
international law.
Incomplete sovereignty over any part of the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the Jordan
Valley region, is unacceptable. We call for an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan,
the Sheba’a farms area and the remaining occupied
Lebanese territory. An agreement that is not based on
justice and equality will lead to a vicious cycle of failed
negotiations.
We have carefully listened to the statements noting
that the decisions required by the peace process demand
courage on the part of decision-makers. That does
not apply selectively to one party, but not to another.
It also applies to the peace process sponsor. The
international community must not allow the Council’s
resolutions to be undermined by efforts to apply the
law of force, which leads to flimsy results dictated by
internal affairs and narrow-minded interests. We call
for courageous leadership that demands the recognition
of rights, without circumventing international law or
legitimacy. In that context, justice and equity will lead
to the achievement of peace.
The current situation of sisterly Syria represents
the greatest humanitarian tragedy of the century.
The Syrian authorities are subjecting their people to
genocide, using all types of weapons, both conventional
and non-conventional, including chemical weapons,
indiscriminate bombings, Scud missiles and barrel
bombs. The regime is antagonizing its people and
cannot protect them. The international community
must accelerate efforts to protect the Syrian people.
Eyewitnesses from Syria have visited the United
Nations and the Council to provide testimony about
acts of terrorism to which they had been subjected.
It is a war of starvation and subjugation that seeks to
humiliate, while fanning the fuel of sedition and sowing
malcontent. They described the situations of those who
are starving in Damascus, Al-Hasakah, Madamiya and
Yarmouk, which contain more than 20,000 Palestinian
refugees. We are wondering, as are the refugees, how
it is possible for the Council to remain unable to adopt
even one statement deploring the gravest violations of
international humanitarian law.

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We emphasize the need for foreign combatants to
leave the Syrian territory. The spread of foreign armed
groups is of grave concern. My delegation emphasizes
the fact that States that have influence on the Syrian
regime must focus such pressure on it, in order to halt
the massacres and pogroms it has been perpetrating for
the past three years.
My delegation appreciates the strenuous
efforts undertaken by the United Nations organs to
unconditionally deliver humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian people. The Security Council must hasten to
adopt a decisive resolution on delivering humanitarian
assistance to all parties in need, wherever they may be,
and to impose deterrent sanctions on those who impede
such actions.
We are about to convene the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, based on the hope that the
Secretary-General’s call to convene the meeting will
continue, based on the framework of the first Geneva
Conference, to form a transitional Government with
broad competencies covering the State facilities,
including intelligence, security and political affairs
sectors, and to realize the aspirations of the Syrian
people and its ambitions for freedom and dignity, in a
manner preserving the territorial integrity, safety and
rights of the Syrians, with respect for their various
factions, creeds and categories.
No one should forget the main goal of the second
Geneva Conference on Syria. All those invited must
agree to the requisites of the invitation and officially
declare their acceptance, first and foremost to the
establishment of a transitional Government. We
therefore believe that inviting Iran is out of the question,
in particular as it has military soldiers hidden by the
regime. Its participation is thus invalid at this juncture.
The international community must not waste this
opportunity saving face, and the States sponsoring the
Conference and the United Nations must respond to the
appeal to rescue the sisterly Syrian people. Those with
the blood of the Syrian people on their hands must not
participate in shaping their future. Furthermore, they
must not be granted impunity for their crimes against
humanity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing the first open debate of the year. I

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive briefing.
This debate is taking place just two days prior to
the beginning of the second Geneva Conference on
Syria in Montreux. The holding of the Conference and
the political push that it will certainly generate are a
welcome and necessary development. Brazil is ready
to contribute to a positive outcome to the Conference,
which should mark the opening of a dialogue between
the Syrian Government and opposition groups to end the
violence and to ensure that peace is fully re-established.
Brazil has consistently advocated for a peaceful
solution to the current conflict and supported the
launching of a Syrian-led political process that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people while
preserving the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria. The presence of a vibrant
community of Syrian origin in Brazil only increases
our interest in contributing to peace in that sister nation.
We remain convinced that an agreed transition
that halts the violence in Syria is still possible. At the
same time, it is also true that, had the principles and
guidelines agreed upon in the Geneva communiqué
of June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex)been put into effect
earlier, the urgent task of restoring peace to a war-torn
country and neighbouring areas would have been less
formidable today. In Montreux, we look forward to the
beginning of a process that will lead to the formation
of a transitional governing body with full executive
powers, established by mutual consent.
We underscore that the parties must create a positive
atmosphere for negotiations and, having embraced the
path of dialogue, reject once and for all the illusion of
military victory. The Syrian Government, which has
the primary responsibility in that regard, must cease
all armed violence, release arbitrarily detained persons,
including the more vulnerable, in particular women and
children, and allow full humanitarian access to people
in need. The Syrian armed opposition must shoulder its
responsibilities and reciprocate and bear in mind that
humanitarian obligations apply to all armed parties.
There will be many obstacles, but the process must
be sustained. All the relevant stakeholders should be
allowed to participate, without exclusions. All must
refrain from aiding and abetting extremist groups and
those who wish the process to fail. The influx of weapons
to all parties in Syria should cease immediately.

14-210277/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Brazil continues to be extremely concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria and in neighbouring
countries, such as Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt, which have been receiving hundreds of thousands
of refugees throughout the conflict. In order to mitigate
that precarious and tragic humanitarian situation, Brazil
has made important financial contributions, including
during the second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria, held last week in Kuwait with great
success. We have constantly urged all parties in Syria
to allow full and unhindered access by humanitarian
staff and assistance to the civilian population. At the
same time, in line with the reports of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, we reiterate our grave concern about
the negative impact that unilateral sanctions are having
on the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Brazil is deeply concerned about the increase of
instability in Lebanon. There has been a series of violent
acts by armed groups across Lebanon, especially in
Tripoli, and terrorist bombings that caused death and
injury among the population, including murdering
a Brazilian citizen in Beirut. We join the Security
Council in condemning those heinous crimes. The
international community must keep up its support for
Lebanon’s State institutions, including the army, and
for the fight against terrorism.
We welcome the opening, on 16 January, of the trial
at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, nearly nine years
after the attack that killed former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri and 21 others.
As the homeland of millions of Lebanese
descendants and with a Brazilian community living
in Lebanon, Brazil reiterates its readiness to help
Lebanon face current challenges. Brazil fully supports
the important work carried out by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, which has been a key
player in the promotion of stability in Lebanon and
instrumental for security along the border between
Lebanon and Israel.
The current instability in Iraq and the increasing
number of civilian victims reinforce our perception that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved through unilateral
actions without Security Council authorization.
Brazil has welcomed the resumption of direct final
status negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians,
in the hope that the talks will lead to the realization
of a two-State solution based on the 1967 borders. We

8/39

20/01/2014

commend the efforts undertaken by the international
community, especially by United States Secretary of
State John Kerry, and encourage him to continue to
pursue a comprehensive peace agreement.
We regret, however, that after encouraging news
regarding the release of Palestinian prisoners, the
Israeli Government has announced plans for the further
construction of settlement units in the Palestinian
occupied territory. Those settlements are illegal and
undermine the peaceful solution of the conflict. The
logic of following confidence-building measures
with confidence-sapping actions is detrimental to the
process.
At the same time, Brazil strongly condemns the
renewed rocket launches from Gaza into Israel, which
are contrary to the cause of peace and only trigger more
radicalization.
Brazil once again calls for the Security Council to
fully carry out its responsibilities and provide support
for the peace process. We also continue to expect that the
Quartet will play a proactive role and report regularly
to the Security Council. In that regard, a support group
to the Quartet with wider geographical representation
might provide badly required impetus to its activities.
We also underscore the importance of the
participation of Israeli and Palestinian civil society in
the creation of conditions for the success of the peace
process. Brazil remains ready to support and engage in
their initiatives towards reconciliation and sustainable
peace. Brazil welcomes and fully supports the launch of
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.
Finally, we are encouraged by the signing of the joint
plan of action on Iran’s nuclear programme by the five
permanent members of the Security Council and Iran.
We commend the goodwill demonstrated by Tehran
in the negotiations, under the leadership of President
Hassan Rouhani. We hope that the positive dialogue
between the parties will lead to a comprehensive
solution, the lifting of sanctions and an encompassing
agreement as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also commend your initiative in choosing

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the theme of today’s debate, namely, “The situation in
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, which
is so important given our support for the cause. We
hope for success for the current efforts as we begin the
new year.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on recent developments in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, in
which he highlighted the principled positions that he
has consistently put forward regarding the conflict.
Our debate today coincides with the declaration
adopted two days ago in Marrakesh during the twentieth
session of the Al-Quds Committee, presided over by
the King of Morocco, Mohammed VI, and with the
participation of the President of Palestine, Mahmoud
Abbas. It was an opportunity to highlight the efforts
being made by His Majesty, as President of the Al-Quds
Committee, and to express respect for the identity
and symbolic value of Al-Quds, as well as to address
all practices that are detrimental to it, including the
building of settlements in that city where all inhabitants
coexist. While explaining the objectives of the meeting,
His Majesty stated that he wished to send a message
to the entire world showing that “we are a nation that
supports peace and a coalition between civilizations
and cultures”.
The declaration adopted at the session also
reaffirms the key importance of the cause of Jerusalem
for the Islamic nation, given that Jerusalem lies at the
heart of a political solution and that any attempt against
the Al-Aqsa mosque would lead only to an escalation
of violence and increase the level of despair and could
have harmful consequences for the region, which would
undermine any possibility for peace.
Secondly, the Security Council was invited to
remain abreast of the situation of tension in Jerusalem,
given its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
Thirdly, the Committee reiterated that the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East was the goal towards which all States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Group are working, consistent with international law
and on the basis of the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the road map, with a view
to enabling the people of Palestine to establish their

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

own independent, fully sovereign and geographically
unified State, with Jerusalem as its capital.
Fourthly, the Committee stated that the negotiations
held between Palestine and Israel since July 2013
represented an important step towards achieving peace
in a manner consistent with resolutions of international
legitimacy and the terms of reference of the peace
process. The Committee reiterated the importance of
addressing any action that is contrary to the objective
of peace and that could strengthen the occupation.
Great hopes have been invested in the negotiations
that are being conducted with great determination
by Secretary of State Kerry to carry the process
forward and bring the people of the region closer to
a comprehensive and just peace, in keeping with the
desire of the international community as expressed in
the context of the Organization since 1948.
However, the possibilities of success for the
negotiations will remain slim as long Israel does not
respect the need to end the occupation, allow the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and abandon the
settlement policy, which we have repeatedly denounced,
as it is contrary to the principles underpinning the
negotiations.
Despite the experiences of the Palestinian people
since 1948, including with policies of displacement and
confiscation, they have always worked to pursue their
inalienable rights. Their leader, President Mahmoud
Abbas, has given tangible and consistent proof of their
commitment to dialogue and negotiation as means of
achieving peace.
Israel must shoulder its responsibilities and work
in a positive and serious manner with the American
mediation so that negotiations can be successful, in
keeping with the resolutions adopted on the basis of
the current situation, because any further failures
could lead to greater extremism, violence and reprisals,
which the peoples of the region cannot deal with given
the current crises.
The tragic situation in Syria is deteriorating on
all fronts and is now reaching the end of its third year,
with all that implies in terms of victims and destruction
across the entire spectrum of Syrian society. This has
also affected neighbouring States, which have shown
unprecedented solidarity. To express our own solidarity
with the brotherly Syrian people and to alleviate the

14-210279/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

burden on neighbouring countries, the Kingdom of
Morocco has established a hospital in the Zaatari camp
in sisterly Jordan.
In two days, the second Geneva Conference on
Syria will be a true test of the possibility of laying the
foundation for political dialogue in a manner consistent
with the aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people,
in the context of a democracy that includes all of the
Syrian people and that guarantees the sovereignty and
unity of sisterly Syria.
The Kingdom of Morocco stands ready to
contribute, along with the Security Council and the
international community, to launching a dynamic that
will put an end to the bloodshed and revive hopes for a
political solution so as to ensure stability.
Turning to Lebanon, the Kingdom of Morocco
welcomes the policy pursued by that country. My
country reiterates its support for the independence and
unity of Lebanon, thereby reaffirming our belief in the
ability of the Lebanese people to rise above through
the difficult circumstances that they are experiencing
today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): As I take the floor in the
Security Council for the first time this year, I would
like to say how glad I am to see your Royal Highness
presiding over the Council during the month of January,
only one month after your country’s election. I wish
every success to Jordan and to the other newly elected
Security Council members — Chad, Chile, Nigeria and
Lithuania. I am also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing.
Today I will touch upon two issues: first, the Middle
East peace process, and secondly, the situation in Syria.
First, I wish to express my heartfelt condolences to
the Government and the people of Israel over the sad
passing of Mr. Ariel Sharon, former Prime Minister of
Israel.
The direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine
are now entering a crucial phase. We have fewer than
four months left for a deal to be made. This nine-month
time frame for the negotiations had been agreed upon
by both parties last year.
We would once again like to call upon both parties
not to take unilateral actions that might negatively affect

10/39

20/01/2014

the peace process, but rather to continue negotiations.
In that context, we deeply deplore the decision made
by the Israeli Ministry of Housing and Construction
on 10 January to publish tenders to build new housing
units in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We believe that helping Palestinians create viable
economic foundations will contribute to advancing
the political process. Given the current phase of
negotiations, it becomes all the more important
for the international community to work towards
the coexistence and prosperity of Palestinians and
their neighbours. From that standpoint, Japan will
continue with its own initiatives aimed at mobilizing
private-sector investment in Palestine. As I said in
this Chamber last October (see S/PV.7047), Japan is
promoting two projects — the Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity and the Conference on Cooperation among
East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development
(CEAPAD). Today, let me focus on the CEAPAD.
CEAPAD was launched in Tokyo in February 2013,
where Japan and Palestine co-hosted the Conference.
In addition to the two hosts, seven countries from
Asia — Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia,
Viet Nam, Brunei Darussalam and the Republic of
Korea — as well as five international organizations,
including the United Nations, participated. It is a
process aimed at mobilizing and sharing East Asian
economic development experiences and resources for
the sake of Palestinian development.
As a follow-up, Japan hosted a private sector
promotion meeting in Tokyo last December.
Participants explored ways to strengthen the
Palestinian private sector and to enhance their business
relations with Palestine. The outcome of the meeting
will be submitted to the second ministerial meeting of
CEAPAD, scheduled to be held in Indonesia in March.
We are grateful to Indonesia for hosting the Conference
and we hope that it will result in tangible outcomes. For
its part, at the meeting in Indonesia, Japan is planning
to announce additional and substantial assistance for
Palestine.
Turning to the situation in Syria, the successful
conduct of the upcoming second Geneva Conference
on Syria is of the utmost importance in moving the
political process forward. Foreign Minister Kishida
will represent Japan at the Conference. Japan strongly
urges both the Syrian Government and the opposition
parties to engage seriously and constructively in direct
negotiations, with a view to putting an end to all forms
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of violence and establishing a transitional governing
body in accordance with the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
The political process needs to be sustained by
international efforts designed to step up humanitarian
assistance on the ground. We would like to express our
appreciation to the Government of Kuwait for hosting
the pledging conference for Syria on 15 January and
for making a very generous pledge on that occasion.
At that conference, Japan’s representative announced
our country’s additional humanitarian assistance in the
amount of $120 million. Our humanitarian assistance,
including support for neighbouring countries, since the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, now totals $275 million.
However, humanitarian aid remains meaningless
if it is not delivered to those in need. Japan therefore
demands that all parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, take the necessary steps to ensure
immediate, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
all areas affected by the conflict.
In addition, I would like to reiterate Japan’s
commitment to providing the greatest possible
cooperation towards the disposal of Syria’s chemical
weapons. In that context, my Government has
decided to contribute a total of $18 million to the trust
funds established under the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
today. We congratulate Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania
and Nigeria for assuming membership of the Security
Counci. We especially thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jordan, His Excellency Mr. Nasser Judeh, for
presiding over the morning portion of today’s meeting.
I am especially pleased to see Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al-Hussein preside over the Council this month.
This year is an important oner for locking in a twoState solution. Last week, on 16 January, the United
Nations formally launched the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, expressing the
hope that in coming months Palestine, Israel and the
international community will intensify their efforts
to find a lasting peace. The resumption of the peace
process in August 2013 was a true blessing, but talks
for the past six months have lingered on without
producing any results. Let me add that even a halting

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

process of engagement between the two sides is better
than complete breakdown and estrangement.
We all hope that this year will be a year of decisions
and an enduring political solution that will lead to an
independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
based on pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital, living side by side with Israel, and both sides
recognizing each other’s legitimate rights. I would
hasten to add that vacating occupied Lebanese lands
and the Syrian Golan is equally essential.
However, talks should not drag on forever; they
must produce results. Decades have already been lost,
and that has kept the region in a maelstrom of conflict.
To achieve results, both sides will have to move
with courage and avoid steps that scuttle the talks. Four
steps by the Israeli Government can stem the downslide
on the ground. First, it must stop the settler attacks.
Secondly, it must halt illegal settlement activity.
Thirdly, it must repeal the law passed late last year that
effectively annexes approximately 29 per cent of the
occupied West Bank. Fourthly, it must ease the blockade
of Gaza and end demolitions and displacement there
and in the West Bank.
We welcome the release of Palestinian prisoners,
which is an important confidence-building measure.
However, prisoner releases should not be linked to the
announcement of massive settlement construction and
create a false quid pro quo.
We endorse the call of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to all the parties in Syria to allow
free passage to the humanitarian convoys to Yermuk
carrying foodstuffs and bringing medical assistance
to the besieged Palestinian refugees. At the twentieth
session of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s
Al-Quds Committee, held in Marrakech last week,
Pakistan once again expressed its consistent and
unflinching support for the Palestinian cause and the
full realization of the Palestinian people’s right to selfdetermination. Mr. Sartaj Aziz, Pakistan’s adviser to
the Prime Minister on national security and foreign
affairs, during his call on President Mahmoud Abbas,
offered assistance to Palestine for capacity-building
programmes and education and training in the fields of
medicine, engineering and diplomacy.
This is an important week for Syria. The planned
talks in Montreux come after a long and vexing
waiting period. This moment is precious; it must not
be squandered. The destiny of the people of Syria

14-2102711/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and peace and stability in that country will be in the
hands of the Syrian interlocutors from Government
and opposition. It is high time for the Syrian nNation
to turn a new leaf. The latest diplomatic problems
arising on the question of participation at Montreux
should be resolved urgently so that the entire process
is not imperilled or derailed. We should harness all the
ingenuity at our disposal to salvage the talks.
The brutal Syrian conflict, which has left more
than 100,000 dead and some 9 million in need of
humanitarian assistance, has made one point abundantly
clear — there is no military solution. The struggle to
get an upper hand in the battlefield kills Syrians. It does
not bring peace. It is also clear that no political solution
is possible without the mutual consent of all sides. We
urge all participants at the Conference in Montreux to
commit to engagement and dialogue until they produce
a blueprint for peace and transition.
We pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban KiMoon, Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi,
the United States, the Russian Federation and regional
Powers for investing their political capital in the Geneva
process. We support the call of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for the immediate
cessation of mass executions and killings by some
armed groups committed in violation of international
law.
Finally, we call on all sides in Syria to cease, or at
least pause, all military operations for the duration of
the Montreux talks.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership and the work you
have done as President of the Council during the month
of January. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing this morning on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The regular review of the issue of the Middle East
requires us to consider the other issues that concern the
region. That is even more true in the light of the ongoing
challenges that threaten to destabilize it. In that light,
diplomacy and dialogue appear to be the best way to
achieve a long-term solution in each of the conflicts in
the Middle East. Of course, each situation has unique
features that preclude the use of identical formulas in
all situations. In accordance with those ideas, I will
12/39

20/01/2014

briefly refer to two of the conflicts that we consider to
be of particular importance: the conflict in Syria and
the peace process in the Middle East.
With regard to the conflict in Syria, Guatemala
believes that the first step to move forward any dialogue
should be the cessation of violence, and in the Syrian
conflict that premise is indisputable. For almost three
years, that conflict has destroyed a people, all sense of
the value of human life, and respect for human rights,
all of which underscores the fact that armed struggle
cannot be an option. If what both parties seek is the
welfare of their people — as they have claimed on
several occasions — they must also be willing to engage
in a political dialogue and seek a permanent solution
to their differences, including the establishment of a
transition Government. That is not easy, but there is
no alternative. The international community should
support that commitment.
The delayed call for an international conference
on Syria — which has been announced for
22 January — opens the door for dialogue. In order
to seize that opportunity, however, it is necessary for
both the Government and opposition groups, as well
as other States that have been invited, to participate
constructively. They must see it for what it is — the only
way to end the violence. It is encouraging that both the
Government and the opposition groups have sent signals
that the effects of armed conflict may be mitigated,
including the possibility of opening humanitarian
access to conflict-affected areas. However, even more
important is the effective and responsible participation
of those who can stop the armed struggle.
With regard to the peace process in the Middle East,
recent events make us question the possible outcome.
The rejection of formal negotiations, the refusal to
change traditional positions and, in general, the taking
of unilateral decisions that undermine any progress
suggest that there is little interest in or intention to
reach a solution of two States living in peace under safe
borders. Nevertheless, from our perspective it remains
the only viable option for peace and security.
We are aware of the enormous challenges to
both parties in that process, both nationally and
internationally. We therefore hope that in the remaining
time, the parties can work positively to meet the
established deadlines. We believe that the involvement
of the international community, especially the Quartet
and regional actors, is essential throughout the process.
Similarly, we must call on both parties to avoid all acts
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that could jeopardize the ongoing discussions, including
the expansion of settlements. We hope that the parties
can demonstrate their maturity and commitment to the
principles that unite us, and minimize all the differences
that hinder progress towards a peaceful solution.
In conclusion, in order to reconcile conflicting
positions it is necessary to maintain a constructive
dialogue. That is the only way to avoid greater evils
which, if continued, will eventually undermine the
stability of the entire Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to welcome, through you,
Mr. President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and thank him
for presiding over this meeting. I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.
In their statements today, some delegations have
deliberately referred to the situation in my country,
Syria, in a provocative and misleading manner. They
have cited a number of false allegations and accusations
that only serve to support terrorism and extremism in
Syria and in the region, and to divert attention from
the core matter under discussion, which is how to put
an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, and
not the domestic affairs of the countries of the region.
On that basis, I will not respond, under this item, to the
statements of countries that support, arm, harbour, train
and incite terrorists and facilitate their infiltration of
Syrian territory across our borders with neighbouring
States. Those statements encourage extremism and
devastation in Syria and feverishly aim to thwart any
possible solution to the Syrian crisis, including efforts
undertaken to convene the second Geneva Conference,
which the Syrian Government has agreed to participate
in without preconditions.
It is well known that the United Nations
bears a historical and legal responsibility for the
establishment of the independent and sovereign State
of Palestine. That responsibility dates to the adoption
of General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) of 1947, which
partitioned Palestine, and 273 (III), which endorsed
Israel’s membership in the United Nations, based on
its commitment to United Nations resolutions relevant
to the establishment of the State of Palestine and the

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

return of Palestinian refugees to their land. However,
what happened after that was just the opposite. Fully
supported militarily, politically and economically
by its protectors and sponsors, Israel launched one
aggression after the other against the people and States
of the region, implementing an expansionist policy that
resulted in occupying territories in a number of Arab
countries in 1967.
Furthermore, successive Israeli Governments have
perpetrated systematic and documented violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
that amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Settlement activities have always been a top priority for
the policymakers of successive Israeli Governments, in
spite of the fact that those activities — as recognized by
everyone, including Israel’s supporters — undermine
the possibility of creating a contiguous and viable State
of Palestine, as well as the right to self-determination of
the Palestinian people.
Israel has not stopped there. It has organized State
terror reaching beyond the region, imposed racist laws,
desecrated Islamic and Christian holy sites, expelled
Palestinians from their homes and arbitrarily detained
and inhumanely tortured Palestinians, including women
and children, and the democratically elected leaders of
the Palestinian people.
In the same context as the Israeli policies I have
just mentioned, the suffering of the Syrian people
under occupation in the Syrian Golan has been going
on for almost half a century. Israeli settlement activities
continue in the occupied Syrian Golan, where the
Syrian population is subject to heinous policies of
suppression, racial discrimination, detention, torture
and depravation of their natural resources, including
oil, gas and water. They are also deprived of the right
to learn the Syrian national curriculum. Their right to
carry their national identity cards is also denied. Syrian
citizens in the occupied Golan receive no medical care
and students are not allowed to study in Arabic or to
use the Syrian national curriculum. Health workers
wearing the symbol of the Syrian Red Crescent are
not permitted to work in the Syrian Golan. Moreover,
a separation apartheid wall is being built to the east
of the Syrian city of Majdal Shams. Israel also refuses
to remove mines that have been planted on Syrian
territory there.
The Israeli occupying Power bears full
responsibility for the consequences of its support
and assistance to the terrorist group in the area of

14-2102713/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, in blatant
violation of the disengagement agreement of 1974,
the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) and international law.
Israel’s support for terrorists endangers the lives of
United Nations forces and undermines their work. This
has been demonstrated in reality when such terrorist
groups have kidnapped UNDOF peacekeepers, fired
upon them or targeted their sites. We have informed
the Department for Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
of the details of those incidents and formally requested
an investigation into the collusion of Qatari intelligence
in the kidnapping of Filipino peacekeepers. What is
surprising is that DPKO has to date failed to report on
the results of that investigation, if such an investigation
has even been conducted.
In the light of the documented and authenticated
facts to which I have just referred, it is only natural
to discuss the issue of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories on the United Nations agenda. What
is strange and unacceptable, however, is that the
resolutions adopted by the United Nations go unheeded
by the Israeli authorities in their intransigence and total
lack of will to follow up on their implementation, in
addition to the irresponsible support provided by some
powerful States for Israel’s ongoing occupation of Arab
territories, in disregard for all relevant resolutions.
The failure of the United Nations to shoulder
its historical and legal responsibilities should not
continue, nor should the failure to implement the
relevant resolutions on ending the Israeli occupation,
including resolution 497 (1981), aimed at ending the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. In
order to maintain what is left of the credibility of the
United Nations, it is imperative that certain States end
their policies of double standards and turn their words
into action by forcing Israel to comply with United
Nations resolutions so as to end the occupation and the
unprecedented calamity to which Arab citizens have
been subject for decades.
We must not delude ourselves or deny the truth.
Israel is a settler entity that was established on the
basis of occupation and expansion, and has never
been interested in peace. It has responded to all
peace initiatives and negotiations by raising such
invalid pretexts as security concerns, only to enforce
occupation and impose a fait accompli that cannot be
changed. It has done so by building and expanding
settlements, threatening Arab territories and changing

14/39

20/01/2014

historical and demographic characteristics. Any
criticism of such actions makes Israel throw up its arms
in protest, while any discussion of the untold suffering
of the Palestinians is always controversial.
No just, lasting and comprehensive peace process
in the region can be successful without honouring the
well-established terms of reference, especially United
Nations resolutions. Those terms of reference are the
only basis for any settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
regardless of any other explanation or judgement that
contradicts them and free from any Israeli attempt at
extortion, bargaining or to link the peace process to
other issues.
The nations of the region aspire to peace and
prosperity and to ending the state of instability and
tension. But Member States that have worked against
the fulfilment of this goal and contributed to the
creation of volatile hotspots throughout the region are
nurturing the violence and fuelling regional clashes
based on ethnic, sectarian and religious reason with a
view to lifting international political and diplomatic
pressure from Israel and to ending any hope of ending
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories.
I mentioned earlier that, in their approach to the
situation in Syria, certain States have focused on certain
issues that they consider important enough to raise in
this meeting while deeming it appropriate not to discuss
to the fullest the issue at hand — putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
and attaching comprehensive and lasting peace. That is
to say, we have been ignoring the elephant in the room.
Although all of this has been discussed, no one has
spoken of the importance of fighting the international
terrorism that has ravaged Syria. In scores of letters to
the Security Council, we have described and detailed
the many dangers posed by this terrorism. Terrorism
entered our country through its north-eastern borders.
However, I would like to remind everyone that it is the
same terrorist group — the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant — that has struck both Iraq and Syria. This
fact is well known to all. Some have condemned its
activities in Iraq, but they have not been able to utter
a word condemning the existence of the same terrorist
organization in Syria.
It is truly shameful that hypocrisy should reach such
levels, at a time when we have presented the Council
with the names of hundreds of dead in Syria — Saudis,
Turks, British, American, Canadians, Australians,

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Libyans, Tunisians and others. All those have died on
Syrian territory. At a time when the Foreign Ministers
of the United Kingdom, France and other countries,
including the chief of the American Federal Bureau of
Investigation, have admitted their fear of the return of
the terrorist elements who are shedding Syrian blood
in Syria to their home countries. If they continue to
shed Syrian blood in Syria that is fine; but for them to
return to their homelands in the West, that is a problem
for them. Preferably, they should continue to shed the
blood of Syrians in Syria and not return to their Western
States of origin. “Kill the Syrians and let the Syrians
kill you”. That is the solution. “But do not come back
to your capitals because you are unwanted.” It is as if
those terrorists left their countries wearing invisible
attire and as if their Governments had no knowledge of
their departure.
Turkish freight trucks sent by the Turkish
Government, supposedly carrying humanitarian
assistance to Syria, were stopped by coincidence on
Syrian territory by the police. It turned out that they
were filled with weapons, and not with medication,
milk for infants or warm clothes for the refugees.
No, they were filled with weapons. However, those
weapons, according to the Turkish Government, are
humanitarian assistance. Those freight trucks were
stopped. When they were searched and the weapons
discovered, the Head of the Turkish Government laid
off hundreds of police officers, judges and other people
involved because they uncovered this deceptive action
at the Yarmouk refugee camp, the home of Palestinian
refugees — our brothers, our sisters — until a decision
is made by the United Nations for a return to their
occupied territories.
The same delegations have ignored the declaration
from Damascus by Palestinian Minister of Labour
Ahmed Majdalani that terrorists, Islamists and
religious people, financed by Saudi Arabia and Qatari
intelligence, are the ones who fired against the convoy
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) that was
attempting to enter the refugee camp. The Director of
UNRWA was there, as was the Palestinian Ambassador
to Damascus and the Palestinian Minister of Security,
and they were all witnesses to the firing on the assistance
convoy attempting to enter the Yarmouk refugee camp.
There is much to be said. However, I will not delve
into further details, as the subject under discussion is
that of the question of Palestine and of putting an end

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

to the Israeli occupation. If some Arabs are going to
please Israel by their actions, I will not do the same.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers,
Mr. President, in commending you for convening
this important debate. I wish to express my personal
pleasure at seeing you presiding over this body.
Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
The year 2014 will be a critical one for the
Middle East. We made a good start by launching the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, on 16 January, and the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, to open in Montreux. We hope
that the launch of the International Year will generate
further support for the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and, with it, statehood
for the Palestinians.
We are encouraged by the diplomatic engagement
by the international community. Peace negotiations
need to be conducted expeditiously and be consistent
with the principles of international law and the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
As has been stated during this debate, we also believe
that the cost of failing to reach a peace accord could
very well bring another round of serious violence,
with tragic consequences. We hope that the parties
concerned will not let go of this opportunity to achieve
a sustainable peace when there is much international
goodwill supporting the process.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, need to end at the earliest
possible date for a sustainable solution in that region.
The situation of the blockade of the Gaza strip is
an obstacle to the peace process. The recent floods,
which displaced approximately 10,000 people, inflicted
extra misery on a population already under strain.
Gaza is also suffering from serious fuel and power
shortages. Although partially relaxed, there is an urgent
humanitarian need to lift more comprehensively the
restrictions on imports of essential supplies of food and
medicines and construction material. We reiterate the
call for the full implementation of the resolution 1860
(2009), and underline our strong support for the work

14-2102715/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of United Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
The security needs of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples must also be respected. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilians will only enhance feelings of suspicion
and insecurity and widen the gap between the parties.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians and for
the greater goal of peace.
We welcome the recent release of long-term
Palestinian prisoners by Israel, which will contribute
positively to the ongoing negotiation process. We also
hope that the issue of the detention of children, which is
linked to broader, long-standing concerns regarding the
detention of Palestinians, will be urgently addressed.
The President of Sri Lanka, His Excellency
Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa, during his recent visit to
Israel, Palestine and Jordan, reiterated his strong hope
for a peaceful and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question and an independent Palestinian State. He was
particularly encouraged to observe that the people
of Palestine are persevering with determination, in
the midst of much hardship, to realize their goal of
statehood. Agreements were signed between Sri Lanka
and Palestine to establish a Sri Lanka-Palestine Joint
Commission and a vocational training centre.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
Sri Lanka is hopeful that both Israel and Palestine will
utilize the opportunities presented during this year to
achieve a historic peace agreement in the interest of
their future generations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by expressing our sincere thanks to you
for convening this open debate. My appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.
I wish to associate my statement with the
statements to be delivered later by the representatives
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Djibouti on behalf

16/39

20/01/2014

of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
We gather today at a time when trepidation remains
persistent in the Middle East and the weapons are far
from silent, but when there is genuine hope in the
hearts of all men and women who care about Palestine
and about peace that remarkable progress can be made
in 2014.
We are pleased to recall that you, Mr. President,
assured us last week at the meeting of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People that the Palestinian question remained not only
a priority for the Council but was also its greatest test.
It is the strong belief of Indonesia that the ability of the
Council to pass that test and bring about a permanent
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will not only
elevate its stature but also set a positive example with
regard to all the other challenges it confronts. The
question is whether the Council has the political will
and courage.
The pursuit of peace is now even more important
following the overwhelming decision of the General
Assembly last year to designate 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. On that
subject, Indonesia welcomes the continuous efforts of
the United States Secretary of State to convince the
relevant parties to move forward towards a firm and
lasting resolution.
Other issues concerning the Palestinian people that
Indonesia would like to highlight today are social and
humanitarian issues. We note with dismay continued
Israeli practices that contravene its responsibilities
as the occupying Power. Israel remains persistent in
its violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people. While we welcome Israel’s recent freeing
of 104 prisoners, it is deeply perturbing to know
that it still detains hundreds of Palestinian children,
including those below 16 years of age. Indonesia is
also saddened to learn that thousands of Palestinians
are still languishing in Israeli prisons, suffering in poor
conditions and lacking medical facilities.
Indonesia is appalled to learn of Israeli policies
involving the destruction of wells and water
infrastructure during military operations, thereby
denying many Palestinians access to clean water. We
also demand that Israel take the necessary measures to
prevent Israeli settlers from attacking Palestinians and

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from desecrating religious sites in the City of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.
Indonesia remains steadfast in its belief that the
Israeli occupation of Palestine is itself a violation of
international law and international human rights law.
Accordingly, we join other States to demand that Israel
make the best use of the remaining three-month period
of negotiation to rectify its illegal actions and start
respecting the will of the international community.
Indonesia reiterates its support of the road map
of the Quartet and the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and under the
parameters established in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the road map of the Quartet, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the three phases of the Madrid road map and
the principle of land for peace. We believe that the
establishment of an independent state of Palestine, on
the basis of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, is the only way to set things right for the
Palestinian people. To that end, we again call upon
Israel to resist the constant temptation to ignore the
legitimate aspirations of Palestinians concerning the
core issues of settlements, the status of Jerusalem,
refugees, security and permanent borders.
Disappointingly, Israel continues to ignore the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and the resolution of the General Assembly concerning
its illegal construction of the separation wall in
the West Bank, including in and around occupied
Jerusalem. Israel has no right to separate Palestinians
from Palestinians, and Palestinians from their land.
Their illegal settlement policy remains the biggest
obstruction to peace in the Middle East.
Indonesia’s support for the Palestinian people
is unwavering. With that in mind, it gives me great
pleasure to announce that Indonesia will host the
Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development later this year.
The Conference, which the Government of Japan
initiated last year, will reinforce various existing
initiatives aimed at bolstering Palestinian development.
I should now like to turn to the issue of Syria. For
more than two years, an extreme humanitarian tragedy
has unfolded in Syria. Death, destruction, displacement
and misery persist despite the strong words that have
been spoken and appeals that have been made at various
Security Council meetings. It is time for members of the
Council to set aside their political differences and work

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

together earnestly in the cause of peace. The Council
must underline its relevance by using its authority to
enforce peace, partly by ensuring that its decisions are
implemented by the parties concerned.
Indonesia reiterates that the conflict in Syria must
stop immediately. All parties must cease acts of violence
and hostility, uphold international humanitarian law
and ensure unfettered and safe humanitarian access
for those in need. Accordingly, Indonesia welcomes the
convening of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which is scheduled to take place within a few days. Our
fervent hope is that all parties to the Syrian conflict
will heed the appeal of the international community
and participate in the Conference in good faith. We
believe that an inclusive political process that reflects
the wishes of all Syrians is the only possible way to
reach peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your country, Jordan, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January.
I also wish to associate myself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and by the representative of Djibouti on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We take this opportunity, in conjunction with the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, to reiterate our support for the State of Palestine.
The launch of the International Year of Solidarity, last
week, only strengthens the legitimacy of the Palestinian
people’s struggle against the illegal occupation by
Israel. Yet the question of Palestine remains unresolved
on the agenda of the Council. What we have observed
so far only emphasizes that a just and lasting solution
is long overdue.
Malaysia reiterates its commitment to the
realization of a two-State solution based on the borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
We continue to call on all parties to live up to their
obligations under internationally recognized initiatives
such as the Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo Accords, the
Quartet road map, the Madrid terms of reference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We further
recognize the tireless efforts of United States Secretary

14-2102717/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of State John Kerry to facilitate the resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestine and Israel.
However, instead of adhering to the principles of
the initiatives I have just mentioned, Israel continues
its defiance against the wishes of the international
community. Secretary Kerry’s efforts have been
met with ridicule by Israel, while European Union
Ambassadors to Israel have been summoned for rightly
speaking out against illegal settlements.
It is clear to us that this intransigence will lead to
the failure of the talks, which already appear to us to
be one-sided against Palestine. The discussions on core
issues must not be compromised or delayed. We fear
that the window of opportunity for a peaceful solution is
in danger of closing altogether, as the occupying Power
has proven it is unwilling to meet all its commitments.
In that regard, Malaysia strongly condemns the
announcement of new settlement activities by Israel,
and we demand a resolute end to that continued
illegal practice. Settler violence against Palestinians,
including destroying their agricultural land and places
of worship, continues unabated.
Malaysia also remains gravely concerned by the
situation in Gaza, where the illegal blockade continues
to suppress the lives of its citizens. The escalation
of Israel’s military activities in recent days further
threatens to exacerbate the dire humanitarian situation.
The food and energy security needs of the people
remain at critical levels, while farmers and fishermen
in the security zone are denied their livelihoods by
the occupying Power. As Vice-Chair of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories, Malaysia has seen
and heard more than enough evidence of that oppression.
We call for an immediate end to the blockade, as well as
all other illegal Israeli practices in the Gaza Strip.
Let me now turn to the situation in Syria, where
the international community faces an ever-increasing
humanitarian crisis. As a demonstration of our concern,
Malaysia participated in the second International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria last week
in Kuwait, where we pledged $500,000. We continue to
urge all parties to end the violence and human rights
violations, including against innocent civilians. While
we welcome the recent delivery of aid to Palestinian
refugees in camps of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in Yarmouk, we remain particularly concerned that
18/39

20/01/2014

they continue to face unbearable human suffering.
All responsible parties must allow for the appropriate
measures to be taken to ensure that humanitarian
assistance is provided to those desperately in need.
In two days, the long-awaited second Geneva
Conference on Syria will commence to follow up on
the 30 June 2012 communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Malaysia remains supportive of the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi, and calls on all parties to come
together to work towards a political solution that is
Syrian-led and inclusive. We hope that the parties
concerned will be able to put aside their differences in
order to ensure a viable and sustainable outcome that
will benefit the people of Syria.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, Malaysia
reiterates its objections to Israel’s actions, including the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements in the
occupied Syrian Golan, which violate international law
and the United Nations Charter. In that regard, Malaysia
calls for the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
Syrian Golan, in line with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981).
The spillover effects of the Syrian conflict to
Lebanon continue to escalate. Malaysia urges the parties
involved in that conflict to cease cross-border fire
and other violence. My delegation also reiterates that
Israel must cease its violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and other hostilities, and withdraw its troops from
Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue Line, in line
with resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, Malaysia underlines its firm belief
in a moderate approach to the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, which can bridge differences and
restore stability to the Middle East. Whether in the
Palestine-Israeli negotiations or the streets of Beirut,
or even at the negotiating table at the second Geneva
Conference, the voices of moderation must prevail
over the voices of those who espouse hate, ignorance,
violence and extremism. We should summon the
collective political will to commit to a moderate course,
which will secure greater gains than if we were divided
by conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by conveying my congratulations to all the
new members of the Security Council — Chad, Chile,
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria — and would like to
congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan upon
your assumption of the presidency, Sir, to preside over
the work of the Security Council this month. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
today.

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

forces and of Israeli settlers targeted at Palestinian
citizens, and the building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories in the West Bank, and especially
in East Jerusalem.

My country’s delegation wishes to align itself with
the statement to be delievered by the representative
of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I should like to add the
following points.

Tunisia condemns the repeated aggression in
Jerusalem targeted at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. In that
regard, we reiterate the statement at the end of the
twentieth session of the Jerusalem Committee, which
took place on 15 and 16 January. We also condemn
Israeli practices aimed at changing the very identify of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We encourage the international
community assume its responsibilities vis-à-vis
Jerusalem.

First, Tunisia wishes to reiterate its firm position
in favour of the legitimate aspirations and yearnings of
the Palestinian people to realize their liberty, freedom,
dignity throughout the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, in the framework of the two-State solution
pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative, the resolutions on
land for peace and the Madrid agreements. We reiterate
the importance of the Palestinian issue as part of the
Middle East as a whole and that continuing to work for
historic justice for the Palestinian people, which has
evaded them for the past four decades, is the reason
for all the tension and conflicts that have wracked the
region.

Fifth, we wish to point out the danger inherent
in the practices and violations that run counter to
international law and international legality. We call
on the international community, including the United
States, the sponsors of the negotiations currently under
way and the members of the Quartet and the Security
Council as a whole, to prompt Israel, the occupying
Power, to put an end to those practices and end its
settlement activities, which are the main obstacle to
the peace process, so as to ensure that we do not lose
the historic opportunity of these negotiations, which
should enable us to reach a lasting settlement regarding
all outstanding issues.

Second, my delegation therefore wishes to
stress that the year 2014 should be one of solidarity
with the Palestinian people, in the search for a fair,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the issue of
Palestine so that peace and security prevail in a lasting
way throughout the region.

Sixth, we reiterate the importance of lifting the
blockade that is asphyxiating Gaza, putting an end to
the very serious consequences that stem from it and
which deprive the Palestinian people of the necessities
of daily life. Especially affected by this are women and
children.

Third, convinced as we are that there is no other
solution than that of peace, that should happen through
new prospects being opened up for the people of the
region. For that reason, we support the negotiations
under way between the Palestinians and Israelis under
the aegis of the United Nations. We hope that the
negotiations will achieve a fair and lasting solution to
the Palestinian issue, enabling the Palestinian people to
again enjoy their full rights, ending the occupation by
Israel of Palestinian occupied territories and resolving
a number of other issues, such as borders, security, East
Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, water and the fate of
Palestinian detainees.

Seventh, my country also wishes to reiterate the
importance of putting an end to Israeli incursions into
Syrian and Lebanese territories.

Fourth, my Government places on Israel the
responsibility for the obstacles to peace — by way of
provocative statements, the actions of the occupation

Eighth, we express our concern regarding the
situation in the sisterly State of Syria and its impact on
neighbouring States at the humanitarian level. In that
respect, we reiterate our support for the second Geneva
Conference on Syria to achieve a political settlement
of the crisis through an agreement among all Syrian
parties to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people, to ensure that they are able to achieve their
yearning for freedom and democracy while preserving
Syria’s sovereignty and unity.
Ninth, Tunisia would like to reiterate its firm
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons during
the conflict under way in Syria. We urge that those

14-2102719/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

responsible for those crimes be brought to justice. In
that regard, we welcome the joint mission of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons aimed at putting an end to the use of
such weapons. My delegation hopes that this will serve
as a positive step towards convening an international
conference on the Middle East becoming a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
as soon as possible, in order to promote peace and
stability in the region and around the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our sincere congratulations to Jordan for its
membership in the Security Council for the 2014-2015
term and its presidency of the Council for the month of
January. My delegation has full confidence that Jordan
will make a significant contribution to the work of the
Council in the coming two years.
The year 2013 was another year that regrettably
ended without any concrete advancement towards
bringing an end to the oldest conflict in the Middle
East. Sadly, we continued to recite over and over again
the litany of unacceptable settlement and demolition
activities; acts of settler violence; violations of
the basic rights of the Palestinians in the occupied
territory; provocations against religious and holy sites,
including the Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque; the continuation of the illegal embargo and
the construction of the separation wall in defiance of
international law and Security Council resolutions; and
the most regrettable loss of lives and injuries on both
sides.
However, the initiative and dedicated efforts of
United States Secretary of State Kerry encouraged us
to welcome 2014 with optimism for a genuine chance
that would lead to the two-State solution, which we
have long yearned for.
Turkey sincerely supports the ongoing talks between
Israel and Palestine towards a just, comprehensive
and lasting resolution based on the concept of two
States, living side-by-side within the pre-1967 borders
in peace and security, through a just settlement of all
final-status issues on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
However, in order to achieve that most-desired
outcome, the parties must refrain from actions that
undermine the negotiations. At a period when we
20/39

20/01/2014

need to foster confidence-building measures, each
and every step taken should be well-planned and taken
with caution. For instance, the systematic coupling of
prisoner releases with new settlement announcements
is not helpful if the parties are sincere about the process.
The basic prerequisite for progress in the peace
process is to fully understand the linkage between
security and a just peace. Only a just and comprehensive
settlement to the conflict will provide a true, lasting
peace and a secure, stable and prosperous Middle East.
Meanwhile, the responsibility on the shoulders of the
international community has not lessened. We will all
be morally accountable if this window of opportunity
for peace once again slips away.
The General Assembly has proclaimed 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. This should be a year for all of us to mobilize
our means and capabilities to support Palestine in
the economic and political realms. A politically and
economically strong Palestine will surely be a stronger
partner for Israel and the entire neighbourhood for years
to come. Turkey therefore supports the inalienable right
of the State of Palestine to sit among us, under this roof,
as an equal Member of the United Nations and fully
recognized by the international community. Needless
to say, Palestinian reconciliation constitutes an integral
part of that strength.
For our part, Turkey will continue to do its best
in alleviating the difficulties of the Palestinian people
through various multilateral and bilateral projects in
Palestine. Two recent examples have been the transfer
of $850,000 to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to be
used in the provision of fuel for generators for critical
service sectors such as health, water and sanitation in
Gaza, and the launching of the Jenin Industrial Zone
Project, in the West Bank, which aims at creating
business and employment opportunities for the
Palestinians in the area.
However, those initiatives can yield effective
results only in an economy that is functioning at full
capacity, where there are no restrictions on the access
of goods and labour. Movements in and out of Palestine
and the contiguity between Gaza and the West Bank
are of vital importance. We therefore call once again
for an immediate lifting of the embargo on Gaza,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009) and the
ceasefire commitments of November 2012. The recent
flexibility extended for access for materials for United
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations projects is welcomed by many, but declared not
enough by many more, considering in particular the
damage caused by the recent severe weather conditions
in the region.
Another source of optimism is the upcoming
second Geneva Conference on Syria, wherein the
countries invited and representatives of the European
Union, Arab League and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, together with United Nations officials,
will try to boost the chances for a political solution to
the Syrian crisis, based on the Geneva communiqué of
June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). Turkey looks forward
to a genuine process, through the establishment of a
transitional governing body with full executive powers
by the mutual consent of the two parties.
However, just as important as the commencement of
the Conference is the grim reality on the ground in Syria,
where innocent people continue to be killed every day by
bullets, indiscriminate aerial bombardments, ballistic
missiles and, last but not least, epidemic diseases and
hunger while under siege. The recent wave of escalating
attacks against Aleppo is extremely worrisome. That
brutality must end. There should be an immediate end
to the hostilities and violence, and the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) should
be implemented immediately in its entirety. Reports
of the eventual access of the humanitarian convoy to
Yarmouk is only partially comforting, as we know
that it is not a long-term remedy. Sadly, there are still
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
who have yet to be reached.
On the other hand, the burden of the humanitarian
crisis on neighbouring countries has reached
intolerable levels, posing a threat to not only domestic
but also regional instability. We would recall that
the Governments of Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Egypt
and Turkey, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in a meeting
that took place in Sanliurfa, Turkey, on 17 January,
appealed once again to the international community to
boost solidarity with countries in the region hosting the
majority of refugees fleeing Syria. We call once again
on the Security Council to devise an effective strategy
under Chapter VII to end this, the biggest humanitarian
crisis of the twenty-first century.
Despite the full mobilization of the international
community to implement resolution 2118 (2013), the first
benchmark for the elimination of the chemical weapons
declared by the Syrian regime has not been met. That

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

is not acceptable. As we have legitimate security and
environmental concerns, we shall continue to closely
monitor the timetable devised by the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We would also like to take this opportunity
to underline once again that paragraph 4 of resolution
2118 (2013) envisages the complete destruction of Syria’
chemical-weapons programme.
I must clarify the facts regarding one particular
accusation by one speaker. Recently, Turkish authorities
confiscated material allegedly bound for Syria. Those
incidents are a testimony to Turkey’s commitment to
international norms and is proof that Turkey is a State
governed by the rule of law. Investigations are being
carried out accordingly. Having said that, Turkey
will stand by the Syrian people, and its humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people will continue.
While the Middle East is going through a turbulent
period, we may well be within reach of putting an end
to the long-term Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is time
for us all to work together to achieve that goal and
for both parties to show the necessary leadership and
political will to prevent a failure, which we may not be
able to afford.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on your election as a member of
the Security Council and on your assumption to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success. By the same token, I would like to
congratulate the other Member States that acceded
to the Council this year and to thank the outgoing
members. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing this morning.
Today we are discussing the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, in the light
of international impetus resulting from the efforts of
the American Administration to reconcile Palestinian
and Israeli viewpoints and to reach an agreement
between Palestine and Israel. The peace process is the
best way to achieve stability in the region. The question
of Palestine is a critical issue for all Arabs. Qatar and
all Arab States reiterate the Arab commitment and the
basis and principles set out in the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve the comprehensive peace in the region to
which they aspire. It is important that any agreement

14-2102721/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recognize Palestinian national rights and be based on
putting an end to the occupation, the achievement of
self-determination, the restoration of the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, and withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories. It must also underscore the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
In that connection, we would like to state that, in
order for any agreement to succeed, Israel must refrain
from threatening the establishment of an independent,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. We would like to
reiterate our warning with regard to the consequences
of Israeli policies that are an obstacle to peace. Such
policies include in particular its fait accompli strategy,
its settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, the use or threat
of use of force, the exploitation of Palestinian national
resources, especially water, the continuing detention
of Palestinians, the demolition of homes and villages,
expulsions, the ongoing attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the blockade on Gaza. We underscore the need for
the Palestinian people to enjoy their inalienable rights
and we continue to express our solidarity with the
Palestinians. That people’s acquisition of their national
rights is a precondition for the settlement and peace to
which we aspire.
We would also like to emphasize the need for
Palestinian national reconciliation on the basis of
the Doha and Cairo agreements. The international
community must pave the way for achieving such a
reconciliation.
The beginning of a new year in the Syrian revolution
doubtless provides the opportunity to pause and reflect
on the grave human rights violations and war crimes
perpetrated by the regime with impunity. According to
international organizations and human rights groups,
the Syrian Government has used chemical weapons and
taken the lives of tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
at the hands of the regime and its loyal militia.
Is it possible that some people still listen to the
claims of that regime? We help to combat terrorism and
must remember some facts. As the new year begins, the
Syrian regime is continuing its indiscriminate bombing
of civilians and its criminal bombardment of Aleppo,
discharging barrel bombs on densely populated areas
and schools. The number of victims of barrel bombs
exceeds the total of chemical weapons victims. The
Syrian regime continues to besiege hundreds of
thousands of people and to pursue a policy of starvation
22/39

20/01/2014

to death. It impedes access to humanitarian assistance.
There is also the deadly blockade of the Palestinians in
the Yarmouk camp. More than 40 children, women and
elderly people are dying of starvation. Is that part of
fighting terrorism or terrorism itself?
Syrian refugees continue to flood into neighbouring
States. We thank Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon and
all neighbouring States for their efforts to alleviate
the suffering of Syrian refugees. The international
community must continue to provide assistance to those
countries. I would also like to thank the Government
of Kuwait and the Secretariat for having convened
the second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria.
The events in Syria require the international
community, including the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities in the face of this unprecedented
humanitarian catastrophe, which has led to louder
voices calling for further pressure and the adoption of
a decisive resolution so as to stem the suffering of the
Syrian people, put an end to the criminal actions and
bring the perpetrators of such crimes to justice. The
convening of the second Geneva Conference on Syria
requires the international community to assume its
responsibility in achieving the aspiration of the Syrian
people for freedom and decent living conditions. We
hope that the Geneva conference will find a solution.
The Syrian regime must not be allowed to mark time
and continue its war of genocide against the Syrian
people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first time that
I speak in the Council under your presidency, Sir, let
me begin by congratulating you on having assumed this
high office.
In the interest of time, I will read out a slightly
abridged version of what we had prepared. The full text
will be circulated to delegations.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries
Iceland, the former Yugoslav Republic of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union fully supports the peace
conference on Syria that will take place on 22 January
in Switzerland. The second Geneva Conference on
Syria should be the first step in a process that leads to
a political solution to the conflict. The only solution
to the conflict is a genuine political transition based
on the full implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and on preserving the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
We commend the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi and his team.
The objective of the Conference is the formation
by mutual consent of a transitional governing body
with full executive powers, including over security, the
military and intelligence. Any elections in Syria should
take place only within the framework of the Geneva
communiqué. The regime as well as the opposition must
commit themselves to the full implementation of the
communiqué as a matter of urgency and demonstrate
that commitment through their actions. The European
Union calls on all parties to engage constructively in a
genuine negotiation.
The European Union welcomes the invitation sent
by the Secretary-General to the National Coalition of
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. The EU
stands ready to assist the opposition delegation, led by
the National Coalition, in needs that might arise as part
of the negotiation.
The European Union considers it important
throughout the Geneva process to also work on promoting
confidence-building measures that directly benefit the
local population. We remain gravely concerned about
the continuing and indiscriminate bloodshed among
the civilian population and call for the cessation of all
violence to allow urgent humanitarian access on the
ground. We strongly condemn the regime’s escalating
indiscriminate attacks, notably in Aleppo. The
European Union shares the growing concern about the
spread of extremism and extremist groups, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Jabhat
Al-Nusra. Their involvement in the conflict poses
a threat to the peace process, the territorial integrity
of Syria and to regional and international security.
The European Union welcomes the Syrian opposition
coalition’s condemnation of all forms of terrorism and

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

extremism, and the fact that the moderate opposition is
opposing extremist groups.
All efforts must be channelled towards the common
goal of rebuilding the country, rid it of its authoritarian
past, preserve its traditions of interreligious,
inter-ethnic and cultural coexistence, and ensure full
respect for all human rights. The European Union is
concerned about the plight of all vulnerable groups and
ethnic and religious minorities, including Christians.
The European Union has consistently supported
civil society groups. Member States have also provided
assistance and capacity-building, including through
recent events such as the Cordoba conference, and will
continue to do so throughout the Geneva process.
The European Union stresses the importance of an
inclusive Syrian peace process and supports the active
and meaningful participation of women and civil society
in the overall political transition process. We encourage
both parties to appoint women to their delegations to
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. We also call
upon the United Nations to facilitate the participation
of women’s groups and civil society organizations in
Geneva. In that context, we also welcome the meeting
on the theme “Promoting women’s engagement in the
Syrian political process,” convened by UN-Women and
the Netherlands on 12 and 13 January.
The European Union will continue to defend human
rights and will remain active in ensuring accountability
for the widespread and systematic violations and abuses
of human rights and international humanitarian law
perpetrated in Syria. The European Union reiterates its
call to the Council to urgently address the situation in
Syria in those aspects, including on a possible referral
to the International Criminal Court, as requested in the
letter from the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to
the Secretary-General of 14 January 2013 (S/2013/19,
annex). We recall that all those responsible for
crimes against humanity and war crimes must be
held accountable, and reaffirm our support to the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, established by the Human
Rights Council.
Following the second Kuwait donors conference,
on 15 January, where the European Union and its
member States pledged €550 million, the Union will
continue to urge progress and engage its partners in
the framework of the United Nations-led high-level
group on humanitarian challenges. We call on all the

14-2102723/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

parties to the Syrian conflict, in particular the Syrian
Government, to immediately implement in full the
provisions of the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15). Considering the unprecedented
scale and nature of the crisis, we call for a humanitarian
resolution by the Security Council.
The European Union urges all parties to the
conflict, in particular the Syrian Government, which
has the greatest responsibility in enabling humanitarian
access, to take decisive steps to facilitate safe,
unhindered and immediate access to all people in need,
including those in besieged areas, through the most
effective ways, including across conflict lines and
borders, and to protect aid and medical workers and
health facilities. We will continue the ongoing efforts
to support Syrians affected by the conflict inside and
outside Syria, as well as the hosting communities and
governmental institutions of Syria’s neighbours that
have courageously welcomed refugees.
We welcome the start of the transfer of chemicals
from Syria for destruction outside the country, but much
remains to be done, including the actual destruction of
the chemicals. Therefore, that step must be followed
by swift and decisive action by the Government of
Syria to meet all its obligations and commitments
under resolution 2118 (2013) and Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Executive
Council decisions. We have provided assistance
to the joint mission and to the OPCW trust fund.
We will continue to give financial, political and
logistical support. We would also like to emphasize
the responsibility of the Syrian authorities to cover
the costs associated with the destruction of the Syrian
chemical weapons stockpile.
The European Union calls on all foreign fighters in
Syria, including Hizbullah, to withdraw immediately.
With regard to the Middle East peace process, the
European Union commends the leadership shown by
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu and
fully supports the tireless efforts by United States
Secretary of State John Kerry. The European Union
recalls previous European Union Council conclusions
that laid forth its vision for a two-State solution resulting
in an agreement on all final-status issues, ending all
claims and fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both
parties. The European Union stands ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements for ensuring
the sustainability of a peace agreement.

24/39

20/01/2014

We have decided that we will provide an
unprecedented package of European political, economic
and security support to both parties in the context of
a final status agreement. In the event of a final peace
agreement, the European Union will offer Israel and the
future State of Palestine a special privileged partnership,
including increased access to European markets, closer
cultural and scientific links, the facilitation of trade
and investments, as well as the promotion of businessto-business relations. Enhanced political dialogue
and security cooperation will also be offered to both
States. In case of peace, the European Union envisions
a future relationship between itself and the two parties
that will not only deepen the bilateral ties between the
Union and the two States; it will also help develop a
positive interdependence and a new mutually beneficial
peaceful relationship between Israel and Palestine.
The European Union is convinced of the positive
role that countries in the region can play in advancing
the peace process, and remains committed to its
ongoing dialogue with the Arab States, including with
regard to achieving peace in the Middle East. The
European Union reiterates the strategic importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative for all parties and for the
entire region. The current negotiations represent a
unique opportunity that must be seized for both parties
to implement a two-State solution. A one-State reality
would not be compatible with the legitimate, sovereign
and democratic aspirations of any of the parties.
It is important to increase mutual trust between the
two parties. Actions that undermine the negotiations
and diminish the trust between the negotiation partners
should be avoided at any cost. In that regard, the
European Union deplores Israel’s continuous expansion
of settlements, which are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. The European Union
also expresses its grave concern regarding incitement,
incidents of violence in the occupied territory, house
demolitions and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza. The European Union expresses its
serious concern about actions that undermine the
status quo of the holy sites, including in Jerusalem.
The European Union will continue to closely monitor
the situation and its broader implications, and will act
accordingly.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is the first time that Cuba takes the floor this
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

year, we wish to congratulate all the new members of the
Security Council. We also commend the presidency’s
initiative to convene this debate.

people in its legitimate claim for the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

Cuba supports the statement to be made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba demands that Israel comply with international
law and put an end to its occupation of all Arab
territories. We reiterate once again our position in
favour of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of
the Middle East region.

The Middle East continues to draw the attention
of the international community owing to the various
events in the region in the course of the past year
and the long-standing hope for concluding a peace
process. The Security Council’s consideration of this
matter has been extremely protracted, and the major
problems remain, especially the question of Palestine.
Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories constitutes the main obstacle to achieving
peace and a just, lasting and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East.
It is imperative that the Security Council play its
due role in defence of international peace and security,
adopting concrete, practical measures to bring Israel
to put an end to its acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people.
Israel’s actions deliberately contravene resolutions
of the United Nations, pose a threat to regional and
international peace and security and violate the human
rights of an entire people. There will never be peace in
the Middle East as long as such aggression continues and
the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people are not upheld and taken into account.
The General Assembly took a historic decision
when its members granted Palestine the status of
non-member observer State in the United Nations.
Cuba supported that decision, in keeping with its
historical position in support of the cause of the
Palestinian people and in favour of their rights. Cuba
reiterates its support for Palestine’s entry as a full State
Member of the United Nations. The Security Council
must consider and approve, without further delay, the
request submitted by Palestine in 2011 to be recognized
as a United Nations State Member.
The news over the past year on the return to
negotiations between Israel and Palestine was
encouraging. But that optimism has been cautious, as
the Palestinian cause and peace in the region need to be
attained through fair agreements that do not undermine
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Support must continue to be given to the Palestinian

The Palestinian people suffer as a result of the
growing number of illegal Israeli settlements, the harsh
and distressing reality of Palestinian prisoners and the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the besieged
Gaza Strip, where residents’ living conditions have
further deteriorated as the unjust blockade has been
maintained. Only by ending that colonialist policy,
releasing Palestinian prisoners and lifting the blockade
against the Gaza Strip would allow for a meaningful
political process to take off and bring peace to the
region.
Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in its just struggle for self-determination and
welcomes the declaration of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We hope
that that decision will mark a historic watershed in the
full realization of the rights of the Palestinian people,
including its full-fledged membership in the United
Nations.
Cuba continues to closely follow the situation in
Syria and its international repercussions. We share the
concern at the loss of innocent lives in Syria, as in any
other part of the world. We likewise condemn all acts
of violence taking place in that country against the
innocent civilian population, perpetrated by any of the
parties to that conflict.
We reject all attempts to turn the alleged protection
of human lives into a pretext for foreign intervention,
whether directly or through support to ad hoc armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, which can
only lead to destruction and augment the death toll.
We also condemn any use of chemical weapons or
other weapons of mass destruction. We are strongly
committed to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, as well as
to strict compliance with its provisions. We welcome
Syria’s joining of the Chemical Weapons Convention

14-2102725/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the agreements reached on the destruction of its
chemical weapons stockpile.
Likewise, we welcome the progress made in
implementing the agreement for the destruction and
verification of the Syrian Arab Republic’s chemical
weapons programme and the cooperation provided by
the Syrian Government to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations joint
mission.
The obligation of the Security Council is to
promote peace and bring an end to violence; to prevent
destabilization, prevent the financing, support and
training of destabilizing actors; and to protect innocent
people and prevent their manipulation for geopolitical
ends. That is also the responsibility of the Organization
as a whole.
Cuba opposes calls promoting regime change in
Syria and supporting the use of force and violence
instead of contributing to dialogue and negotiation
among all of the parties. We also reject the complicity
of the mass media, committing its customary distortion
of reality with no need to face the consequences of its
actions.
We reiterate the call to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and the
right to self-determination of its people, without any
kind of foreign interference or intervention. We call for
the conflict to be settled diplomatically without further
bloodshed.
We join international aspirations by investing our
hopes in the prospect of the second Geneva Conference
on Syria leading via dialogue to agreements ending the
conflict in Syria, through a peaceful process led by the
Syrian people in exercise of its legitimate right to selfdetermination.
Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all acts of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by
whosoever committed, including States. In that regard,
Cuba condemns all acts of terrorism perpetrated in the
Middle East.

20/01/2014

you for having organized this first open debate of
2014 on the Middle East, which affords the wider
membership an opportunity to participate in these
important deliberations. As 2014 has been declared the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, we look forward to participating in similar
forums aiming to resolve the fragile security situation in
the Middle East, in particular the question of Palestine.
At the same time, I wish to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Security Council and to extend
my delegation’s support to them during their tenure on
this body.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
We remain convinced that the main political
problem in the Middle East is the systematic aggression
by Israel against Palestine. That continues to pose
a threat to peace and security in the region. Namibia
remains concerned about the critical situation and
the continued illegal Israeli settlement campaign in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which continues to gravely undermine the
integrity of the State of Palestine and threatens to make
impossible the achievement of the two-State solution
for peace on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
Of great concern to my delegation is the increasing
number of Israeli settlements, which is based on
an illegal colonizing policy that has resulted in the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, restricted access for muchneeded goods, humanitarian aid, medical supplies and
fuel. The sustained Israeli occupation severely affects
the socioeconomic well-being of the Palestinians, which
is a flagrant denial of their right to self-determination
and of their exercise of their fundamental human rights
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.

Namibia believes that Israel’s continuing flagrant
contempt for international law demands urgent attention
and responsible action by the international community,
with a view to compelling the occupying Power to end
all such grave breaches and salvaging the prospects for
a peaceful solution in the Middle East region.

Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country’s election to serve on the
Security Council for the period 2014 to 2015, and upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January 2014. Equally, I wish to thank

As a country that experienced similar illegal
occupation by the South African apartheid regime,
Namibia continues to persistently extend its steadfast
support for the Palestinian people in pursuit of their
inalienable right to self-determination, independence

26/39

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and freedom. We will remain committed to that
noble course. In that context, Namibia welcomes the
proclamation by the General Assembly of the year
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, in accordance with resolution
68/12 of 26 November 2013. We are hopeful that the
observance of this year as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People will help bring an
end to the illegal occupation of Palestinian territories
and the achievement of the independence of the State
of Palestine, with full sovereignty and East Jerusalem
as its capital.
We wish to remind the Council of its obligations
to furthering the just cause of the People of Palestine
by adopting practical measures to end Israeli abuses
and illegal policies against the Palestinian people. It is
incomprehensible that the question of Palestine remains
a permanent agenda item on the Council’s programme
of work, considering that the General Assembly, the
most representative organ of the United Nations,
adopted a historic decision in 2012 by according
Palestine non-member observer State status in the
United Nations. We remain hopeful that this decision
will constitute an important step towards the eventual
accession of Palestine to the United Nations as a full
Member State. It is therefore important for the Council
to respect the wish of the international community by
considering and approving, without further delay, the
request made by Palestine for recognition as a fullfledged Member State, taking its rightful place among
the community of nations.
Namibia continues to believe that a real and lasting
solution leading to the freedom of Palestine can be
realized only through the implementation of all relevant
resolutions of the United Nations regarding the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, and that peace
in the Middle East can be achieved only by addressing
the illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories by
Israel, the creation of the Palestinian State, ending all
conflicts and bringing lasting peace and security to
Palestinians and Israelis alike and to the wider region.
Let me reiterate Namibia’s strong support for the
ongoing peace process and our appeal to both parties to
commit themselves to and embrace this opportunity by
abiding by their previous agreements and obligations
concerning lasting peace between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, living side by side.
Let me conclude by further reiterating Namibia’s
unwavering support for and solidarity with the people of

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

Palestine in their just cause for freedom, independence
and social justice, and Namibia’s steadfast support for
the full membership of Palestine in the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Miss Hassan (Djibouti): My delegation is honoured
and pleased to take the floor on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).
This important meeting is being held at a time
when the question of Palestine is yet again at a very
critical juncture. Our hopes for reaching a just and
comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine
were raised following the recent resumption of peace
talks, which definitely requires the strong support of
us all to ensure the advancement and attainment of
their goals, in conformity with the parametres defined
by relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.
However, it is unfortunate that, in spite of those
positive developments, conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, are
still deteriorating as Israel continues its colonization
of Palestinian land, including through Israeli settler
terrorism, the arrest and detention of Palestinian
civilians, and the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip with an illegal
blockade.
Israeli colonial settlement activities, which have
manifestly escalated recently, remain the core challenge
to making genuine progress in the peace negotiations.
The matter needs to be seriously addressed by the
international community if we are to salvage that
solution and work towards peace. In that regard,
we reaffirm that the continuation of building and
expanding Israeli colonial settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in and around East
Jerusalem, undermine the territorial integrity, viability
and contiguity of the Palestinian State on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders and are clearly illegal acts
that constitute a flagrant violation of international
laws, resolutions and covenants, especially the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.
In contradiction with United Nations resolutions
and the peace process, Israel continues to defy the will
of the international community by creating de facto

14-2102727/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

realities on the ground, aimed at altering the Arab
character, status and demographic composition of
occupied East Jerusalem, with a view to isolating the
city from its natural Palestinian environs. All of Israel’s
unlawful activities — inter alia, settlement activities,
forcibly displacing Palestinian civilians, restricting
Palestinians’ access to places of worship, building
the apartheid wall, confiscating Palestinian lands,
desecrating Islamic and Christian holy sites, and closing
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem — must be
brought to an immediate halt.
We must also draw the Council’s attention to
the constant incitement by extremist Israelis at holy
sites, particularly at Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied
East Jerusalem. Such provocative, illegal actions
are aggravating religious tensions and risk fuelling
religious conflict. In that regard, we forewarn that the
continuation of all such Israeli violations will lead to
eliminating any chance to realize peace and eventually
threaten to further destabilize the already fragile
situation in the Middle East.
At the same time, the OIC reiterates its firm
commitment to the rights of the Palestinian people in
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, and remains
in support of a final solution that guarantees the return
of the city to Palestinian sovereignty as the capital of
the State of Palestine.
Given that the Palestine question remains at the
heart of unrest in the region and has constituted a longstanding challenge to this body, the OIC group reaffirms
that the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires firm and prompt action by the
Security Council to enforce international law and to
ensure compliance by Israel, the occupying Power, with
all of its legal obligations and commitments to ending
its daily crimes and aggressions for the achievement of
peace and justice.
Likewise, the OIC reaffirms the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations for the Palestinian
question until all of its aspects are justly and fully
resolved. In this International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the OIC further appeals for
the international community’s sustained engagement
and full support at this critical period in order to seize
the current diplomatic opportunity to bring about the
enforcement of United Nations resolutions and an

28/39

20/01/2014

end to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land
occupied since 1967.
In closing, I wish to reaffirm the full support and
solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in their
endeavour to regain their legitimate and inalienable
national rights, including their right to return, selfdetermination, sovereignty and independence in the
State of Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have circulated my
statement and will therefore not read it out in its entirety.
There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Syria. Pouring more weapons into the conflict will
only prolong the human suffering. For this reason,
Norway welcomes the Secretary-General’s convening
of the second Geneva Conference on Syria, and we look
forward to attending. We also reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call to the Syrian parties to ensure the full
and effective participation of women. The logic of
peace must replace the logic of war.
We urge both sides of the conflict to accept the
invitation to the negotiating table and to embark on
the challenging process of reaching agreement on an
inclusive, Syrian-led transition and solution to the
conflict. Going to the negotiating table is the first step.
Remaining at the table is even more important.
It is vital that the conference yield concrete results.
Violence must end. Ceasefires must be declared.
Immediate, full and unimpeded humanitarian access
must be ensured and humanitarian principles respected.
Syrian women and civil-society actors must be actively
involved in the negotiations. That will increase the
legitimacy of the process. The international community
must come together in demanding an end to the
conflict, as it did on the issue of the destruction of
Syria’s chemical weapons. In our view, taking steps of
this kind could facilitate an agreement on a transitional
governing body, as outlined in the Geneva communiqué
of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
The humanitarian challenge is still enormous, and
it will remain with us for years. We need to do even
more. Assistance to Syria’s neighbouring countries
must be stepped up. Norway pledged $65 million in
humanitarian assistance and $10 million for assisting

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syria’s neighbouring countries at the second Kuwait
pledging conference.
The destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons is well
under way under the supervision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations. Norway is proud to be a part of that joint effort
to eliminate those deadly weapons. We urge all parties
involved to fulfil their international commitments to
ensure that the chemical weapons are removed from
Syria and destroyed within the agreed time frames.
The Middle East peace process is at a decisive
phase. We commend President Obama and Secretary
Kerry’s leadership and dedication. Norway believes
that given the broader situation in the region, this is
the time for Palestinians and Israelis to agree on ending
the conflict. A two-State solution whereby Israel and
Palestine can live side by side in peace and security is
indeed within reach. The process shows how difficult
the outstanding questions are: security, borders, the
status of Jerusalem and refugees. Reaching agreement
involves painful concessions and tough decisions,
for both sides. Therefore, we urge the leaders on
both sides to show courage and determination at this
critical moment. This historic opportunity must not
be squandered. Norway believes that such a historic
compromise will be possible only if the core needs of
both parties are duly addressed, and met, in a fair and
balanced way.
Norway aligns itself with the position of the
European Union (EU), as set out in the December 2009
EU Council conclusions, regarding the parameters for
a solution to the outstanding questions. The solution
must be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Oslo Accords and subsequent
agreements. We cannot allow the negotiations to be
derailed. Norway condemns all use of violence. Norway
calls for the parties to refrain from unilateral acts that
could undermine the talks, change the situation on
the ground or prejudge the outcome of the final-status
negotiations. Settlement activities must stop.
Norway is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
call for the lifting of the restrictions in compliance
with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) in all its
elements, including the need for security for all civilian
populations.
The institutional basis for an independent Palestine
is already in place. However, the Palestinian Authority

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

will continue to need generous financial support from
donors in 2014 to support the efforts to achieve peace.
Assistance to the Palestinian Authority amounted to
$1.25 billion last year, a big improvement over the year
before. That still leaves a budget deficit, which will
add to Palestine’s public debt. Norway urges donors to
remain generous in their contributions to the Authority
while the Palestinians strive to reach a negotiated
settlement with Israel. We plan to hold a new meeting
of the donors group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, in late spring this year, in Brussels. There,
we will review assistance for 2014.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Before
I begin, let me say that, as I think I am the fortieth
speaker in this debate, I promise not to speak for more
than half an hour. I shall, of course, read out the short
version of my statement.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would
like to convey the Movement’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, as well as to the Foreign Minister of
Jordan, for having convened this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine.
Another year has begun, and peace, justice and
stability remain elusive in the Middle East. The
ongoing Israeli military occupation of Palestinian and
Arab lands and the denial of the freedom and rights of
the Palestinian people continue to demand the attention
of the international community and require urgent
action for redress, in conformity with international law
and United Nations resolutions. This must be one of
the priorities on the global agenda for the year 2014, a
year that has been declared by the General Assembly
to be the “International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People”.
The Movement remains seriously concerned about
the situation in Palestine as a result of the illegal
policies that continue to be pursued by Israel, the
occupying Power, against the Palestinian people and
their land. Over the past months, while the international
community has been exerting efforts for tangible
progress in the resumed negotiations and has articulated
its full support for that process on the basis of the long-

14-2102729/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/01/2014

standing parameters rooted in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, Israel, the
occupying Power, has instead, regrettably, continued to
behave in a manner contradictory to those parameters,
to the good faith required for the negotiations and to the
overarching objectives of the peace process to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution.

use of force against civilian protesters, the forced
displacement of civilians and the arrest and detention
of still more Palestinians. Despite the recent release
of long-term Palestinian prisoners, Israel continues in
an almost daily manner to arrest Palestinian civilians,
including children. More than 5,000 Palestinians
remain in Israeli jails. These are all serious concerns
for the Movement.

Tensions continue to rise and to widen the gap
between the expectations for the political process and
the reality on the ground. A brief review of just the
recent period shows that Israeli settlement activities,
including the construction of settlements and the wall
and the confiscation of more Palestinian land, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, military raids and arrests,
and constant violence and provocations by extremist
Israeli settlers, all have continued unabated, in grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention and the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Such violations
are exacerbating the conditions on the ground and
reinforcing doubts about Israel’s true intentions and
commitment to the just and lasting peace that the State
of Palestine, with the strong support of the international
community, including the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement, has been exerting serious effort to achieve.

The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip
also continues to inflict grave socioeconomic losses
and humanitarian hardship on the Palestinian people
besieged there. NAM condemns those violations and
urges the international community to persist with its
calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately
end the blockade and cease its collective punishment
and all illegal actions against the Palestinian people
under its occupation and respect its obligations under
international law. If Israel persists in its contempt for
international law, it will soon be high time for the
international community to undertake measures to
uphold the law and ensure accountability.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains extremely
alarmed, in particular, by the escalation of acts of
aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, especially in
and around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and Al-Aqsa Mosque,
resulting from provocations by Israeli extremists. The
blatant disrespect for that holy site and those who come
to worship there and the continued threats of further
incursions are tantamount to grave acts of incitement
that are stoking religious sensitivities and aggravating
already high tensions. Israeli Government officials
continue to recklessly fuel such religious tensions by
encouraging extremists to acts of provocation that
threaten to ignite a religious conflict that would have
far-reaching and dangerous consequences for the region
and beyond. Therefore, the Non-Aligned Movement
once again draws the attention of the Security Council
to all these serious matters that threaten international
peace and security and calls for actions to halt all such
Israeli incitement and for respect for the sanctity of
religious sites.
NAM also reiterates its serious concern over the
continued systematic Israeli violations of human rights
of the Palestinian people, including the killing and
injury of civilians in violent military raids, the excessive

30/39

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
solidarity with the Palestinian people and support
for the realization of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and freedom in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a just
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects.
It is hoped that the current negotiations will succeed
within the specified time frame in the achievement of
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that will bring
a complete end to the Israeli military occupation of
Palestine and other occupied Arab lands and usher in
an era of peace and stability in the Middle East.
At this critical juncture, the Non-Aligned Movement
renews its calls for continued support for the Palestinian
people in their legitimate historic struggle for justice,
dignity, peace and the exercise of their rights to selfdetermination. The Non-Aligned Movement calls for
a redoubling of international efforts, including by the
Security Council and in line with our political, legal
and moral obligations, towards the realization of those
noble objectives this year.
Lebanon has suffered from repeated Israeli attacks
against its territory with a heavy human and material
toll, followed by subsequent years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to violate
Lebanese airspace and has intensified its incursions
into Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions, in particular, resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security of Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.
The Movement condemns all the measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
that have been intensified since the outbreak of the
Syrian crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement demands
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967 in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
I thus conclude my statement given on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I now wish to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.
In the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, the international community should
exert its utmost pressure on the occupying Power, the
Israeli regime, to end its aggressive and expansionist
policies and non-adherence to international law, norms
and principles. This year, the Security Council should
fulfil its long overdue responsibility and fully support
all of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
by compelling the occupying regime to withdraw from
all Palestinian and other Arab territories. Without a
doubt, continued inaction by the Council will only lead
to more atrocities by that criminal regime which, in the
past 65 years, has waged over 10 wars against all of its
neighbours, continues to threaten countries of the region
and uninterruptedly commits savage attacks against
peoples under occupation, in particular defenceless
women and innocent children, as documented by
competent international organizations and as is strongly
condemned by the international community, including
even supporters of the regime.
The Israeli regime, which is the only regime in
the region to possess every type of weapon of mass
destruction but is not a party to any of the treaties
banning them, should also be compelled to join such
treaties, in particular the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, without any further delay or
precondition, and place all its nuclear activities under
the comprehensive safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, in order to remove the sole
obstacle to the establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East proposed by Iran in 1974.

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

Over the past several months, the Middle East has
witnessed the escalation of foreign-backed terrorist acts
in Syria, Iraq and Lebanon, targeting hospitals, schools,
religious sites and diplomatic property and claiming
the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians, including a
diplomat from the Iranian embassy in Beirut following
a terrorist attack committed by a terrorist group led
by a Saudi citizen. Undoubtedly, those are only but
a few of the examples of the catastrophic impact of
violent and extremist narratives. Those developments
gave support to the very timely action taken by the
General Assembly when it rejected violent extremism
and promoted moderation and tolerance through its
adoption by consensus of resolution 67/127, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”, in
the final days of 2013 — a proposal that was based
on an idea presented to the General Assembly by the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Finally, we firmly believe that the recent strong
support of the international community for the efforts
of the Iraqi Government against terrorist groups should
also be extended to Syria by placing the question of
combating terrorism on the agenda of second Geneva
Conference on Syria. Likewise, every effort should
be made to end the ongoing conflict and to support a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process in order
to allow Syrian people to freely determine their destiny.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for convening this open debate. Jordan’s intimate
knowledge of the conflict will no doubt be an asset to
the Council’s efforts to find a resolution to this longstanding conflict.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The Council meets today at a moment of heightened
diplomacy in the Middle East, from the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, on Wednesday, 22 January, to
ongoing negotiations between Israel and Palestine.
Five months ago, following the concerted efforts of the
United States, we saw a positive development in the
political process with the resumption of negotiations
with a view to achieving a lasting and comprehensive
agreement between Israel and Palestine by April this

14-2102731/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

year. Whereas the resumption of negotiations remains a
promising sign, as it has brought an end to the paralysis
that plagued the peace process for some years, the
parties will have to make tough decisions in the weeks
ahead.
South Africa identifies with the struggle of the
Palestinians for self-determination and continues to
support the Palestinian people in their legitimate and
just struggle for the establishment of an independent
State. We welcome the launch on 16 January of the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, and South Africa joins other voices urging
that the observance be used to redouble efforts to
achieve a lasting and durable peace between Israel
and Palestine. We remain steadfast in our belief that
the only way a solution to that protracted conflict can
be found is through a peaceful and fair negotiation
process carried out in an environment conducive to
fruitful deliberations — that is, an environment free
of intimidation, fear, violence and other obstructionist
activities.
The construction of settlements by Israel remains
the biggest obstacle to progress in the peace talks.
Nonetheless, Israel’s illegal settlement activities
continue with impunity. Again we warn that the
continued settlement construction changes the
geographical makeup of Palestine and could make
impossible the creation of two States, in line with the
overwhelming call for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, democratic, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully alongside
Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The parties need to continue their positive
confidence-building measures, and in that regard the
release by Israel of Palestinian prisoners in December
was a positive development. However, it is undermined
by the continued arrest and detention of Palestinian
citizens by Israeli authorities. Further, the release date
was followed by a new barrage of illegal settlement
activities with the announcement by Israel of the
expansion of 1,400 new settlements in the West Bank.
Those actions by Israel collectively serve to stifle the
very few positive actions in the process and puts the
sincerity of Israel’s commitment to the peace process
in question. We therefore call on Israel to refrain from
actions that undermine progress in the peace talks.
We condemn all violence, which further
undermines the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
32/39

20/01/2014

Mahatma Ghandi said that the worst form of violence
is poverty, and therefore the continued economic and
political isolation of the Gaza Strip further exacerbates
the fragile political process. South Africa once again
emphasizes the need for Israel to lift the illegal blockade
against the people of Gaza.
The Israeli-Palestinian peace process is currently
at a critical point, with the renewed efforts of United
States Secretary of State John Kerry to bring Israelis
and Palestinians together to agree on a framework for
permanent status negotiations. The test will be whether
current efforts will achieve a two-State solution and
also realize the vision of an independent Palestinian
State.
Allow me at this stage to turn to the situation in
Syria. The continuation of the crisis in Syria is of
great concern. Although progress is being made in
the destruction of Syria’s chemical stocks, the conflict
continues. Without an inclusive political settlement,
the consequences for regional peace and security will
be greater. South Africa fully supports the efforts
of the United Nations in bringing about a political
solution to that protracted conflict, and looks forward
to participating in the second Geneva Conference on
Syria later this week.
South Africa has steadfastly maintained that it is
an unassailable right of the Syrian people to have peace
and democracy. South Africa remains convinced that
in a complex, divided society, such as Syria’s, there
can be no military solution to the conflict, and we have
condemned the continuing supply of weapons to that
area, as it has entrenched the false notion that the use
of arms can end the conflict. We are convinced that if
the crisis continues to be fuelled with weapons, we will
witness in Syria, as we have elsewhere in the world,
that it is ultimately the people of Syria who will pay the
price, while those supplying weapons live in safety far
away from the crisis.
Furthermore, we are very conscious of the
importance of a greater role for women in ending
conflicts and building peace, and urge a proportional
participation of women in the talks in Geneva slated
to begin on 22 January. South Africa continues to
maintain that the only solution to the Syrian crisis is
a Syrian-owned process where all Syrian parties must
take responsibility to end the violence and commit to
finding lasting peace.

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, the delicate process of negotiations
between Israel and Palestine requires trust, and trust is
earned by action and not by mere words. We continue
to believe that peace in the Middle East is dependent on
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine.
Vacating occupied lands is also an imperative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I would first like
to congratulate your country, Mr. President, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for the way in which it
is leading the work of the Council this month. Allow me
to also personally thank you for your presence and for
the statement you made on behalf of the Council at the
first meeting of 2014 of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, held
last Thursday.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
Our Committee is grateful for the continued
diplomatic efforts of the international community, and
first and foremost for the steadfast efforts of United
States Secretary of State Kerry to encourage the parties
to reach a comprehensive agreement.
The Committee calls on all parties to act responsibly
so as to create a climate conducive to productive
negotiations that will allow for a solution of all final
status issues and bring an end to the Israeli occupation,
a total Israeli military withdrawal from the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
as well as the realization of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including the right to selfdetermination.
As we approach the April deadline, prospects for
peace continue to be undermined by the occupying
Power’s actions on the ground, in particular the expansion
of settlements. Israel has announced the construction
of thousands of new settlement units since the start of
negotiations in July, the latest of which, concerning
more than 1,400 units, was announced 10 days ago. The
144 settlements, scattered throughout the occupied West
Bank and East Jerusalem and connected with each other
by roads built for the exclusive use of Israeli settlers, are
totally inconsistent with the two-State solution. Their
continued expansion undermines the Palestinians’ trust
in Israel’s commitment to achieving that solution. Peace

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

will be possible only when the occupation is brought to
an end and the State of Palestine is truly independent,
sovereign and viable.
Moreover, settlement activities constitute grave
breaches of international law. The Committee calls on
the Council, as the guarantor of international peace
and security, to uphold international law and its own
resolutions, including resolution 446 (1979), which
determined that settlements have no legal validity
and called on Israel to abide by the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
The Committee is also troubled by the recent
tensions on the border between Gaza and Israel, the
rockets fired from Gaza into Israel and the Israeli
air strikes on Gaza, all of which could undermine
the fragile ceasefire between the two sides and have
devastating consequences for the Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations.
The General Assembly has proclaimed 2014 the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People and requested the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to
organize activities in cooperation with Governments,
United Nations organizations, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society. The objective of the
International Year, which was officially launched last
Thursday, is to promote the key theme of solidarity with
the Palestinian people as a contribution to international
awareness of the question of Palestine and of the
obstacles to the ongoing peace process, including the
illegal settlements. A wide range of activities is being
organized, and we count on the entire membership,
including Council members, for their cooperation and
engagement to make 2014 a historic year for the longoverdue two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on this month’s Jordanian
presidency of the Security Council, and commends your
convening of this timely open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Jordan’s leadership draws on insights into the region
that are of great benefit to the Council, and it will be
from Amman, in your own country, that His Holiness
Pope Francis, as a witness to peace, will begin his own
pilgrimage of prayer to the Holy Land on 24 May.

14-2102733/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For the Holy See, the resumption of peace talks
between Israelis and Palestinians constitutes a positive
development, in regard to which Pope Francis has
expressed the hope that both parties will resolve,
with the support of the international community, to
take courageous decisions. Courageous decisions are
seldom easy, and can place demands on us that may be
politically difficult and unpopular.
Yet when faced with the reality of conflict in the
Middle East all right-minded people see the need for
change. Peace is not simply the absence of war, but
requires that the demands of justice be met for all
peoples and communities. My delegation accordingly
joins its voice once more with those of all people of good
will who welcome, with great hope, the re-engagement
of direct, serious and concrete negotiations so that a
rejuvenated peace process may help unfold better
prospects for the future.
Of great significance, furthermore, is the recent
agreement with Iran with respect to its nuclear
programme, which offers great hope that an era of
distrust may be replaced by a new climate of trust and
cooperation. It is hoped that it will be fully implemented
and open the path to a definitive agreement.
The Holy See has urgently and repeatedly voiced
its clear concerns for the peace and welfare of all the
peoples of the Middle East. Most recently, the ongoing
situation in Syria prompted Pope Francis to reiterate
the Holy See’s profound solicitude for the situation in
the whole region. Calling the Catholic faithful to prayer
and fasting for Syria in September 2013, Pope Francis
made a heartfelt plea
“that the violence and devastation in Syria may
cease immediately and that a renewed effort
be undertaken to achieve a just solution to the
fratricidal conflict. Never has the use of violence
brought peace in its wake... War begets war,
violence begets violence”.
May the upcoming second Geneva Conference on
Syria be an occasion for a renewed reflection on the
criteria needed to offer a new start for that beautiful
nation, left prey to indescribable destruction and
loss of lives. Due to political preconditions, those
criteria must include an immediate ceasefire without
procrastination, including a renewed commitment to
promoting initiatives of peace instead of the sending
and funding of arms, which have escalated the violence
and conflict.

34/39

20/01/2014

At the same time, it must involve an immediate
rollout of humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
for the countless refugees and displaced persons being
housed temporarily in neighbouring countries, where
so many suffer life-threatening shortages, inter alia,
of nutrition, safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
The urgency of rebuilding peace trumps the resolution
of other political and social questions, although such
rebuilding will certainly need to include new forms of
political participation and representation that ensures
the voice and security of all groups calling Syria their
home.
Pope Francis has expressed his deep concern for
those experiencing relocation and displacement in
efforts to escape incessant violence, as well as for those
nations challenged by the influx of a great number of
refugees. The international community cannot stand
aloof to their praiseworthy efforts to assist. The Holy
See pledges to continue — through its wide array of
educational, health care and social service outreach
efforts — to work alongside those alleviating the
suffering of all of those who have been marginalized,
uprooted or oppressed by conflict.
Many of the refugees constitute a worrying exodus
of Christians from their bimillenial homelands owing,
among other causes, to the targeting and instability
visited upon them by fundamentalist and extremist
forces. Interreligious dialogue and reconciliation will
therefore be required to restore the balance in the rich
and complex pluralism of Syrian society. The Holy
See stands ready to support all religious communities
in their efforts to reach new understandings and the
restoration of trust after these years of violence, revenge
and recrimination.
The Syrian people have demonstrated by their
history an ability to live together in peace. Regional
and international rivalries that have little to do with
the Syrian communities themselves must therefore
be set aside so that at the heart of the discussions are
not these interests but rather those of the individual
human person and the good of Syria. To this end,
all the interested parties are called to work together
if conditions for lasting peace are to be put in place.
The second Geneva talks must accordingly ensure the
inclusive participation of all parties to this conflict in
the region and beyond. The Holy See wholeheartedly
wishes to support this objective.
Finally, I wish to call to mind the concern expressed
by Pope Francis for the ongoing political problems in
14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lebanon, and also for Iraq, which struggles to attain
the peace and stability for which it hopes.
For the United Nations the challenges of the Middle
East are a clarion call for its peacemaking role, the very
raison d’être for this institution. May this open debate
help muster the much-needed political will to spur the
international community to make a real difference in
the lives of the peoples of the Middle East and help
them to fulfil their dream of long-awaited peace.
The global economic situation no longer permits
the international community to continue indefinitely to
fund growing refugee populations. Political solutions
are the best solutions even for the economies of these
countries, because peace is the necessary precondition
for the socioeconomic stability capable of attracting
development funds. In his address on 13 January to the
members of the diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy
See, Pope Francis therefore urged the whole world, with
great insistence, to address the problems of the Middle
East and to act before any further deterioration of the
situation occurs.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
congratulate you Sir, on your patience and your efforts
this day. I will be very brief, and will distribute the
full text of my statement in Arabic and English to all
representatives. The Government of Iraq also thanks
the members of the Security Council for their adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/1, supporting
Iraq in its fight against terrorism.
I congratulate the Palestinian people on the
launch of the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People.
Another year has passed and the peace process
in the Middle East still stumbles. The international
community seeks to reach a peaceful settlement.
Meanwhile, Israel continues to pursue its arbitrary and
illegal practices, depriving the Palestinians of their
rights and freedoms. Israel continues to persist in its
settlement policies, constructing and building new
settlements and a separation wall, and continuing to
seize more Palestinian land every day. Israel has also
imposed a blockade on Gaza and arrested numerous
Palestinians, and continues its practice of collective
punishment, in addition to the provocations posed
by extremist Jewish settlers, which can only escalate
tensions in the Middle East.

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

Iraq supports the international community’s efforts
to make a success of the process of peace in the Middle
East, based on unwavering principles, including those
enunciated in United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. We commend the efforts of the
Palestinians and the Government of President Mahmoud
Abbas. We also pay tribute to the continued good
offices and good will of the United States to encourage
both sides to reach a two-State solution to resolve the
conflict. In this regard, we hold Israel responsible for
not implementing binding resolutions of the Security
Council and urge the international community and the
Security Council to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
honour its commitments and to implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
Finally, we must work diligently to restore stability
to the troubled Middle East, with all its conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. Finding a
just solution that will enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination in a State
based on the 1967 borders, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, is a noble goal to which we aspire and that
would achieve security and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Allow me first to congratulate
Your Royal Highness on Jordan’s assumption of both its
membership of the Council and the presidency of the
Council for this month.
Let me begin by expressing our appreciation to
the Council for convening this quarterly open debate,
which will allow the Council to take stock of recent
developments in the Middle East, including the State of
Palestine. I should like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing earlier today.
The situation in the Middle East region remains
fragile and unpredictable, with unprecedented changes
in several countries in the region and the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We look forward to the success of
the efforts of the international community this week to
resolve the situation in Syria.
We firmly support a negotiated solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian issue resulting in a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with

14-2102735/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel. We also continue to support Palestine’s bid for
full and equal membership of the United Nations. We
look forward to a meaningful 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, which
was launched on 16 January by the Secretary-General.
We welcome the continuation of the negotiation
rounds between Israel and Palestine that began in late
July last year with the aim of reaching a deal within
nine months. It is unfortunate that so far there has been
little visible progress, but we hope that both sides will
seize the opportunity presented by direct negotiations
and strike a peace deal in the critical months ahead.
The recent announcement by Israel of new
settlement construction is regrettable. The settlement
activities are not only illegal but also pose a threat to
the two-State solution. We join others in urging Israel
to stop these settlement activities.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
meanwhile, remains a cause for serious concern. The
blockade on Gaza is not only adversely affecting the
population but also driving militant elements to vent
their frustration through violence, thereby further
complicating the situation on the ground and increasing
Israel’s vulnerability and security concerns.
India has always supported the nation-building
efforts of Palestine through technical and economic
assistance, including budgetary support. In 2012, India
pledged $10 million as budgetary support to Palestine
and signed three memorandums of understanding for
development projects in the fields of information and
communication technology, vocational training and
the construction of schools. In September 2013, India
contributed $1 million as a part of its annual contribution
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
primarily for the provision of food and medicines to the
displaced people in refugee camps under the various
UNRWA programmes.
We are also implementing a series of development
projects in Palestine, funded by the India-BrazilSouth Africa Dialogue Forum. We have thus far been
able to assist in the rehabilitation of a cultural and
hospital centre in Gaza, the construction and equipping
of a centre for person with physical disabilities in
Nablus, and support for recreational activities through
infrastructure support for a football stadium in
Ramallah.

36/39

20/01/2014

India welcomes the efforts made by the Joint
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
towards the removal and elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme, and hopes that the
Joint Mission will be able to meet the final deadline of
30 June for the complete elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme. In December 2013, India offered a
financial contribution of $1 million to the trust fund set
up at the OPCW at The Hague for use in the destruction
of Syria’s chemical weapons and related facilities. India
has also offered the services of its experts to be used
by the OPCW in destruction verification activities and
training slots for personnel participating in the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Mission for the destruction of
Syria’s chemical weapons.
In conclusion, let me express our full support for
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. We hope that it
will launch a Syrian-led inclusive political dialogue that
will resolve the current crisis and meet the legitimate
aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of
my country, I warmly welcome the presence here earlier
today of Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for Foreign and
Expatriates Affairs of Jordan, and congratulate him on
his country’s election to the Security Council and on
assuming its presidency for this month. I also take this
opportunity to welcome the newly elected members
and express appreciation for those that have completed
their work on the Security Council. I offer my gratitude
to Jordan’s presidency for the timely convening of this
open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Djibouti on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
In my national capacity, I would like to inform the
Council that, while chairing the OIC in 2011 and 2012,
Kazakhstan, supported by all OIC member States, did
its best to contribute to the peace process in the Middle
East and to overcome disputes between the various
parties to the conflict. One of the strategic goals
of Kazakhstan’s chairmanship of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation was to support Palestine’s
aspiration to take its rightful place as a full Member
of the United Nations. Under Kazakh leadership, the
OIC dispatched its first-ever delegation to the Holy

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

See to raise the issue of Palestinian sovereignty over
the property of the Catholic Church in the occupied
territories. We have also actively promoted the
Palestinian cause in a number of international forums,
and now my country, in its national capacity, is eager
to continue to contribute to the international action in
that direction.
From the very beginning of the conflict in Syria,
my country has expressed support for all possible
opportunities to arrive at a mutually acceptable
formula for achieving peace between the parties. We
see that the conflict continues to rage, despite relentless
international efforts to halt it and to reach an acceptable
solution based on international law, as demonstrated by
the sincere determination of all parties concerned. The
entire world, including my country, looks forward to
achieving a balanced and widely agreed solution at the
peace talks.
Kazakhstan welcomes the start of the process to
eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons stockpile, and
hopes that there will be no delay beyond the end of June
deadline for the total removal of all such materials. We
believe that the Syrian Government will extend its
full and constructive cooperation in this respect to the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations. We
are confident that those joint steps of the Syrian
Government and the multilateral community will
serve as yet another political and practical measure to
mitigate tensions in the region.
The persistence of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
continues to threaten regional and international peace
and security, and its negative implications are not
confined to that region only, but are felt well beyond
and around the globe. Kazakhstan supports a peaceful
settlement of the problem based on international law,
including compliance with the pertinent Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We
support the efforts of the Quartet to restore the IsraeliPalestinian negotiation process to identify borders
based on the principle of the peaceful coexistence of
both States.
Kazakhstan will continue to render its support to the
stabilization process in the Middle East as an integral
part of establishing peace and security in the region.
We recognize the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and the creation of an
independent State of Palestine within the 1967 borders,
peacefully coexisting with Israel. We also advocate its

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

efforts to obtain full-fledged membership of the United
Nations.
My country condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, and in this regard supports the
aspirations of all the peoples of the region to live in
security. Kazakhstan hopes that the efforts of the
sponsors of the peace process, the international and
regional organizations, and the good will of the
participants engaged in the negotiation process will
lead to the achievement of a lasting and just peace in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Recent developments
in the Middle East have shifted the focus of the
international community from the Palestinian issue to
more pressing items on the agenda: the situation in Syria
and preserving regional stability. However, Ukraine
believes that, in the current circumstances, the peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian issue should remain one of
the buttresses of a stable and secure Middle East. We
understand the claims on both sides and think that it is
only through compromise and direct Israeli-Palestinian
talks that the sides will reach a final agreement.
Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, in advancing direct
dialogue between the parties with the aim of achieving
a framework agreement that would provide guidelines
for permanent status negotiations and address all the
core issues — in other words, a full and final peace
treaty between the parties. We see some positive signs.
The third group of prisoners was released in late 2013.
We are very well aware that it was a very painful and
difficult decision for the Israeli side. We understand
the Israeli security concerns and support all initiatives
aimed at elaborating adequate guarantees.
My State also understands the need to continue to
assist the Palestinian Authority in building its social and
economic development, which is of critical importance
for the viability of a future Palestinian State and to
its Palestinian inhabitants to be able to lead a normal
life. We hope that 2014, proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, will contribute to finding a true
and durable solution to the conflict.
Ukraine supports a two-State solution resulting
from successful negotiations between Palestine and
Israel. We support the Palestinian people’s efforts

14-2102737/39

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to obtain an independent State, and we hope to see
Palestinians enjoying freedom and prosperity in their
own State. A historic compromise should be achieved.
That brings us to the importance of the mediation
endeavours of the regional players, with Jordan being
one of the key brokers. With this in mind, we support the
official Jordanian position, voiced earlier this year by
Prime Minister Abdullah Ensour. Jordan should be part
of the final agreement between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. Its position should be taken into account while
settling the important issues of the status of Jerusalem,
border issues, water and security arrangements.
Ukraine has repeatedly expressed its concern
over the situation in Syria, where a two-year conflict
continues to take the lives of innocent civilians. In that
context, the important task in the short term is to ensure
the holding of a successful second Geneva conference
on Syria. We have high expectations for the results of
that conference, while welcoming the strong diplomatic
efforts of Russia and the United States. We appeal to
all parties involved to overcome the contradictions that
have long hindered the development of consensus on
the issue of a Syrian settlement within the Security
Council.
The humanitarian situation in the country is also
dangerous. We call on all parties, in particular the
opposition groups, to provide unhindered access to
humanitarian organizations in the country in order to
begin to overcome the terrible situation that is currently
affecting the lives of civilians, particularly women
and children. In that context, we welcome the recent
international donor conference, held in Kuwait, which
resulted in the international community managing to
raise $2.4 billion of the required $6.5 billion.
However, benefiting from international assistance
is impossible without an understanding between the
parties to the conflict. We are concerned about the
lack of unity inside the opposition camp in Syria and
urge it to take part in the second Geneva conference in
order to reach a political compromise, which is needed
now more than ever. Ukraine believes that the only
possible solution to the Syrian crisis is an inclusive
political dialogue and the necessary transformation in
the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Israel has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.

38/39

20/01/2014

Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I am compelled to take the
floor again today. I will be brief.
As in previous meetings, we have heard many
Arab and other representatives from the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) criticizing Israel. I would like again
to point out to those same representatives, Arab and
others, that they choose to ignore the crimes of the Chair
of NAM, Iran, at their own peril. In particular, it comes
as quite a surprise that the Non-Aligned Movement has
the nerve to lecture Israel on human rights, while two
members of NAM, Iran and Syria, are the world’s worst
human rights abusers. Iran oppresses its own people
and helps other States to slaughter theirs. Today in Iran,
free expression is repressed, minorities are persecuted,
women are denied their basic rights and the regime
has executed more people than any other country in
the world. Since fighting broke out in Syria almost
three years ago, Iran has provided financial, political
and logistical support to Al-Assad, while also sending
Hizbullah militia to assist the Syrian Government forces
in killing civilians. NAM’s cynicism and hypocrisy is
shameful.
I must admit that I was astonished to hear the
Iranian representative speak about non-compliance
with Security Council resolutions. How absurd that is. I
wish that I could be shocked by the accusations hurled
by the Syrian representative today, turning the meeting
into a theatre of the absurd. The Syrian representative
has the audacity to shed crocodile tears about the
situation of the Palestinians, while his own Government
kills and pursues a policy of starvation against the
Palestinian population in the Yarmouk camp. While the
Syrian Government bombs schools and kills children,
the Syrian representative finds it necessary to complain
here in the Security Council about the curriculum in
schools in Israel. That is the theatre of the absurd at its
worst.
The Syrian representative’s accusations against Israel
with regard to violations of the 1974 Disengagement
Agreement are baseless. Syria systematically violates
the Agreement and Israel only provides and will
continue to provide humanitarian aid to the Golan
population, including soldiers and other residents of
the Golan who are severely injured. Just recently, Israel
treated a severaly injured soldier of the Syrian armed
forces, who came to the border asking for help. That
happened only two weeks ago but, of course, that was
not part of the Syrian representative’s statement here at
today’s meeting.

14-21027

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to respond to a State in our southern
vincinity, whose representative spoke about the situation
in Gaza. To begin with, there is no blockade on Gaza.
In fact, all goods and humanitarian aid — let me repeat
it — all humanitarian aid entering Gaza comes from
Israel. It seems that that representative’s concerns has
less to do with the humanitarian need in Gaza and more
to do with demonizing Israel. One does not need to be
able to understand the writing on the Rosetta Stone to
discover that Gaza has an additional entry point.
Lastly, it took a great deal of audacity on the
part of the Malaysian representative to criticize the
human rights record of my country. Israel is a thriving
multicultural democracy, in which the rights of all
minorities are respected and all religions are tolerated.
That is in contrast to Malaysia, whose serious human
rights violations include torture, the denial of due
process and the abuse of workers’ rights. That is to
say nothing of the Government curtailing the right to
freedom of expression and religion.
I could continue but, out of respect for the serious
work before us and the limited time of the Council, I
will refrain from doing so.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Syria has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
In accordance with our statements on the subject matter
before us today and with regard to putting an end to
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories, I

S/PV.7096 (Resumption 1)

will respond to some comments made by the Israeli
representative.
The funding of and support for armed groups in
Syria by certain States are clear. As is well kown, the
conflict and wars in the Middle East are caused by the
Israeli occupation. That is well documented by many
international organizations. Israel’s history is bleak and
full of slaughter. Israel has occupied the Arab territories
for more than 60 years. Israeli State terrorism has
perpetrated the worst crimes against civilians in the
Syrian Golan, Lebanon and Palestine.
For Israel to claim to regret the situation in Syria is
an attempt to divert attention from the Israeli occupation
of the Golan since 1967, wreaking humiliation and
slaughter, expelling our citizens and flouting all
international resolutions that have urged Israel to put
an end to the occupation of the Arab territories. The
assistance referred to by the representative of Israel,
which he placed in a humanitarian context, must not
mislead the Council. Israel persists in allowing terrorists
to work in the area of separation and to perpetrate their
terrorist acts.
We could speak at length of Israel’s actions. What
we have heard today bears witness to its practices. In
the interest of brevity, that is all I will say.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

14-2102739/39
