A /72/PV.108

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

108th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 24 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Perera (Sri
Lanka), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Dante
Maria Caputo, President of the General Assembly
at its forty-third session
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. TheoBen Gurirab, President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-fourth session
The Acting President: It is my sad duty to inform
the members of the General Assembly of the passing,
on 20 June, of His Excellency Mr. Dante Maria Caputo,
President of the General Assembly at its forty-third
session, and on 14 July of His Excellency Mr. TheoBen Gurirab, President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session.

for Foreign Affairs before being elected to serve the
General Assembly. They dedicated their public lives to
diplomacy, and we are all very grateful.
Mr. Caputo became Foreign Minister of Argentina
in 1983. During his tenure, he laid strong foundations for
many multilateral initiatives that went on to benefit the
region and the world. The Southern Common Market,
the Rio Group and the Cartagena Group are prime
examples. As a political scientist at heart, Minister
Caputo’s intellectual expertise would later benefit not
only his native Argentina but also the wider global
community. A true champion of peace, as President of
the General Assembly Minister Caputo emphasized the
importance of countries seeking a peaceful settlement
of disputes and the role of the United Nations and its
organs in promoting peace.

I shall now deliver a statement on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly.

During Minister Caputo’s tenure, the Assembly
had on its agenda the item on the question of Namibia,
on which Minister Gurirab also worked. For years as
observer of the South West Africa People’s Organization
to the United Nations, Mr. Gurirab used his oratory and
political mastery to advance the interests of the people
of Namibia. He did so again as Foreign Minister in
1990, when Namibia gained independence.

This morning we pay tribute to two stalwarts, His
Excellency Mr. Dante Caputo of Argentina, President
of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, and
His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia,
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session. Both men served their countries as Ministers

A man of principle, integrity and great acumen,
Minister Gurirab was elected to preside over the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, in 1999.
He brought the highest standards to the office. During
his tenure, the Assembly also had a very busy schedule,
with three special sessions — on small island developing

On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like to
convey our deepest condolences to the Government and
the people of Argentina and Namibia, respectively, and
to the bereaved families of Mr. Caputo and Mr. Gurirab.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-23651 (E)

*1823651*

A/72/PV.108

States, women, and social development — also being
convened. He led with distinction.
They have gone before us and they have made their
mark. They contributed greatly to our global endeavour
to maintain peace, uphold human rights and promote
justice and social progress. While we mourn their
passing, we can preserve their legacy through our own
actions and commitment to the cause of multilateralism
and the United Nations. On behalf of the General
Assembly, I wish to convey profound sympathies to
their families and to the Governments and the peoples
of Argentina and Namibia during this time of grief.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Dante
Maria Caputo and Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, former
Presidents of the General Assembly.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule
70 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
I now give the floor to Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, to make a statement on behalf of the
Secretary-General.
Ms. Viotti: On behalf of the Secretary-General, I
join the General Assembly in sorrow at the recent loss
of two distinguished members of the United Nations
family, each a greatly admired public servant and each
a former President of the General Assembly.
Dante Caputo, who passed away last month, will be
remembered for his wide-ranging contributions to peace
and democracy in his native Argentina and across Latin
America and the Caribbean. His ties with the United
Nations were productive and close. As Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Haiti in the early 1990s,
he facilitated the democratic transition in that country
following decades of repressive rule.
As President of this organ at its forty-third session,
he helped to guide the Assembly at a time of profound
global change. Through his service as Argentina’s
Foreign Minister and with the Organization of American
States, his voice was crucial in Latin America’s own
democratic transformation. Those contributions
across a life of influential action and ideas form an
important legacy.
2/13

24/07/2018

Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, who died earlier this month,
will be remembered as one of Namibia’s founding
fathers. His involvement with the United Nations dates
back to the 1960s, when he received a United Nations
fellowship to attend Temple University in the United
States. It continued during his years as the observer
of the South West Africa People’s Organization at the
United Nations.
After Namibia’s independence, Mr. Gurirab returned
to New York as President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session and helped put causes such as the
Millennium Development Goals on the global agenda.
He also played an invaluable role in the adoption of the
landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. The United Nations
was proud to stand with Namibia in its struggle for
independence, and is grateful to have benefited from
the work of Mr. Gurirab, who also served with great
skill as his country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and
as Prime Minister.
The careers of Dante Caputo and Theo-Ben Gurirab
spanned roughly the same chapter in history. Both were
committed to diplomacy, international cooperation
and a rules-based global order, and both showed how
the United Nations can bring about peaceful, positive
change. We can honour their service by preserving and
building on the achievements to which they dedicated
their lives.
I express our profound gratitude for their
contributions and offer condolences to their families,
friends and all others touched by our great loss.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I have the honour, on behalf
of the Group of African States, to pay tribute to His
Excellency Mr. Dante Caputo of Argentina, President
of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, who
passed away on 20 June. The late Mr. Caputo, who was
a champion of democracy and human rights, respected
dialogue and listened to everyone, regardless of their
rank. The late Mr. Caputo was one of the significant
promoters of the Rio Group, which called for joint and
multilateral action by Latin American countries in order
to preserve peace and democracy in South America.
He also became one of the leaders of the Cartagena
Group, whose objective was to encourage joint action
18-23651

24/07/2018

by indebted countries towards creditors in order to ease
their debt burden.
Today we celebrate his life of commitment and
democracy, which was demonstrated by his bravery
during a period in Argentina when it was not easy
to take such a stand. As the Argentine Minister for
Foreign Affairs, he helped shepherd the 1984 Treaty
of Peace and Friendship between Chile and Argentina.
The African Group pays tribute to this great son of
Argentina for standing for, and defending the ideals
of, peace and democracy. We stand together with our
Argentine brothers and sisters to celebrate a life well
lived by a man who reminds all of us what it means
to be brave and visionary. We shall continue to honour
his memory by recommitting to the ideals that he
cultivated, including equity among nations for the
purposes of development and the alleviation of poverty.
Allow me now to pay tribute, on behalf of the
African Group, to the late President of the General
Assembly Mr. Gurirab.
I have the honour, on behalf of the African Group,
to pay tribute to a fallen son of Africa who dedicated his
life to fighting injustice, racism and violent oppression.
The late Mr. Gurirab was a peacemaker and freedom
fighter who became one of Africa’s best diplomats owing
to his negotiation and conflict-resolution skills, which
led him to serve for 14 years as the chief observer of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) to
the United Nations, and later as its Permanent Observer.
From 1986 to 1990, he served as SWAPO’s Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and played a major part in the
negotiations leading to Namibia’s independence. The
late Mr. Gurirab brought the struggle of the Namibian
people to the attention of the international community
and played a key role in the protracted negotiations that
produced Security Council resolution 435 (1978), which
contained an internationally accepted plan to bring
independence to Namibia.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia, the
late Mr. Gurirab led three years of negotiations over
Walvis Bay, which resulted in its reintegration and
that of the off-shore islands into Namibia in 1994, in
fulfilment of Security Council resolution 432 (1978).
The late Mr. Gurirab cared deeply about his country,
Namibia, and the continent of Africa. He returned home
in 1989 to help organize pre-independence elections,
and was one of the leading SWAPO negotiators of the
ceasefire agreement signed in 1989 between South

A/72/PV.108

Africa’s apartheid regime and SWAPO. That set the
stage for elections in Namibia and its transition to
independence. The late Mr. Gurirab also served as a
member of the Constituent Assembly, which drafted
the Namibian Constitution, and is credited as one of
the leading figures who helped set Namibia’s foreign
policy trajectory.
The late Mr. Gurirab worked tirelessly to promote
regional and subregional cooperation and, in 1995,
represented Namibia on the bureau of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) Council of Ministers. That
year, as the Council’s first Vice-Chair, he presided over
the first extraordinary session of the central organ of
the OAU for the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts.
The late Mr. Gurirab was elected in 1999 to preside
over the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
The leadership he provided during his tenure led to
the establishment of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Africa honours the late Mr. Gurirab
for his great contribution to the realization of selfdetermination for Namibia, which was Africa’s struggle.
He dedicated his life to promoting peace and fighting
for the human rights of the Namibian people. The
history of Africa is one of struggle for independence
and our heroes of the African liberation movement
cannot be counted without mentioning Mr. Gurirab. We
pay tribute to him as a hero who will be remembered in
African history as a freedom fighter, a peacemaker and
a consummate diplomat.
In conclusion, to honour his life and legacy, we
commit to the implementation of the development agenda
to complete the unfinished business of the MDGs,
succeeded now by the Sustainable Development Goals,
and to teach future generations and generals to live up
to the ideals of peace, respect for human rights and the
protection of the freedom that was earned through the
sacrifice of heroes such as the late Mr. Gurirab.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific
States to remember and pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Dante Maria Caputo, President of the General
Assembly at its forty-third session.

18-236513/13

A/72/PV.108

During his lifetime, Mr. Dante Caputo served his
country and the international community in many
ways. He was Argentina’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
from 1983 to 1989. During that time, he signed the
1984 Treaty of Peace and Friendship with Chile, which
ended the Beagle Channel conflict. He was a leader of
the Contadora support group, a predecessor of the Rio
Group. He was also one of the leaders of the Cartagena
Group and played a key role in laying the foundation for
the Southern Common Market.
The year that Mr. Caputo served the General
Assembly as President during its forty-third session
was a remarkable one for multilateralism and
the United Nations. During that year, there were
agreements reached to end the war in Afghanistan
and to establish a ceasefire between Iran and Iraq. In
December of that year, an agreement was also reached
to usher in Namibia’s transition to independence. The
United Nations Peacekeeping Force was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of its contributions to
peacekeeping. The prestige of the United Nations had
never been greater.
Even so, as he passed the baton following his
term, we were all aware that the successive peace
and multilateralism remained fragile. Mr. Caputo
understood that. He understood that, to survive
and prosper, multilateralism needs its champions.
Multilateralism and the persistence of the international
order requires continued effort from us all. In that
respect, Mr. Caputo continued to serve the international
community throughout his lifetime, taking up roles as
Special Envoy for the United Nations and in the United
Nations Development Programme.
In remembering his life today, the Asia-Pacific
Group pays tribute to Mr. Caputo’s work for his
country, his region and the international community.
He was a true son of Argentina, who did his country
proud and upheld the cause of multilateralism and the
international rules-based system. As we approach the
closure of the seventy-second session, let us continue
his legacy and work in the spirit of cooperation and
consensus, in the common understanding that we are
all stronger together than we are apart.
I now have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States and to extend
our deepest condolences to the family of Theo-Ben
Gurirab, as well as to the Government and the people of
Namibia, on the passing of a giant in Namibia’s history.
4/13

24/07/2018

Mr. Gurirab was one of the founding fathers of
Namibia and devoted his life to the liberation of his
nation and the anti-apartheid struggle. He spent 27 years
in political exile, and his tireless efforts as the chief
representative and subsequently Permanent Observer
of the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO) to the United Nations, followed by his role
as SWAPO Secretary for Foreign Affairs, placed the
struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination
in the international spotlight. His efforts were central
in laying the groundwork for an independent Namibia.
Mr. Gurirab also played vital roles, as the key drafter
of Namibia’s Constitution, in helping to organize
pre-independence elections and in negotiating the
ceasefire agreement between South Africa’s apartheid
regime and SWAPO in 1989.
Following Namibia’s hard-won independence, in
March 1990, Mr. Gurirab served as the new nation’s first
Minister for Foreign Affairs and was a prime architect
of Namibia’s diplomacy. It was during that period that
he concurrently served as the President of General
Assembly for its fifty-fourth session. During his tenure
as President of the General Assembly, he oversaw
the successful Millennium Summit of world leaders,
during which the historic Millennium Declaration was
adopted. It was through that milestone Declaration that
the community of nations committed to a new global
partnership to reduce extreme poverty and set out the
Millennium Development Goals, the precursor to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Gurirab also played an important role in the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. Mr. Gurirab went
on to serve his country honourably as Prime Minister,
and subsequently as Speaker of the National Assembly,
until his retirement from public office. Mr. Gurirab’s
enduring commitment to justice, solidarity and selfdetermination, as well as multilateralism and the rule
of law will continue to inspire us all. We honour the
indelible legacy he left for Namibia, the African
continent and the international community.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the Group of
Eastern European States.
18-23651

24/07/2018

It is with sadness that we received the news of the
passing of His Excellency Mr. Dante Maria Caputo,
President of the General Assembly at its forty-third
session, and His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab,
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session. On behalf of the members of the Group of
Eastern European States, I would like to express our
deepest condolences to the families and friends, as well
as the the Governments and the peoples of Argentina
and Namibia.
Mr. Caputo dedicated many years of his professional
career to being a diplomat and politician in the service
of the people of Argentina, the United Nations and the
Organization of American States (OAS). In the words of
His Excellency Mr. Jorge Faurie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina,
“Mr. Caputo was the first Foreign Minister
when democracy was restored, and that gives him
an important role in Argentina’s history. He was
a man who was committed to human rights, who
respected dialogue and dissent and who listened to
everyone, regardless of their rank or hierarchy.”
After serving as the Foreign Minister from 1983
to 1989, Mr. Caputo was elected to the Chamber of
Deputies and served as Vice-President of the Foreign
Affairs Committee. In 1992, Mr. Caputo represented the
OAS and the United Nations in Haiti as Special Envoy.
In 1993, he was appointed the Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General to Haiti and
negotiated an agreement to allow for the democratic
transition on the island. From 2001 to 2004, he directed
the regional project on democratic development in
Latin America of the United Nations Development
Programme. He also held various positions at the OAS,
including Secretary for Political Affairs.
Mr. Gurirab, President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-fourth session, was regarded as one of
the founding fathers of the independent Republic of
Namibia, one of the principal architects of Namibia’s
diplomacy and a stalwart of the anti-apartheid and
freedom struggle. He was the country’s first Minister for
Foreign Affairs, from 1990 to 2002, and subsequently
served as the second Prime Minister of Namibia from
2002 to 2005. He was one of the key drafters of the
Namibian Constitution and contributed immensely to
the drafting of new laws for independent Namibia.
From 1990 to 2015, he was a member of the
National Assembly of Namibia, while from 2005 to

A/72/PV.108

2015 he served as the Speaker of the Assembly. During
that term, namely, from 2008 to 2011, Mr. Gurirab also
held the position of President of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union. Among Mr. Gurirab’s achievements at the
United Nations was the chairing of the negotiations
that brought about the reintegration of Walvis Bay into
Namibian territory, in fulfilment of Security Council
resolution 432 (1978).
Our thoughts and sympathies are with the family
and friends of Mr. Caputo and Mr. Gurirab. May they
rest in peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Antigua and Barbuda, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the sad
duty to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States in tribute to His
Excellency the late Mr. Dante Maria Caputo, President
of the General Assembly at its forty-third session,
who passed on 20 June. Mr. Caputo represented the
developing world and our regional Group of Latin
American and the Caribbean States with great pride.
Mr. Caputo was the former Foreign Minister
of his native Argentina and was also known as a
dedicated professor, a sharp and meticulous diplomat
and a passionate political leader. He is widely
remembered in Argentina for rebuilding the prestige of
Argentine diplomacy and achieving the reintegration
of the country into the world after several years of
international tension.
He is also known for his work on the South
American integration movement, the birth of the
Southern Common Market and the Treaty of Peace
and Friendship with Chile. As President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Caputo took immense care in trying
to address the widening gap of inequality and wealth
between the developed and developing countries.
After his tenure as President of the General
Assembly, he never ceased in his service to the
international community. He represented the United
Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS)
in peace missions in Haiti, which led to the restoration
of democracy in the country. In recent years, Mr. Caputo
worked in several international organizations. From
2001 to 2004 he was a project director for the United
Nations Development Programme, and between 2006

18-236515/13

A/72/PV.108

and 2009 he was the Secretary of Political Affairs of
the OAS.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States expresses its solidarity and sincere condolences
to the family of Mr. Caputo and to the Government and
the people of Argentina during these difficult times
of national grief. The Group also wishes to remind us
all, as international civil servants, to not only use this
occasion to pay homage to that outstanding diplomat
from the developing world, who dedicated his life to
service not only to Argentina but also to the world,
but also to use this occasion to recommit ourselves to
fulfilling the indelible work in ensuring the provision
of a safer, more secure and unified world.
I now turn to our tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab. I have the sad duty, once again,
to deliver this statement on behalf of the members of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in
tribute to the late Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, President of
the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, who
passed away on 14 July.
Mr. Gurirab represented the developing world with
distinction and was the son of the African region. His
Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab is being recalled as
a prominent politician in his home country of Namibia
and is considered one of the architects of the country’s
independence in the fight for freedom from colonialism
for the independence of his people. Mr. Gurirab’s
persistence and insistence that freedom and justice
belong to every human being provided him with the
moral armour to serve his country in several positions,
namely, Minister for Foreign Affairs from 1990 to
2002, Prime Minister from 2002 to 2005 and Speaker
of the National Assembly from 2005 to 2015.
Mr. Gurirab was elected President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session in 1999. During
his presidency of the General Assembly, he was
instrumental in the work of conceiving the Millennium
Development Goals, the forerunner to today’s
Sustainable Development Goals. Under his stewardship,
Heads of States and Governments for the first time
formally recognized the importance of interaction
and engagement among the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which
he also headed.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States expresses its condolences and sincere solidarity
to the family of Mr. Gurirab and to the Government and
6/13

24/07/2018

people of Namibia. We express our heartfelt sympathy
for the last of the freedom fighters. The Group also
wishes to remind us all that in honouring the life of that
great leader, we can do so by recommitting ourselves to
fostering a better environment for international peace,
diplomacy and development.
May their souls both rest in peace and may our
world continue in the fight that they have left us.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): In
a sad coincidence, I address the General Assembly
today to pay homage to two former Presidents of the
General Assembly.
It is with profound sadness that we have learned
of the passing of Mr. Dante Maria Caputo, former
President of the General Assembly. He will be
remembered for his outstanding diplomatic career and
his commitment to peace, democracy, human rights and
regional cooperation.
Former Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Argentine Republic from 1983 to 1989, Dante Caputo
contributed significantly to the preservation of peace
and the strengthening of democracy in Latin America,
and in particular in his own country after the end of the
dictatorship. He was one of the founding fathers of the
Southern Common Market and a major supporter of the
Contadora Support Group.
Mr. Caputo guided with confidence and finesse the
work of the General Assembly as President during its
forty-third session, at a key moment at the end of the
Cold War, marked by major geopolitical changes. He
pursued his work in the service of our Organization,
first as the Special Envoy and later as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti. In
his functions as director of the regional programme for
democratic development in Latin America of the United
Nations Development Programme, he could rely on his
experince in his national capacity for the sometimes
difficult reconciliation among Latin American States.
I extend my condolences, in the name of the Group
of Western European and other States, to the people
and the Government of Argentina, and foremost to his
family and friends, whom we know are many.
18-23651

24/07/2018

Today I would also like to pay tribute to another
former President of the General Assembly, Mr. TheoBen Gurirab. He will be remembered as a politician
and diplomat whose exceptional commitment to the
independence of his country and respect for human
rights is undeniable.
As a member of the South West African People’s
Organization, Mr. Gurirab held the position of its
observer to the United Nations for 14 years. During
that period, he contributed significantly to the historic
struggle for independence of his country. He played
a major role in the process leading to the adoption of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978), which opened
the door to the independence of his country. As a
member of the Constitutional Assembly, was able
to crown his previous efforts on becoming the key
penholder during the drafting of the Constitution of the
Republic of Namibia. After independence, he served in
the most prestigious of functions of his country.
Mr. Gurirab presided over the fifty-fourth session
of the General Assembly at a pivotal moment in
history during the preparations for the United Nations
Millennium Summit in 2000 and the establishment of
the Millennium Development Goals. His work therefore
largely contributed to adapting our Organization to the
strategic challenges of the twenty-first century. He was
also a leader in the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which now serves as our
guide. As President, and later as Honorary President of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Mr. Gurirab contributed
to the shaping of democratic awareness in multilateral
institutions. I need not recall how important that is in
our world today.
I offer my condolences, in the name of the Western
European and other States Group, to the people and the
Government of the Republic of Namibia, and especially
to his family and his friends, whom we know are
inconsolable. Our thoughts are with them during this
time of sorrow. Our thoughts are with all of the friends
and families of Mr. Dante Caputo and Mr. TheoBen Gurirab.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I wish to express my sincere
condolences to the people of the Argentine Republic
regarding the passing of Mr. Dante Maria Caputo,

A/72/PV.108

former Argentine Foreign Minister and President of the
General Assembly at its forty-third session.
Dante Caputo was a driven and passionate
diplomat, an educator and a lifetime public servant.
He was devoted to serving the Argentine people and
tirelessly campaigned for the restoration of democracy
to Argentina, until it was achieved. His bravery earned
him the well-deserved role as Argentina’s first Foreign
Minister after the return of democracy. His efforts
were vital in establishing democratic institutions
in his country and bringing his people to peace by
dismantling the seven-year military dictatorship. He
promoted freedom and democracy at a time when it
was not easy. He showed us that ideas, and even action,
are not enough, but rather that those ideals need to be
framed in institutions and Government.
He was a man who was committed to human rights,
and who promoted dialogue and discussion in the face
of disagreement. He pushed for accountability for those
found guilty of human rights violations in the Argentine
military. He was vital in the signing of the Treaty of
Peace and Friendship with Chile, successfully ending
conflict between the two countries over the Beagle
Channel. The questions we face today — on how to
uphold human rights in an evolving security space or to
promote justice — do not have easy answers. Mr. Caputo
showed us that we can instil change, as impossible as
it may seem.
Mr. Caputo was a great partner for the United
States. He helped improve the partnership between
our two countries. We have since formed a counternarcotics partnership and gained an important security
ally. Relations between the United States and Argentina
are stronger now than ever before.
The world stage welcomed Mr. Caputo here in New
York as the President of the General Assembly at its
forty-third session. He was a leader on international
development, a strong advocate against racial
discrimination and an activist for greater cooperation
between developed and developing nations. Today we
not only mourn his loss, but also recognize him for
his dedication and leadership in the fight to promote
democracy and human rights around the world.
The passing of Dante Caputo is a devastating loss for
the entire international community. May God bless the
memory of Dante Caputo and the people of Argentina.

18-236517/13

A/72/PV.108

On behalf of the United States, I wish to express
my sincere condolences to the Government and the
people of the Republic of Namibia on the death of
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab. Mr. Gurirab was a seasoned
diplomat, a negotiator and a leader. He envisioned an
independent Namibia, united across ethnic groups,
with a democracy that would give Namibians academic
and economic opportunities.
The United States and our United Nations
community have known Mr. Gurirab since he was young.
His dedication earned him a United Nations Fellowship
to study in the United States at Temple University in
Pennsylvania. He graduated with a degree in political
science and quickly took up the torch of his nation’s
liberation movement, the South West African People’s
Organization, working as its associate representative at
the United Nations in New York for eight years.
Then, for 14 years, Mr. Gurirab was devoted to
the independence movement’s delegation at the United
Nations. Through his hard work and devotion, Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) was adopted, calling
for a ceasefire between the independence movement
and South Africa. That resolution also established the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group, which
oversaw elections, South Africa’s eventual withdrawal
and, ultimately, Namibian independence. As a member
of Namibia’s Constituent Assembly, Mr. Gurirab
helped draft Namibia’s Constitution, which is the basis
of democratic Namibia. Mr. Gurirab taught us the
power of dedication and action. His efforts shed light
on the important role of the United Nations, and of
the Security Council, in advancing peace and security
around the world.
In addition to being Namibia’s first Foreign
Minister, Mr. Gurirab also served as President of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session. From a
student-in-exile who received a United Nations study
fellowship, to serving as a chief negotiator for a United
Nations-mediated conflict, Mr. Gurirab showed us
that persistence and faith could unite the international
community. His leadership in the General Assembly
is a testament to his dedication to diplomacy and
international relations.
Mr. Gurirab was an optimist and idealist, but for
him ideas were never enough. He worked for three
decades to achieve the independence of his homeland,
and as Namibia became independent he helped create an
enduring democratic structure for future generations.
8/13

24/07/2018

He quickly raised the profile of his young nation on the
global stage and forged strong relationships, including
with the United States.
Mr. Gurirab will be remembered as a founding
father of Namibia and a global leader. His contributions
to the creation of an independent and democratic
Namibia will be enjoyed by Namibians for generations
to come. May God bless the memory of Mr. Gurirab
and the people of Namibia.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
profound appreciation for the heartfelt words of those
who preceded me, including the Vice-President of
the General Assembly, the Chef de Cabinet to the
Secretary-General, all of the Chairs of the regional
groups and, of course, the United States of America as
the host country.
It is an honour for me to deliver this statement in
memory of Dante Maria Caputo, Argentine Minister for
Foreign Affairs from the democratic recovery in 1983
until 1989 and President of the General Assembly at
its forty-third session, among the other high positions
he held in the international arena throughout his
outstanding and impeccable career.
To remember Dante Caputo in this Hall is to
remember him with great emotion and pride. He
embodied before the world the recovery of democracy
and the commitment to the struggle for human rights
in Argentina, and during his tenure, he outlined some
of the foreign policy guidelines that continue to set the
course for my country’s actions in the world today. His
commitment to human rights, freedom and the defence
of institutions was exemplary and inspired generations
of Argentine diplomats and politicians.
As he said in his address to the general debate of
the Assembly during its forty-first session,
“We the Argentine people believe in the
possibility and need for peace ... based upon truth,
justice and freedom for all, without exception. ...
Our presentation is essentially political. ... We
believe in peace as a true formula for coexistence,
in equality as a predicate of action towards the
common welfare, in development as a focus for
the energies of men and women to build a new
society. We have no other weapons than our minds.
18-23651

24/07/2018

A/72/PV.108

... We prefer a world in which people can coexist
peacefully and freely, not in submission or under
oppression.” (A/41/PV.5, pp. 99-104)

Agreement, which made the democratic transition
and the beginning of national reconciliation possible
in Haiti.

Dante Caputo was also a strong advocate and
promoter of dialogue and understanding among
people, as well as integration. He has been described
as an architect of consensus and compromise, with an
unstoppable desire to unite what others separated and
to bring together those who thought differently. His
work and leadership were instrumental in concluding
the Treaty of Peace and Friendship between Chile and
Argentina, and his efforts towards integration among
Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil laid the foundation for
the creation of the Southern Common Market.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Argentina, I would like to extend our sincere
condolences to the family of Dante Caputo, who has
undoubtedly left an indelible mark on the memory
and future of our country, region and the entire world.
We will be eternally grateful for having had such an
excellent exponent of the values that unite us as an
international community.

As a faithful exponent of the region, Dante
Caputo embodied Latin America and the Caribbean’s
commitment to peace and democracy, and in that
regard actively participated in the Contadora Support
Group, later called the Rio Group, to promote peace
in Central America. Moreover, he was one of the
promoters of the Cartagena Group, with the objective of
the indebted countries taking action against the foreign
debt creditors.
As President of the General Assembly, Mr. Caputo
was responsible for presiding over this forum at a time
when the world was beginning to undergo a transition
into a period of profound changes in the international
order and power relations among States. He served
during the tenure of His Excellency Mr. Javier Pérez
de Cuéllar as Secretary-General, and both embodied
the values and professionalism of Latin America at the
helm of the Organization.
During Caputo’s tenure as President, the Assembly
made progress on issues related to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the defence
and promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and economic development with equality.
After completing his term as President of the General
Assembly and Foreign Minister of the Argentine
Republic, Dante Caputo continued to work actively in
the international arena for peace, democracy and human
rights as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Haiti from 1992 to 1994, and subsequently as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Haiti from 1993
to 1994. He was also appointed Special Envoy of the
Organization of American States for Haiti in 1993. In
that context, he helped conclude the Governors Island

Lastly, let me also say a few words in memory of
Theo-Ben Gurirab, who was President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, while representing
his country Namibia. He stood out for laying the
groundwork for the formulation of the Millennium
Development Goals and for fostering interaction
between the United Nations and parliaments around
the world. We extend sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of Namibia, as well as to
the entire African continent, on the loss of one of the
founding fathers of that nation and a true leader.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I join all those who have
spoken before me in expressing the heartfelt sympathy
of the Government and the people of Namibia on the
passing of Minister Caputo of Argentina. He worked
hand in glove with the late Theo-Ben Gurirab in the
corridors of the United Nations, sharing the same
aspirations and objectives in the fight for liberty, justice
and freedom. He became Foreign Minister at a time
when Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab was Foreign Minister. He
shared his understanding and knowledge with Javier
Pérez de Cuéllar and oversaw the implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) for Namibia. We
extend our deepest condolences to the bereaved family
of the late Minister Caputo and to the entire bereaved
nation of Argentina.
Today we are gathered here to pay tribute to one of
the legends, and indeed a hero of Namibia’s liberation
struggle, and one of Africa’s and, dare I say, one of the
world’s finest diplomats. He grew up in the rural village
of Usakos, in my country, Namibia, and rose to become
a distinguished global citizen and statesman — a
champion of freedom, democracy, peace, human rights,
the right to self-determination and independence.

18-236519/13

A/72/PV.108

On behalf of the bereaved Gurirab family, the
Government and the people of Namibia, I wish to
express our heartfelt gratitude to you, Sir, and to all our
colleagues for your invaluable support in honouring
an outstanding son of the Namibian soil. He was truly
an extraordinary representative of the values and
principles upon which our international parliament of
the people, the United Nations, was founded. It was
here among diplomats from around the world that he
stood up and raised his voice against racial oppression
and injustice and apartheid colonialism and demanded
liberty, justice and freedom for people all over the
world fighting to liberate their countries from the
shackles of colonialism. It was here where his journey
as fearless defender of human rights and independence
for the people of his beloved Namibia found its way
into the corridors of the United Nations and onto the
international stage. It was here where his close friend
and comrade Mr. Hage Geingob, now President of the
Republic of Namibia, handed the reigns to him to take
charge as the top diplomat of the South West African
People’s Organization (SWAPO) at the United Nations
in 1972. It was here, nearly 50 years ago, that his
remarkable journey into the world of diplomacy begun.
I thank the members of the Assembly from the
bottom of my heart for taking the time to be with us
today as we pay tribute to the late Honourable Mr. TheoBen Gurirab. In his departure, Namibia has lost a son,
Africa has lost a visionary and the world has lost a
great leader. As we bid farewell to one of the legends
of Namibia’s liberation struggle, we honour the legacy
of an outstanding representative of the people, who
distinguished himself as a skilful, talented, sharp and
eloquent negotiator. He was known as a Pan-Africanist
at heart, who always reminded us of the vision of the
founders of the Organization of African Unity, now the
African Union.
Here at the United Nations and in other international
forums, he was known for his toughness in negotiations,
but because of his ever-present gentleness he was simply
and affectionately referred to as Ben. It is funny how I
am able to say that only now that he cannot hear me,
for it would never have left my lips to address him in
such an informal manner. He was my Minister, Prime
Minister and Speaker — never would I have dared to
call him Ben, as he was referred to here in the halls of
the United Nations.
Over the past week since his demise, we have
heard numerous accolades and heart-warming tributes
10/13

24/07/2018

about this remarkable son of the Namibian soil. The
central message was, is and will remain that TheoBen Gurirab has left an indelible mark as a highly
intelligent, fiery but compassionate diplomat. He was a
man of unbelievable charm, generally soft-spoken with
captivating oratory skills.
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab was in no small measure an
intellectual giant. He was a man with a deep passion
for the art and purpose of the diplomatic profession;
intoxicated with a desire to seek peaceful settlement of
conflicts. He was a skilful negotiator who was committed
to the pursuit of justice for the disenfranchised, with a
strong conviction that win-win solutions would have
long-lasting impact. Without exception, Mr. Theo-Ben
Gurirab has been hailed as a consummate diplomat,
one of the principal architects of Namibia’s diplomatic
prowess, anti-apartheid and tireless freedom fighter,
towering figure of Namibia’s diplomacy, a stalwart of
the struggle for Namibia’s independence, as well as a
great proponent of African pride and identity.
Mr. Gurirab arrived in the United States in 1963,
upon being awarded a United Nations Fellowship. He
attended Temple University in Pennsylvania, where
he obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in political
science. He completed advanced post-graduate
studies in international relations in 1971. In 1964 he
was appointed, along with His Excellency Mr. Hage
G. Geingob and the late Hidipo Hamutenya, as one
of SWAPO’s troika of associate representatives to
the United Nations and the Americas, serving in that
capacity while simultaneously pursuing their education.
As a seasoned diplomat and negotiator, Mr. Gurirab
served as SWAPO’s chief observer at the United
Nations for 14 years, during which time he successfully
led the campaign that resulted in the General Assembly
adopting resolution 3111 (XXVIII) on 12 December
1973, granting SWAPO observer status as the authentic
representative of the Namibian people and recognizing
the South West Africa People’s Organization in 1976 as
the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian
people. Under his able stewardship here at the United
Nations, Mr. Gurirab succeeded in making the case
for Namibia’s independence when a plan for the
independence of the territory was unanimously adopted
by way of Security Council resolution 385 (1976), of
30 January 1976, demanding free and fair elections
in Namibia, under the supervision and control of the
United Nations.
18-23651

24/07/2018

Over the 14 years of his stewardship as SWAPO’s
top diplomat at the United Nations from 1972 to 1986,
the Organization’s political and diplomatic status grew
from that of a petitioner on the sidelines of diplomacy
to a mainstream negotiator and participant in the
international arena. Through his efforts Mr. Gurirab
turned the struggle of the Namibian people into a
celebrated cause of the international community.
The protracted negotiations that produced Security
Council resolution 435 (1978), which contained an
internationally accepted plan to bring independence
to Namibia, represented one of the high points in his
political career.
Following Namibia’s independence, Mr. Gurirab
held the positions of Foreign Minister from 1990 to 2002,
Prime Minister from 2002 to 2005 and Speaker of the
National Assembly until his retirement in March 2015.
He also served as President of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union from 2008 to 2011.
Mr. Gurirab will be remembered for his role as
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session, from 1999 to 2000, when he presided over the
Millennium Summit of the United Nations. He had
the distinct and singular honour of presiding over the
General Assembly as it transitioned from the twentieth
century into the twenty-first century from 1999 to
2000. Without question, I would say that that was a
once-in-a-lifetime privilege.
Over more than 35 years in the field of international
affairs and diplomacy, Mr. Gurirab knew and worked
with three generations of world leaders and five
Secretaries-General of the United Nations. He devoted
his life to the liberation of his country. Throughout
his extraordinary journey through life, he remained
a man of the people, a firm believer in the power of
education and knowledge and an advocate for equal
rights and for the advancement of women and young
people in society. He was an avid reader, a historian,
a philosopher, a compassionate and dedicated family
man, a friend of the arts and culture, a diplomat par
excellence and, above all, a distinguished gentleman.
On a personal note, I had the privilege to know
and to work with that extraordinary man for the entire
28 years of my career in the foreign service of our
country. I remember him as one of the most eloquent
and passionate diplomats. He was painfully precise,
especially in his use of vocabulary and in his writings.
At the same time, he was able to sit and talk with anyone

A/72/PV.108

and to fit in with anyone at their level. He was at ease
with world leaders, academics and superstars and with
his staff — in fact, with anyone. There is no doubt that
he was an icon for many of us in the diplomatic world,
particularly those of us who had the privilege to work
closely with him.
In conclusion, allow me to share with members
a few lines of my personal message to him. The sun
has set, and the time to bid you farewell has dawned
on us. For you, honourable TBG — as I affectionately
used to call him — the journey into eternity has just
begun. We salute you and will forever be grateful for
your legendary example of service and of hard work
and for your sacrifices and immeasurable support
and selflessness. Farewell my dear teacher, mentor,
icon of Namibia’s extraordinary diplomatic finesse,
internationalist, distinguished orator and gentle giant.
Until we meet again, may your soul rest in perfect peace.
The Acting President: That concludes the tributes
paid to two former Presidents of the General Assembly,
namely, the late Mr. Caputo and Mr. Gurirab.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/72/L.63)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.63.
Mr. Cadena Duarte (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.63,
entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Decade
of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)”.
In its nine preambular and six operative
paragraphs, this succinct but significant draft
resolution seeks to increase the political relevance of
the implementation of activities in the context of the
work programme of the Decade. Among its sources
of information, it is worth mentioning the report of
the Secretary-General (A/72/829) and the 2017 report
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World,
compiled by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund
for Agricultural Development (IFAD), UNICEF, the

18-2365111/13

A/72/PV.108

World Food Programme (WFP) and the World Health
Organization (WHO).
The Government of Ecuador notes with deep
concern that the 2017 report indicates that the number
of people suffering from chronic undernourishment
throughout the world increased to 815 million in 2016,
as compared to 777 million in 2015. Also, while the
prevalence of chronic childhood malnutrition decreased
from 29.5 per cent to 22.9 per cent between 2005 and
2016, 155 million children under the age of five years
are still affected by that malady — a clear reflection that
we are far from eradicating hunger and malnutrition.
We welcome the reference in the draft resolution
to the importance of promoting sustainable farming
and agriculture in order to eradicate hunger and
malnutrition and to the contribution that family farming
and smallholder farming can make to that end.
The draft resolution recognizes that women are
often more affected by food insecurity than men in
every region of the world, that almost one third of
women of reproductive age worldwide suffer from
anaemia and that wasting, undernutrition, overweight
and obesity are recurrent problems that affect children
in several countries are of the greatest importance and
require the commitment of all to deal with them.
The document reiterates the call on Governments,
United Nations agencies, other international and
regional organizations, civil society, the private
sector and academic institutions to make ambitious
commitments with a view to strengthening efforts and
scaling up activities under the work programme of the
Decade, as well as our appeal to FAO and WHO to
redouble efforts in continuing to lead the activities of the
work programme, in collaboration with WFP, IFAD and
UNICEF and in consultation with other organizations
and platforms, together with the reference to convening
open and inclusive dialogues at the midterm evaluation
of the Decade and at the end of it in order to build on the
initiatives of Governments and their partners.
Finally, as facilitator of the informal consultations,
Ecuador expresses its gratitude to the delegations
that actively participated in the discussion on the text
before us, as well as for the technical support during
consultations by the representatives of the offices of
FAO and WHO. We reiterate our appreciation to the
Permanent Missions of Guinea, Samoa, Senegal and
Tunisia for the early sponsorship of the draft resolution,
and we thank the 19 States that by 9 o’clock today had
12/13

24/07/2018

decided to sponsor it. We invite other delegations
to sponsor the document, which is the result of a
multilateral exercise in mutual benefit.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolution A/72/L.63, entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/72/L.63: Brazil, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Myanmar, Palau,
the Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovenia, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.63?
Draft resolution A/72/L.63
(resolution 72/306).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): While
we joined the consensus on resolution 72/306, entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)”, we would like to make
reference to our prior statements containing points of
clarification on language related to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We once again underscore
that the 2030 Agenda is non-binding, does not create or
affect rights or obligations under international law and
does it create any new financial commitments.
We previously provided an explanation of the United
States position on this matter in the General Assembly
on 12 June following the adoption of resolution 72/281,
under agenda item 14 (see A/72/PV.95).
Mr. Cadena Duarte (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 72/306,
18-23651

24/07/2018

A/72/PV.108

entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Decade
of Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)”, sends a clear
message of optimism.

products, which are necessary to guarantee an adequate
caloric intake. The main cause of hunger in the world
is poverty.

The Government of Ecuador promotes healthy food
practices and assistance for the development of the
agricultural sector as mechanisms to ensure a decent
life for the population. Reducing the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition and investing in new technologies
for agricultural production are priority areas for action.
Early childhood care, with an emphasis on the first
1,000 days of life, is one of our main challenges. Our
public policies focus on reducing chronic malnutrition
in children between the ages of 2 and 5, while
encouraging only breastfeeding during the first six
months of life. At the same time, we face pressing
problems of obesity and overweight in children aged
five to 11, the prevalence of which was more than 31 per
cent in 2014.

Ecuador presented its intersectoral food and
nutrition plan last February. The plan, which covers
the period 2018-2025, aims at ensuring adequate
nutrition throughout a person’s life and comprehensive
care, as well as the setting up of mechanisms for
shared responsibility among all levels of Government,
citizens and the private sector. The latter would involve
intersectoral interventions that act on the social
determinants of health, with the aim of addressing
all forms of malnutrition through a participatory,
consensual and joint effort.

We have made significant progress in Ecuador
in measuring average household food consumption,
which is essential for analysis and action. Our goal is to
ensure that more and more households have the means
to access foodstuffs such as grains, meat and dairy

We reiterate our commitment to participating
actively in multilateral processes to get back on the
right track towards achieving our common goals.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 14?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

18-2365113/13
