UNITED

THIRTY-EIGHTH

2505”

YEAR

MEETING:

19 DECEMBER

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2505). . . . . . . . . . . . . .‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . ..*...................................

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President bf the Security Council
(S/16216). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

-.

_-

;.

_-

slPv.2505

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2505th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 19 December 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Max VAN DER STOEL
(Netherlands).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Egypt;the German Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria and the United Republic of Tanzania in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2505)

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/162 16)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Pelletier
(Canada), Mr. Khalil (Egypt),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic),. Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria)
and Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania) took the
places resewed for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/16198,
which contains the text of a letter dated 5 December
from the representative of Angola addressed to the
President of the Council.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Portugal.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 Decembef 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216)

5. Mr. MEDINA
(Portugal)
(interpretation
from
French): Sir, first of all I should like to congratulate you
on acceding to the presidency of the Council and, in
expressing my gratitude for your delegation’s constant
co-operation with my own, wish you success in your
work.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2504th meeting, I invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the representatives of Botswana, Brazil, India,
Mauritania,
Mozambique,
Portugal, Somalia, South
Africa, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. My delegation
in this debate.

has three basic reasons for speaking

7. The first is that we are aware of the duty incumbent
upon Portugal to co-operate, within the Organization,
in efforts to redress wrongs caused by violations of
international
law. Indeed! one of the United Nations
main contributions to the mtemational
community has
been its work to strengthen the system of lex gentium.
This has been a contribution
of tremendous importance, which has emphasized that the Organisation is
based on the fundamental principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the non-use of force, the ter-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Krishnan
(India), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Medina (Portugal), Mr. Adan
(Somalia), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
1

ritorial integrity of States, the implementation
in good
faith of international
obligations and the respect for
human rights. It is therefore the duty of every Member
State to lend its full co-operation to promote scrupulous
respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and for decisions taken by the competent
bodies of the Organization. It is also in the interests of
the entire international community to control any situation that could lead to unforeseeable consequences for
inter-State relations. Indeed, the time has come for
States to discharge their moral and political responsibility to put an end to a critical problem that jeopardizes the authority, credibility and prestige of the
United Nations, threatens to erode the United Nations
system and increases-the sense of failure caused by the
constant thwarting of efforts to halt violation of the
basic tenets of the Organization.

.
_-

_-

_’

I

-

_.

-.
_-

8. The second reason my delegation has for speaking
in this debate is Portugal’s deep concern over a confrontation fraught with serious repercussions that could
jeopardize
the entire international
political
order.
Unless a solution is found through peaceful means, that
confrontation,
which has so often erupted into armed
struggle, will threaten stability in southern Africa. The
continued acts of aggression and the illegal occupation
of part of the territory of Angola, against the backdrop
of a policy of repression and intimidation,
diminish
respect for that country’s national identity and its right
to development. A solution is essential, for today it is
clear that the only path open to us, in view of the
deterioration
of a situation that has been condemned
almost universally, can only be the immediate halting of
inadmissible actions that have already led to considerable loss of human life and essential economic resour.ces. Moreover, this escalation of violence is likely to
make settlement of a patently dangerous problem ever
more difficult. This peril explains Portugal’s unwavering support for all United Nations initiatives-or
for
any expression of concrete political will by the Governments concerned-aimed
at avoiding armed confrontation, until the rights of the Angolan people are duly
safeguarded and respected.
9.‘ Portugal’s devotion to the cause of the Angolan
people-and
this is the third reason for my delegation’s
participation
in this debate-is
also explained by the
special ties between my country and southern Africa,
in particular with the People’s Republics of Angola
and Mozambique.
Indeed, as Portugal is linked to the
African continent by age-old ties, it could not remain
indifferent to anything that happens there-not
only
because of the consequences of such events on the
international
system, but also because of the cultural
and historical ties that irrevocably bind my country to
Africa.
10. .Portugal is thus taking part in the just and legitimate defence of the causes that the peoples of that
continent regard as essential to their future prospects
and to their determination
to define their own kind of
society through the full exercise of their sovereignty.

Therefore my delegation cannot fail to point out, with
deep concern, the persistence of a situation entailing
evident dangers for a region that should at all cost be
spared a clash of extracontinental
interests, insofar as
those interests might try to influence the solution to the
present problems without taking account of the realities
and the interests of Africa.
11. The stability of these Governments,
within the
context of their national identities, is a prerequisite for
the development of these countries, so greatly threatened by the situation prevailing in southern Africa. It is
also a priority objective of the co-operation offered by
Portugal, which is reflected most clearly in the presence
there of many of our own nationals who ‘are deeply
committed to the process of regional development.
12. The urgent need for a just and swift settlement of
the problem that has been brought before the Council is
essential, because of the legal, political and moral
imperatives flowing from the,colIective obligation and
the very principles on which the United Nations is
based. It is up to the Council to reaftirm its belief in
those principles by supporting the legitimate demands
of Angola.
13. My delegation hopes that this work will help to
strengthen the prevailing awareness of the need to
reach a peaceful, constructive, fair and lasting overall
solution. Portugal, aware that no historical or legal
argument can be invoked to delay such a solution,
reiterates its total readiness to co-operate with the competent bodies of the United Nations and the Govemments concerned in the achievement of an objective to
which the peoples of southern Africa aspire in their
desire to build a future of peace and prosperity together.
14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
15. Mr. MACIEL
(Brazil): I should like first to
express to you, Sir, my Government’s
and my delegation’s gratitude for this opportunity
to speak to the
Council on the case brought to it by Angola, a sister
country of my own, and to say how happy I am to be
speaking to the Council under your presidency.
16. It is a matter of great distress to us that this issue
should once again have to be considered by the Council, to which the Government
of Angola finds itself
compelled to resort yet another time.
17. Indeed, South African military forays into Angola
have become more frequent and have escalated lately,
amounting to an actual occupation of Angolan territory.
Such acts of force constitute persistent violations of
international law and of the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and represent a clear
threat to international
peace and security. The Brazilian Government vehemently condemns these acts,

which, in addition to their inherent illegality, substantially aggravate the situation in southern Africa. We
cannot disregard the fact that at the root of South African aggressions against Angola and other countries of
the area with which Brazil enjoys close relations of
friendship and to which we express our full support lies
the practice of apartheid, an unjustifiable and aberrant
system which the Republic of South Africa strives to
preserve.

commitment
to the sovereignty
rights of peoples.

of countries and to the

24. .For far too long we have been witnessing the
prolonged occupation of parts of southern Angola by
the racist armed forces of South Africa. The aggressive
policy of the Pretoria regime, its use of massive military
force and the brutal oppression of the countries and
peoples of southern Africa are continuing. This policy
and these acts have grave consequences for peace and
security in the region and beyond.

18. The Brazilian nation repudiates racism in all its
forms, especially when it is practised in an institutionalized manner, as is still the case under the apartheid
South African regime. Brazil also repudiates the use of
force in international
relations, and it does so even
more vigorously when force is used in a systematic
manner as part of a cumulative process which originates in other illegal actions, such as the occupation of
Namibia.

25. South Africa is constantly imposing war upon the
neighbouring non-aligned, sovereign and independent
countries. It is attempting to destabilize these countries
by military, economic and political means, to achieve
domination in the region and to maintain its colonial and
expansionist policy, as well as the inhuman system of
apartheid. It continues to wage war against Angola,
flagrantly violating the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international
law and the very
bases of international relations. This situation poses a
direct challenge to the Organization and to the Council.

19. It is high time that effective international action
was taken on the question. Countless meetings have
been held without succeeding in putting an end to the
series of illegal acts perpetrated by South Africa. The
international debate, nevertheless, contributes to clarifying once and for all the real causes of the problem. It is
worth repeating one more time that the international
community must firmly condemn the irresponsible acts
committed bythe South African regime. It is necessary
for South Africa to be convinced that it cannot proceed
with impunity
in its aggressive and unjustifiable
actions.

26. Disregarding the call for the withdrawal of military forces from Angolan territory and for scrupulous
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola, Pretoria continues to turn a deaf ear to all
demands by the international
community.
Escalating
its policy of State terrorism, it is organizing, financing,
equipping and using armed groups and mercenaries in
order to subvert the legitimate Government of Angola.

20. The question now under discussion concerns not
only the military aggression against Angola but also the
situation in South Africa as a whole and, in the final
analysis, the authority of the Security Council itself. It
is our opinion that this organ should decisively condemn South Africa for its military aggression, demand
the immediate withdrawal of its forces from Angola and
have South Africa pay reparations for the loss of human
lives as well as material losses it has inflicted upon
Angola. Should the illegal occupation of Angolan territory by South Africa persist, we cannot see how the
Council can fail to resort to the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

27. The South African regime uses the territory of
Namibia as a springboard for aggression against Angola
and other front-line States. This is calculated also to
delay the process of the decolonization of Namibia and
secure South Africa’s permanent presence there, as
well as its further exploitation of the people and natural
resources in that area.
28. Since the first Conference of Heads of State or
Government held at Belgrade 22 years ago, the nonaligned countries have time and again proved their
solidarity with the people of southern Africa and the
front-line States, as well as with all the peoples suffering foreign aggression and occupation.

21. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

29. The Heads of State or Government
of NonAligned Countries at their seventh Conference held at
New Delhi in March this year strongly condemned the
continued military occupation of a part of Angolan
territory by the South African racist troops, which they
considered an act of aggression against the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. They demanded the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South African
troops from Angolan territory, and decided to increase
support for, and solidarity with, the people and Government of Angola in order to consolidate the national
independence of that country and safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Sovereign and independent Angola needs peace above all, in order to be

22. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): You bring to the presidency of the Council for the month of December, Sir,
wisdom and understanding of the problems of peace
and development that you showed so creatively while
serving in high and responsible posts in the Govemment of the Netherlands.
23. Permit me to use the precious time of the Council
also to express our deep appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Victor Gauci, representative of Malta. In
guiding the work of the Council, he displayed a firm
5

32. The Council should enforce the immediate and
unconditional
withdrawal of all racist military forces
from Angolan territory, using all the means provided
in the Charter with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.

able to turn to the problems of its economic and social
development and meet the pressing needs of its population.
30. Massacres of defenceless women and children
and the destruction of the economic infrastructure are
designed to bring the people of Angola to their knees.
But they know that the aggressor should be resisted and
fought, and they do not want to give in to another
colonial domination.
They are fighting the battle that
has been repeated so many times in recent history. We
admire them, we support them, and they have our
unreserved solidarity. We in Yugoslavia defended our
own freedom and independence, and we know its significance and value.

33. The recent statement by the Pretoria Government
[250&h meeting] does not seem to express an honest
intention to comply with the previous decisions of the
Council. It is, rather, another attempt at prevarication
and procrastination,
with which South Africa is trying
to cover up the long trail of destruction and suffering it
has been sowing in Angola and all States in southern
Africa that come within the reach of its military machine.
34. It is high time this crying injustice ended. South
Africa should be told that this is no longer the time when
the big and powerful do what they wish, and the smaller
and weaker suffer what they must.

3 1. We expect the Council to condemn South Africa,
to halt its continuous aggression, to stop the illegal
occupation of the territory of Angola and to call for full
and adequate compensation by South Africa to Angola
for the damage to life and property inflicted by this
aggression.

The meeting

4

rose at 11.45 a.m.

.

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans la libmiries et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.
KAIC

IIO.‘I.Y’ILITb

Zi3aAHMll

OPrAHH

3AlK&iH

OIYbE~WIHEHHhIX

HAUZIH

Hanar-run
Opratxasaqrcw
O~Z~AKH~HH~IS
HairHi
xoxm
~ynmb
B K~H~H~IX
wwaJWH~X w arenrczeax
no ncex pakowax
Mnpa. HaeonwTe
cnpamcn
06 nartannsix
B
BatheM rofnxno~
braraanne
wnu nmrr~~e
no aapecy : Oprauusauwrc
06-bentinexrrbrr
Haunt% Ce~urm no nponawe
wanarmfi,
Hbto-Hoprc
HI~U Xeeeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas partes de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

904020CMarch

1!992-2,050
