United Nations

S/PV.6477

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6477th meeting
Tuesday, 8 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security.
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-22784 (E)

*1122784*

S/PV.6477

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I give the floor
to Baroness Ashton.
Baroness Ashton: Thank you, Madame, for
giving me the opportunity to again address the Council
on the contribution of the European Union (EU) to
international peace and security. As you know, we have
a
long-standing
commitment
to
effective
multilateralism, with a strong United Nations at its
core. Regional organizations are building blocks for
global governance, with a dual responsibility, first, to
enhance security, development and human rights in
their own region; and secondly, to support United
Nations efforts to promote those goals around the
world.
When I spoke to the Security Council last year
(see S/PV.6306), I updated members on the progress
regarding the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty and
the promises that it held for strengthening our
contribution to addressing international concerns. I am
pleased to report that, as of 1 January, the European
External Action Service, one of the Lisbon Treaty’s
main innovations, is up and running. It operates under
my authority and brings together all our global
instruments. In our view, the Lisbon Treaty and the
External Action Service are not just good for Europe;
they also make us a better partner for the United
Nations, and we are very grateful for the Council’s
help in recognizing this.
In many countries today, we are seeing people
demand
greater
freedoms,
democracy
and
accountability. In North Africa and the Middle East, we
are seeing demonstrations of people’s basic wish to be
guaranteed
political
participation,
fundamental

2

freedoms, social justice and economic development.
Last Friday, the 27 Heads of State and Government of
the European Union saluted the peaceful and dignified
expression by the Tunisian and Egyptian peoples of
their legitimate, democratic, economic and social
aspirations, which are in accord with the values that the
European Union promotes for itself and throughout the
world.
Our position is clear — the democratic
aspirations of citizens must be met through dialogue,
genuine political reform and free and fair elections that
are well prepared. These are not just words. The
European Union will offer practical support to the
transition processes. I have already discussed this with
the new Tunisian Foreign Minister, and I will visit the
region next week to clarify further how we can help.
We know from our own experience how difficult the
establishment of genuine democracy can be. These are
not linear processes. So we will help countries not only
to run free and fair elections, but also to fight
corruption,
make
local
administration
more
transparent, ensure the independence of the media and
make the justice system fully independent.
We are witnessing major change in the Middle
East. The contours of what will eventually emerge are
not yet clear — they cannot be — but we do know that
urgent progress on the Middle East peace process is
vital, now more than ever. This weekend, I chaired an
important meeting of the Quartet in Munich to review
the current situation and chart a common plan of
action. The search for a negotiated peace between
Israel and the Palestinians has dominated the region for
decades. Current developments must bring us closer to
that goal, not farther away, and I am pleased that the
Quartet agreed on a specific path to do this, with a
follow-up meeting of our envoys in Brussels. For the
first time, the Quartet will meet separately with
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators to hear their views.
We further agreed to meet again at the ministerial level
in March to ensure that momentum is kept up, and we
confirm our support for having a framework agreement
in place by September 2011.
The parameters for peace as seen by the European
Union are well known: two States, co-existing in peace
and security, with a Palestinian State that is sovereign,
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable, based
on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States. Our position on this and on

11-22784

S/PV.6477

related issues,
unchanged.

including

settlements,

remains

We are also active in laying the foundations of a
future Palestinian State through practical measures. We
are at the forefront of providing budgetary support and
assistance on security to the Palestinian Authority.
During my most recent visit to the region, I confirmed
that we will front-load an initial financial package of
€100 million for the occupied Palestinian territories
under the 2011 budget. I also discussed the new
Palestinian National Plan with Prime Minister Fayyad
in Paris last week, and reconfirmed our support for his
plan. We will also host the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting in Brussels on 13 April to promote efforts on
Palestinian State-building.
The Security Council also knows well the needs
of the people of Gaza, and we are committed to
supporting them. I have proposed a comprehensive
package of EU support for the Gaza crossings,
focusing on infrastructure, equipment and training. Our
objective remains an unconditional opening of those
crossings, while addressing Israel’s legitimate security
needs.
There is a third issue that affects the landscape of
the wider Middle East, and indeed global security, and
that is the Iranian nuclear issue. On 20 and 21 January,
I chaired a series of meetings between the E3+3/P5+1
with Iran. Given the well-known difficulties, our aim
was not to look for an immediate agreement but to
focus on building confidence. The fundamental
problem is that we do not have confidence that the
Iranian nuclear programme is purely civilian in nature.
Regrettably, our concrete proposals to build confidence
and transparency were met by an Iranian request that
we first recognize Iran’s right to the entire fuel cycle,
including enrichment, and a lifting of sanctions.
That was disappointing. As the Council has
underlined on several occasions, Iran is at present not
complying with various obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. From our
side, we reiterated that we remain committed to the
path of dialogue. Our practical proposals remain on the
table. If Iran were to adopt some of the transparency
measures that most countries already implement, we
would be starting a process that could go far.
As I mentioned, electoral processes are essential
mechanisms for enabling people to enjoy their political
rights, but they are also very delicate. The situation in

11-22784

three countries has shown just how important it is for
electoral
processes
to
be
underpinned
by
comprehensive political strategies.
Let me first refer to the successful developments
in South Sudan. The preparations and organization of
the referendum went well. I would like to praise the
Sudanese authorities for their willingness to find a
peaceful solution ensuring the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. They should
continue to do so and resolve all outstanding issues. I
also want to commend the United Nations for the
political leadership shown in this process. This
confirms that real progress can be made when the
international community persists with concerted
efforts.
We now have to stay focused so that the region
does not slip back into the violence that has marred it
for decades. The European Union contributed to the
referendum through the deployment of an important
observer mission. We will continue to engage with the
North and South alike — including on the crucial task
of building the vital democratic institutions — in full
cooperation with the United Nations and other
partners.
Unfortunately, in some cases electoral processes
aimed at helping States move on from conflict and
internal strife have run into difficulties. Here, we have
to remain firm and engaged. In Côte d’Ivoire, the
European Union fully supports the leadership of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States and the key role played by the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. The EU recognizes
President Ouattara as the winner of the elections and
has also adopted targeted sanctions on individuals and
entities closely allied to former President Gbagbo to
step up the pressure and persuade him to heed the
results of the election. Going forward, we all want to
see real results from the process that was launched at
the recent African Union Summit, and which the EU
supports.
In Haiti, the recent electoral crisis proves that
reinforcing democratic institutions is essential. The
Provisional Electoral Council has taken a positive step
in announcing the final results of the first round of the
presidential and legislative elections. Now, all political
forces in Haiti need to contribute responsibly to the
electoral process so that the second round can be
concluded in line with the Constitution and the will of

3

S/PV.6477

the Haitian people. A transparent democratic transition
and political stability are prerequisites for success with
Haiti’s recovery and reconstruction. The EU is
contributing significant resources to both civil
administration and the wider reconstruction of the
country.
The ideals of freedom, democracy and
accountability are universal, but they require the
presence of some forms of State order. As this Council
knows well, the international community also has to
deal with failed States where warlords and criminal
gangs prevent the establishment of the rule of law. In
these situations, we should focus first on ensuring
stability and security as the basis for any economic and
social development. There are several cases around the
world where the international community is working to
build functioning States where current structures fall
short. Somalia is a clear example. The EU has an
important and successful naval operation off shore,
called Atalanta. But there can be no long-term solution
to the problem of piracy without more stability on
shore and greater regional capabilities. Therefore, we
are working hard on these three tracks as part of an
overall regional strategy.
Security,
development,
democracy,
good
governance and respect for human rights are all
interlinked. We must pursue these goals in concert or
none will succeed. That means addressing both the
wider root causes of conflict and developing
appropriate tools to address them. For example, we
know that in some cases the question of politicized
access to natural resources can cause or perpetuate
conflict. Similarly, climate change has a real impact on
vulnerable people and places, and hence on global
peace and security. These issues cannot be tackled by
fragmented approaches.
We should all invest more in conflict prevention,
finding ways to channel grievances through peaceful
means while addressing the underlying causes:
underdevelopment, weak institutions and lack of
democracy and respect for human rights. In this
context, I want to commend the Brazilian presidency of
the Council for convening a special meeting next
Friday on the links between development and security.
The EU is very engaged in making and supporting the
necessary connections between these areas, both at
headquarters and in the field, in full coordination with
the United Nations and other international partners.

4

I have limited my comments to some of the cases
which are perhaps the most pressing, but there are
many others in which the EU is engaged, with and in
support of the United Nations to protect the vulnerable
and ensure that genuine democracy can take root. Let
me end by acknowledging the great responsibility of
this Council in steering the international community
away from conflict and confrontation. In carrying out
its tasks, it can count on the full commitment and
support of the EU.
The President: I thank Baroness Ashton for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Baroness Ashton for her briefing. I welcome this
second visit of the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union,
which attests to the importance of European Union
engagement within the United Nations.
I need not recall that the European Union has
long been a prime political mover — a reality that the
implementation of the Lisbon Treaty has strengthened
further. The European Union — the largest contributor
to the United Nations budget, responsible for some 40
per cent — undertakes decisive action in pursuit of the
Charter objective to ensure international peace and
security.
Having brought peace to the old continent, which
was a source of numerous conflicts, the European
Union plays its full role in managing crises around the
world. On the one hand, it has launched many civilian
and military operations, mandated by the Security
Council. Without going into exhaustive detail, I cite by
way of example the support of the European Union and
its member States for such varied operations as those in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
on land and at sea in Somalia, and in Kosovo.
Moreover, in the case of serious humanitarian crises or
natural disasters, the European Union plays a decisive
role in emergency assistance and reconstruction. In
Haiti, for instance, we offered our expertise and
committed more than €1.5 billion, making the
European Union once again the largest donor.
The European Union is also involved in the
resolution of major international crises. From that
perspective, I thank the High Representative for her

11-22784

S/PV.6477

very useful and enlightening comments today on the
meeting of the Middle East Quartet that she chaired.
That meeting, she told us, was just a first step; it
should augur a change in the political software used by
the international community to advance towards a
negotiated final settlement of the dispute, the
parameters of which are familiar to us all and which we
know the two parties are incapable of achieving by
themselves. Phased approaches have proven to be paths
to nowhere, and we must therefore move on to a final
settlement. We hope that the Quartet will play a key
role in that regard.
I should also like to revert to the Iranian nuclear
issue, in which the European Union is represented by
the E3+3 in negotiations to ensure that Iran honours its
international obligations, especially with regard to the
Security Council. As has been recalled, at the Istanbul
summit the six reaffirmed their unity and steadfastness,
while the Iranians insisted on new conditions in
pursuing the same dilatory tactics they have used for
the past six years.
With regard to another priority international
portfolio — counter-terrorism — on 31 January
Baroness Ashton was asked by the Council on Foreign
Relations to develop a European Union strategy for the
Sahel, which we hope will be adopted as soon as
possible. Its goal is to combat the links between AlQaida in the Islamic Maghreb and drug trafficking
channels in West Africa. This is clearly a subject of
great interest to both the European Union and the
Security Council.
Lastly, the European Union is an essential partner
in preventing conflict and building peace. As Baroness
Ashton has mentioned, the Brazilian presidency will in
a few days organize a Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development. In
that regard, it is worth recalling that the European
Union is the main provider of official development
assistance, contributing more than 60 per cent of the
assistance provided by member countries of the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development — that is, about €50 billion annually.
The European Union’s participation in this debate
therefore has particular relevance.
Beyond financial assistance, however, I should
like to refer to the efforts of the European Union in the
areas of good governance, respect for human rights and
gender equality. As the European Council affirmed on

11-22784

4 February, the European Union is determined to
provide its unreserved support for political transition
and to support reforms in the southern Mediterranean.
European heads of State have entrusted the High
Representative with a mission in that regard.
Of course, much remains to be done. However, as
Robert Schuman said in his speech of 9 May 1950,
Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a
single plan. It will be built through concrete
achievements which first create a de facto solidarity.
That is equally true when it comes to foreign policy.
The time has come to say and to demonstrate that the
European Union is not some super non-governmental
organization or purveyor of assistance. It has values
and projects power.
You can
therefore count on France’s
determination, Madam President, as a permanent
member of the Security Council and as a founding
member of the European Union, to ensure that that EU
assumes its share of responsibility in building a world
of peace, stability and prosperity, in line with the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to express our appreciation to
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her cross-cutting briefing on the
engagements of the European Union (EU) and its
relations with the United Nations.
A new phase in the EU’s history started more
than a year ago with the entry into force of the Treaty
of Lisbon. The Treaty provides the European Union
with tools to strengthen and simplify its international
representation. During the past year, the European
External Action Service was created under the able
leadership of Lady Ashton. The Service should reach
its full potential in 2011, resulting in the EU’s
increased aptitude for maintaining international peace
and security, combating poverty and providing
humanitarian assistance, to mention some of the
significant areas of the EU’s activities.
Challenges and risks to international peace and
security require a multidimensional and multilateral
response. It is therefore commendable that the
European Union and the United Nations are jointly
addressing major global crises in the Middle East, the
Sudan, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Chad and Haiti. The European Union and the

5

S/PV.6477

United Nations share a strong commitment to peace
consolidation, the rule of law and socio-economic
development in post-conflict societies. Hence tangible
results have been achieved in those areas. However, we
believe that there is always room for improvement in
the multidimensional approach to which I have
referred.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has had rather intensive
cooperation and interaction with a variety of actors in
the international community in its recent history. One
of the lessons learned during the international
engagement in our country was that all actors of the
international community — civilian, military,
economic and political — should speak with one voice.
The Security Council presidential statement issued
under the symbol S/PRST/2011/2 underscores that
more coherent and coordinated actions represent an
essential precondition for the success of every mission
undertaken by international community actors —
whether the United Nations or the EU or UNHCR, the
World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme or the International Organization of la
Francophonie.
Bosnia and Herzegovina therefore strongly
encourages the European Union to be more vocal in the
United Nations, with a view to establishing adequate
coordination mechanisms for better coherence and
efficiency of EU and United Nations military and
civilian operations. The role of the EU is especially
important when it comes to the issue of sharing
experiences and improving coordination with other
regional and subregional organizations, especially with
the African Union.
Finally, as a member of the Security Council and
potential candidate for EU membership, Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains fully committed to bolstering and
developing cooperation and effective partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, including the European
Union.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you for
convening this meeting, Madam President. I also
welcome the statement of the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy.
One of the main objectives of the Lisbon Treaty
is to enhance the European Union’s international role.
One year after its entry into force, important steps have

6

already been taken in order to give the Union a
stronger and more unified voice and capacity to act, as
High Representative Ashton has just underlined.
Given the importance of the cooperation between
the European Union (EU) and the United Nations, as
partners with shared values and objectives, we believe
that strengthening the EU’s foreign policy will also
contribute to reinforcing an effective multilateral
system with the United Nations at its centre.
The challenges of the twenty first century
demand the concerted action of global, regional and
subregional actors. With its specific tools in the fields
of security, crisis management, development and the
environment, among other areas, the EU is in a
singular position to support the United Nations in
responding to the multidimensional challenges to peace
and security.
As has already been mentioned, the European
Union and its member States jointly make the largest
financial contribution to the United Nations system.
The EU plays a central role in peace-making,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and works with the
United Nations to prevent conflicts, manage crises and
build sustainable peace. There are several good
examples where the cooperation between the two
organizations is taking place or can be further
developed, be it in the Balkans, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau,
Somalia or the Sudan.
Allow me now to address some of the issues
mentioned by the High Representative in Africa and
Middle East.
In the Sudan, the conclusion of a timely and
peaceful referendum is a historic accomplishment and
a milestone, not only in terms of underlining the
Sudanese people’s attachment to democratic processes
but also as evidence of what can be achieved through
cooperation and commitment among all stakeholders.
Its outcome will allow for the stability and sustainable
development of both South and North Sudan and pave
the way for the normalization of relations between
Khartoum and the international community.
The High Representative has underlined the EU’s
continued engagement in that process. In the short
term, this means supporting the international efforts to
reach an agreement on all outstanding Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and post-referendum issues,

11-22784

S/PV.6477

including Abyei and the difficult security and
humanitarian situation prevailing in Darfur. It also
means, in the period ahead, working closely with the
United Nations towards peace, stability and the
integrated development of the subregion.
The EU and the United Nations have also been
working together to help stabilize the situation in
Somalia, as was mentioned by the High Representative.
The support to the African Union Mission in Somalia,
the cooperation between the European Union, the
United Nations and the African Union in the training of
Somali military personnel and the coordinated efforts
in fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia provide
good examples of this. However, continued strong
coordination between the three organizations, along
with other international stakeholders, is crucial, as
those efforts must be accompanied by an upgraded and
comprehensive political strategy for the country in
order to achieve a long-term sustainable solution.
With regard to Côte d’Ivoire, we concur with the
High Representative’s assessment. In the aftermath of
the AU summit last week, Portugal welcomes the
recent creation of the African Union high-level panel
for Côte d’Ivoire. In keeping with the objectives of the
Africa-European Union Strategic Partnership, it is very
important to back this genuinely African effort to find a
political solution to the current stalemate. Such support
represents a strong signal of our willingness to work
closely with African regional and subregional
organizations on issues of peace and security.
More generally, we see that some of the
challenges faced by Côte d’Ivoire are shared by other
countries in the region. That is why we think that it is
important for the European Union and the United
Nations to give serious consideration to their approach
to West Africa as a whole, as I have stressed on
different occasions in the Council.
The European Union and its member States have
been following the recent developments in the
Maghreb and the Middle East very closely. That is a
region with which the European Union has longstanding relations and where, through a number of
instruments and mechanisms, it has developed genuine
and effective bilateral and regional partnerships, as
Baroness Ashton has just alluded to. She also
mentioned a number of steps that the European Union
is undertaking in the light of recent events with the aim
of jointly furthering, with its partners, the shared goal

11-22784

of building stability, peace and prosperity in the
Mediterranean and the Middle East region.
The developments that we are witnessing will
undoubtedly have a decisive impact on the future of the
region and beyond. As my Minister recently stated, the
many issues affecting that region cannot be addressed
“in a fragmented, unlinked, inconsistent and incoherent
manner”. They require an efficient partnership between
all stakeholders. Over the decades, the European Union
has developed an important acquis of instruments that
can and should complement United Nations efforts to
promote peace and security in the Mediterranean and
the Middle East. Together, the European Union and
United Nations should develop a complementary
partnership capable of adequately responding to the
many challenges in the region.
Portugal stands fully behind Baroness Ashton’s
remarks concerning the Middle East and the peace
process. Indeed, the current developments in the region
clearly underscore the urgency of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East. Portugal thus
reiterates the Quartet’s most recent appeal to the
parties to overcome the current obstacles in the peace
process and to engage in serious negotiations on the
basis of the well-known parameters for peace. I thank
Baroness Ashton for clearly reaffirming those
parameters. We know what the issues are. What is
needed is the effective political will to address them,
with the serious ambition of reaching peace through a
comprehensive agreement on all final status issues, as
underlined by our French colleague.
Ending the 63-year conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians is the shared aspiration of all those in the
Chamber. That is surely another area where the
European Union and the United Nations can actively
work together towards a positive outcome, through
both the Quartet and the relevant United Nations
bodies.
I conclude by saying that the very fact that this
meeting is taking place reflects the important role that
regional organizations play in the overall contribution
to peace and security. That clearly results from the
United Nations Charter, and the European Union has
been part of that effort.
The Treaty of Lisbon represents yet another step
forward in the Union’s vision and capacity in that area,
which we strongly believe can be instrumental to the
United Nations in pursuing its universal goals.

7

S/PV.6477

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and
Vice-President of the European Commission.
This Security Council meeting takes place just a
few days after the conclusion of the Munich Security
Conference, which provided a good opportunity to
discuss informally current issues of international
security. On the margins of the Conference, there was a
broad range of important events that also have a direct
impact on the maintenance of international stability.
I hope that colleagues will not mind if we deem
the most important event to have been the exchange of
instruments of ratification of the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation
on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed on 8 April 2010 in
Prague by the Presidents of Russia and the United
States of America. That document became a reality
thanks largely to the understanding that unilateral
approaches to security are counterproductive.
We are pleased that the resolve to improve
international relations, including in the Euro-Atlantic
region, is supported by our European partners.
Recently, they put forward a whole range of ideas that
are basically in line with the initiative of Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev to conclude a treaty on
Euro-Atlantic security. In particular, German
Chancellor Angela Merkel proposed the establishment
of a Russia-European Union committee on foreign
policy and security issues that would raise cooperation
between Moscow and Brussels to a completely new
level.
A priority of our cooperation with the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations, including as part
of the Quartet of leading international mediators, is the
topical issue of a Middle East settlement. The most
recent ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet took
place on 5 February in Munich, at Russia’s initiative.
During the meeting, there was a substantive exchange
of views on the situation in the Middle East, including
in the light of recent events in Egypt and other
countries in the region.
Russia commends the efforts of the EU to support
the Middle East peace process. Our positions on that
issue are broadly the same. EU support for Palestinian
State-building and the restoration of normal trade and

8

economic links between the Gaza Strip and the outside
world are important. We consider it necessary to
bolster those efforts in active pursuit of intra-Palestine
unity. We, in turn, are also striving to solve this issue
by acting in coordination with regional and other
partners.
We count on continuing fruitful cooperation with
the EU on an entire range of issues linked to the
Iranian nuclear programme.
The Sudan also represents an important area of
our productive cooperation with the EU and the United
Nations. We welcome the successful holding of the
referendum on self-determination in Southern Sudan.
That demonstrated the resolve of the Sudanese parties
to fully implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). It is important that both parties to
the Agreement recognize the referendum results. The
priority now is to settle the remaining obstacles with
constructive international assistance in a mutually
acceptable way, as part of the CPA.
In her statement, Baroness Ashton also mentioned
the issue of Côte d’Ivoire. The situation in that country
remains tense. Action that could further exacerbate the
situation must be avoided. We support the diplomatic
efforts of the African Union and its high-level panel of
mediators to develop options for a political settlement,
to bring about national reconciliation in the country
and to create the conditions to overcome its long-term
de facto schism.
The international community needs to support
those efforts by believing that there is no reasonable
alternative to a peaceful solution to the crisis. Any
interference using force is the quickest path to the
long-term destabilization of the situation in the Côte
d’Ivoire and the entire subregion.
We agree with Baroness Ashton’s assessment of
the situation in Haiti. Currently, the top priority for
Haitians is to conclude the electoral process peacefully
and to elect the leadership of the country
democratically. Given the scale of Haiti’s problems,
comprehensive international assistance to that country
must continue. Nevertheless, the main responsibility
for Haiti’s recovery should be borne by the people of
the country.
The Russian Federation has consistently
supported comprehensive development and better
cooperation with the United Nations, the Security

11-22784

S/PV.6477

Council and regional and subregional mechanisms.
Cooperation should be on the basis of the United
Nations Charter, in particular Chapter VIII. As a
regional mechanism, the European Union has
established fruitful and close cooperation with the
United Nations on a wide range of key areas. We
support further strengthening of that cooperation.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union.
High Representative Ashton’s briefing to the
Security Council comes at a good and timely moment.
Recent developments in Tunisia and Egypt, both
neighbours of the European Union (EU), are of
immediate relevance not only to the European Union
and its member States but also, ultimately, to the
international community as a whole. Northern Africa
and the Middle East are in a crucial phase of transition.
Civil societies claim fundamental political and human
rights and a new economic perspective for the future.
Reforms are the only way forward. We have to adapt
our policies with regard to the entire region. The
European decision to grant special support to the
transformation process is the right initiative to respond
to Egyptian requests.
Baroness Ashton also informed us about the
meeting of the Middle East Quartet in Munich, which
she chaired three days ago. Our common goal is very
clear: we all want to see the State of Israel and a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.
The Munich statement, in which the Quartet
highlighted the urgency of meaningful negotiations on
all final status issues and their conclusion by
September 2011, committed to playing an active role
and scheduled the next principals’ meeting for March,
is an important contribution to creating much-needed
momentum.
The close contacts between the High
Representative and the Secretary-General over the past
week is yet another indicator of the high level of
cooperation between the EU and the United Nations.
Let me underline that this cooperation is built on
a fundamental convergence of views. It is based on the
idea that relations among States should be subject to

11-22784

the rule of law and founded on universal values and
mutual respect. The EU believes in a multilateral,
rules-based approach to world affairs. The EU itself
was built by a process of negotiation and consensus
among its current 27 member States, which has led to a
considerable pooling of sovereignty. Germany has been
part
of
that
unique
peacebuilding
and
institution-building exercise from the very beginning.
With a newly created External Action Service
implementing the Treaty of Lisbon, the EU is about the
further improve its joint diplomatic capabilities and
will become an even more effective international
partner for the United Nations and for other regional
organizations. While holding the European Union
presidency in 2007, Germany promoted the adoption of
a joint declaration on United Nations-European Union
cooperation in crisis management. Exchanges between
senior United Nations Secretariat officials and the
Political and Security Committee of the EU on areas of
cooperation have since become regular practice.
By definition, the European Union firmly
believes in regional cooperation. The African Union
(AU) and African subregional organizations are
strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture and are working actively to settle
conflicts in Africa through their peacekeeping missions
and good offices. The EU supports those efforts, and
not only with financial means. The African Peace
Facility has helped to enhance AU peace support
operations and its institution- and capacity-building.
In Somalia, just to give one example — and I
could name others — the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union are closely cooperating
and complementing each other in their efforts to help
rebuild sound State institutions, thereby creating
conditions for peace and stability, and to combat piracy
off the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean.
Through its Operation Atalanta, the EU
contributes successfully to the protection of World
Food Programme shipments, thereby saving the lives
of many ordinary Somalis. Atalanta also plays an
important role in protecting African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) transports and international
shipping, which are so vital for the economies of the
broader region. Furthermore, following calls from the
Security Council, the European Union is conducting a
programme in Uganda to train soldiers for Somalia’s
Transitional Federal Government. The objective of that

9

S/PV.6477

military training mission is to improve the security
situation in Somalia. AMISOM, which receives
substantial support from the European Union, has the
same objective.

positive role of the EU in maintaining regional and
international peace, stability and security. We support
and encourage continued contributions from the EU in
that regard.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that my country
remains committed to a strong partnership between the
United Nations and the EU that builds on shared values
and common goals. We welcome the Security Council’s
recognition of the need for closer cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in its
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/1) last year. We
are confident that the cooperation between the EU and
the United Nations will remain fruitful and look
forward to the further deepening of that relationship.

China highly values and supports the constructive
role of the EU in international affairs. We trust that, as
the EU intensifies its efforts to implement the Lisbon
Treaty, along with progress in the process of
integration, the EU, the United Nations and the
Security Council will be able to undertake even more
pragmatic and effective cooperation in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the briefing by Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, on cooperation between the
Union and the United Nations. China attaches great
importance to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In January last year, an open debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security (see S/PV.6257) was
held in the Council on the initiative of the Chinese
presidency. The meeting issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/1) reiterating the importance and the
necessity of mutually reinforcing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The European Union (EU) is a major cooperation
partner of the United Nations and has made positive
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In recent years, the EU has been actively
engaged in preventive diplomacy and good offices on
hot-spot issues, and has promoted the settlement of
conflicts and disputes through mediation, negotiations
and other peaceful means.
The EU vigorously supports United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has provided substantial
funding for United Nations-mandated African Union
(AU) peace support operations. The EU is playing an
active role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
has also made significant efforts in supporting the
development of the AU and other African regional and
subregional organizations. China appreciates the

10

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to welcome High Representative Baroness Ashton
to the Security Council and thank her for her briefing
on the European Union’s (EU) cooperation with the
United Nations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peace and security is a major priority for South Africa.
We welcome all efforts in that regard.
We have noted all the areas of cooperation that
Baroness Ashton mentioned in her briefing today.
South Africa has had an opportunity to share its
positions on many of those issues. As a strategic
partner of the European Union, South Africa
acknowledges and welcomes the EU’s significant and
steadfast contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We are of the view that multilateralism is
strengthened through enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations makes provision for regional
arrangements in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The role of the European Union and the
African Union (AU) in that regard is testimony to the
foresight of the crafters of the Charter, who envisaged
such a role for regional bodies.
Multilateralism will also be strengthened through
enhanced cooperation among various regional
organizations. In that regard, we again acknowledge
and value the strong cooperative relationship between
the African Union and the European Union.
Each regional organization is unique and the
challenges they face in addressing international peace
and security differ. Cooperation with the United

11-22784

S/PV.6477

Nations should therefore take on characteristics that
reflect its own priorities and comparative advantages.
The 2008 report of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations, also known as the
Prodi report, stated that
“There is a need to reaffirm the collective
responsibility for global peace and security in
order to reflect changes that have taken place in
recent years. . . . there is a growing anomalous
and undesirable trend in which organizations
lacking the necessary capabilities have been left
to bear the brunt in terms of providing the
international community’s initial response, while
others more capable have not engaged. This
inversion of responsibility is generating a trend of
benign neglect in which interests rather than
capabilities prevail.” (S/2008/813, para. 11)
The report further notes, in the following
paragraph, that the complexity of recent and ongoing
conflicts in which Africa has intervened to resolve
creates demands that are out of all proportion to the
availability of resources to address them.
We have witnessed, particularly over the past
decade, that regional organizations have acted when
the Security Council has been unable or unwilling to
act in particular circumstances.
The African Union, for its part, has been
proactive in taking the lead in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in countries such as
Burundi, the Sudan and Somalia. Despite the strong
political will to establish peace and security throughout
the African continent, the AU continues to face
enormous resource constraints. In this regard, we
commend the role that the European Union is playing
in meeting these challenges, including through the
establishment of the African Peace Facility to support
peace-support operations mandated by the African
Union.
Meeting in Tripoli in November 2010 on the
occasion of the third Africa-EU Summit, leaders of the
AU and the EU recognized the need for more concerted
action between the AU, the EU and the United Nations
to move the process of implementation of the
recommendations of the Prodi panel and subsequent
reports of the Secretary-General forward. In this
regard, the Summit stressed the importance of follow-

11-22784

up to the Prodi report especially on attaining
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African peace-support efforts. Africa and the EU also
committed to strengthening dialogue and cooperation
with the United Nations to address global threats to
peace and security, both in terms of conflict areas as
well as in thematic areas, such as terrorism and the
protection of civilians.
South Africa will continue to promote effective
multilateralism by working towards enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the European Union. In this
regard, we look forward to working with all our
partners in the Security Council to achieve this aim.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States welcomes High Representative Ashton
back to the Security Council. We thank Baroness
Ashton for her briefing today and the European Union
(EU) for its close and deep cooperation with the
Security Council, which encompasses conflict
prevention, crisis management, peacekeeping, postconflict peacebuilding and long-term capacitybuilding.
The European Union has become an important
partner for the Council in addressing matters of peace
and security. Together, we are applying more effective
solutions to the increasingly complex problems we
face. This morning, I would like to highlight a few
areas of our effective cooperation.
First, I would like to thank the European Union
for its critical role in preventing and resolving conflict
in the EU neighbourhood, utilizing both civilian and
military operations on the ground. One example is
Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
the United States strongly supports. We welcome the
EU’s intention to strengthen its civilian presence there
to better promote reforms needed for Bosnian
European integration.
In Kosovo, the United States is a contribute to the
EU’s Rule of Law Mission and supports the High
Representative’s initiative to facilitate dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo to resolve practical issues,
improve lives and help realize both countries’
European perspectives. We likewise support the
ongoing efforts of the EU, the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
as chairs of the Geneva process for Georgia, including
their respective roles in facilitating the Incident

11

S/PV.6477

Prevention and Response Mechanism, which is
tackling ongoing difficult security and humanitarian
issues on the ground.

EU member States with personnel on the ground in
Afghanistan in provincial reconstruction teams
contribute to Afghanistan’s long-term security.

Beyond Europe, we welcome the role played by
the EU as a member of the Middle East Quartet. The
United States is continuing to consult with both the
Israelis and Palestinians, and is working with the
Quartet and our partners in the region to achieve a
framework agreement on all the core issues, ultimately
resulting in a negotiated peace agreement.

Finally, I want to strongly applaud the European
Union’s commitment to the protection of women in
conflict situations and the promotion of their
participation in peacebuilding. The recent joint AfricaEU Strategy Action Plan underscores both
organizations’ commitment to this important issue.

Further, we commend the EU’s support of United
Nations efforts in the Horn of Africa, where the EU is
deploying naval forces through Operation Atalanta to
combat piracy, and in Haiti and the Sudan. The United
States welcomes the Government of the Sudan’s
announcement that it accepts the Southern Sudan
referendum results, and looks forward to continuing
our work with the EU and the broader international
community to ensure that the two States live alongside
each other in peace.
We also note the EU’s support of a peaceful
resolution to the political crisis in Côte d’Ivoire and the
financial pressure it is putting on former President
Gbagbo and his supporters to step aside in favour of
democratically elected President Ouattara. Many
challenges lie ahead, but we must maintain the unity of
the international community’s response as we address
these challenges in Côte d’Ivoire and elsewhere.
Secondly, we would like to point out the EU’s
support for training and capacity-building in
coordination with the United Nations and international
partners. Such efforts can serve as a multiplier for the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities undertaken
by regional organizations. We appreciate the EU’s
initiative to share experience, through the EU African
Peace Facility, to build the African Union’s capacity
for peace operations, as well as the training the EU is
providing for Somali Government forces.
Within Afghanistan, the EU, like the United
States, works closely with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
commend the EU’s police training mission that has
been operating in Afghanistan since 2007, in
coordination with the NATO training mission and
UNAMA. Especially important is its support for the
construction of Afghan National Police staff colleges in
Bamyan and Kabul in 2011. The EU’s civilian
assistance and the efforts of the numerous individual

12

The United States expresses its appreciation to
the European Union for its commitment to
international peace and security, and looks forward to
further discussions between the United Nations and the
EU on how to deepen cooperation and coordination.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Baroness Ashton, High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU), for her insightful comments and analysis of some
current global security challenges. Nigeria lauds the
depth of the EU’s work in regional security issues
around the world. We firmly believe that vigorous
action is needed to curb the threats to global security.
Accordingly, we look forward to the enhanced security
that the External Action Service will bring to EU
missions worldwide.
Second only to natural disasters, the challenges of
governance pose grave security risks to local
populations. Humanitarian aid is an essential support
for countries facing crises to develop robust and
participatory governance institutions. In turn, political
stability and properly functioning democratic
institutions are prerequisites for the reconstruction and
development of distressed communities. We therefore
commend the EU for its work in Haiti, the Sudan, Côte
d’Ivoire and elsewhere. The depth of its involvement in
these countries illustrates its understanding of the
relationship between security, development and
humanitarian aid.
With respect to Haiti, like the EU, we support a
transparent and legitimate electoral process and the
implementation of the postponed second-round
presidential elections. Indeed, we salute the work done
by the Organization of American States verification
mission to evaluate the presidential elections in Haiti.
We consider this to be an important step to maintain
and strengthen the confidence of the Haitian people in
the electoral process.

11-22784

S/PV.6477

Nigeria commends the international community,
especially humanitarian actors, for the support given to
Haiti in the wake of the devastating earthquake and
cholera outbreak. Strengthening the capacity of the
Government and national institutions to engage in the
tasks of reconstruction is an overriding long-term
challenge, to which we must remain fully committed.
In reviewing the Southern Sudan referendum, the
commendable role played by the EU cannot be
overlooked. Through financial support, monitoring
activities and partnership with the Secretary-General’s
high-level monitoring panel, the EU contributed
significantly to the outcome of the referendum. We are
pleased that the EU is prepared to provide long-term
support for addressing the political and economic
challenges facing both Northern and Southern Sudan.
We welcome the EU’s firm and clear support for
the decisions in favour of democracy taken by the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union. Now more than ever, a concerted
international response is required to overcome the
crisis situation in Côte d’Ivoire. EU support therefore
remains very necessary.
We also welcome the important role the EU
continues to play in efforts to find a lasting solution to
the Middle East crisis. Its commitment expressed at the
5 February Quartet meeting in Munich, Germany, to set
up an engagement in the peace process is
commendable. It is hoped that the next meeting,
scheduled to take place on the margins of the Group of
Eight Foreign Ministers’ meeting, will add impetus to
this process.
On partnership in general, the vitality of the
partnership between the EU and the African Union is
evident, not only in the work of the EU in the Sudan,
but also in Operation Atalanta, a multilateral task force
off the coast of Somalia. These efforts reveal that
partnerships are an effective means of employing
global resources to combat regional security risks. We
therefore call for sustained dialogue between the EU
and African regional and subregional organizations,
and enhanced support for regional peace and security
architecture, post-conflict strategies and peacebuilding
efforts.
In closing, Nigeria shares the conviction that, if it
is to respond successfully to global crises, challenges
and threats, the international community needs an
efficient multilateral system founded on universal

11-22784

rights and values. Through partnerships, humanitarian
aid and financial support, the EU has demonstrated the
impact that multilateral partnerships can have on our
collective search for lasting peace.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other colleagues in warmly
welcoming Baroness Ashton back to the Security
Council today.
As a member of the European Union (EU) and a
permanent member of the Security Council, the United
Kingdom has a strong interest in ensuring that the
partnership of the European Union and its member
States with the United Nations becomes increasingly
effective in addressing the many challenges to
international peace and security. Baroness Ashton has
highlighted today the important role that the European
Union plays across a range of key security issues. I do
not need to cover that same ground, so I will confine
myself to making a few general comments.
First, Baroness Ashton rightly pointed to the
European Union’s ability to take a comprehensive
approach to global problems. The European Union is
uniquely placed among regional organizations to
deploy the full range of tools, from military
intervention and political influence to humanitarian
and development assistance. The European Union and
its member States can therefore support and
complement the United Nations across that full range
of activity, from Afghanistan to the Balkans. In
particular, the European Union and the United Nations
can combine powerfully with the Security Council to
prevent and resolve conflict.
The current period of uncertainty and change in
the Middle East and North Africa highlights the need
for a comprehensive and coordinated approach. It is
essential that the European Union and the United
Nations work closely in responding to and planning for
events as they unfold.
In Tunisia, the European Union is already
working on a broad package to assist with
constitutional and democratic reforms and economic
development. My Foreign Minister is in Tunisia today,
discussing how best we can support the reform process.
The United Nations and the EU should be natural
partners in this endeavour.
On the Middle East peace process, where decisive
progress is urgently needed, the European Union has

13

S/PV.6477

demonstrated the practical application of the
comprehensive approach, in close coordination with
the United Nations. As a member of the Quartet, the
European Union has been involved in pressing for a
political solution to the conflict, while at the same time
providing critical assistance to the Palestinian
Authority’s State-building programme, which will
continue to provide the foundations of a future and
viable Palestinian State.
Secondly, the European Union has an important
role to play in sharing its experience and its expertise
with other regional organizations. EU/United
Nations/African Union collaboration in Somalia is a
concrete example of what can be achieved when
regional organizations and the United Nations work
together. The European Union is complementing the
broad support of the United Nations to the African
Union Mission in Somalia by providing funding
through the African Peace Facility. This is just part of a
multi-level EU strategy towards Somalia, which
encompasses regular assistance to the security sector
through development programmes and projects,
humanitarian assistance, naval security operations and
security training. As we approach the end of the
transitional period in August 2011, it is vital that the
African Union, the United Nations and the EU pursue a
coherent strategy to ensure that the transition results in
a legitimate, credible Government that is acceptable to
all the Somali people.
Thirdly, the European Union, as the world’s
largest economy comprising the most open and tradeoriented countries in the world, can be a force for
development by providing a huge potential market.
Open and resilient markets play a key role in
maintaining global peace and security.
Finally, the European Union has an important role
to play in advancing non-traditional contributions to
international peace and security. One such example is
in the area of climate security. Climate security is
likely to feature on the Council’s agenda later this year,
reflecting the growing recognition that climate change
is a powerful amplifier of instability across some of the
most volatile regions in the world. We hope that the
European Union can take forward work on climate
security as a key policy priority, in close collaboration
with the United Nations.
The Security Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security requires

14

us to set the strategic direction for cooperation with
regional bodies. These relationships will be of vital
importance in the years ahead. There is more that we
can do together, particularly in areas such as preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding. We look forward to a
strengthened partnership between the United Nations
and the EU, built on shared values and with a strong
commitment to action to support these values.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, and thank her for her
invaluable statement.
Over 50 years ago, those who drafted the United
Nations Charter dedicated an entire Chapter of that
document, namely, Chapter VIII, to regional
organizations because they believed in the
complementary role played by such organizations
alongside the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security.
Today, the international environment is especially
dynamic, particularly in the light of multilateral
diplomacy, the great openness of States, the emergence
of geographic blocs, and new, complex and diverse
challenges. In this environment, some regional
organizations, including the European Union, have
been able to consolidate their positions as active
partners in the many activities of the United Nations,
the most important of which is the maintenance of
international peace. This success is due to the fact that
these organizations’ principles are in line with those of
the United Nations and its objectives to promote peace
and security, ensure respect for human rights, and
establish the rule of law.
Lebanon welcomes the ongoing efforts, both past
and current, of the European Union to preserve and
build peace. We also commend its operational work
and its achievements in the civilian sphere, including
its overt cooperation aimed at resolving a great number
of conflicts around the world. The European Union
provides the United Nations with the means to
accomplish its work, in particular in Africa and Haiti.
Lebanon urges the European Union, which has
enhanced its role on the international scene following
the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, to
prioritize its foreign policy in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
and to put an end to violations of international law and

11-22784

S/PV.6477

international humanitarian law. This is all the more
important given the European Union’s key position in
the international Quartet.
Lebanon believes that the mere occasional
condemnation of certain Israeli practices is
insufficient. Indeed, such condemnation has not
prevented Israel from ignoring the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well as
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We recall here that Israeli practices contravene
the very principles of the European Union, such as the
rejection of violence and racism, the establishment of
the rule of law, and respect for basic human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention. That Convention prohibits
collective punishment, such as that meted out in Gaza,
and the transfer of settlers to occupied territories, such
as continues to occur in the West Bank today.
It is high time for all parties that seek a two-State
solution to recognize the Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and to support it in bringing an
end to the occupation of all Palestinian territories. The
new Palestinian State should be a Member of the
United Nations, and could be before the next session of
the General Assembly begins in September.
Lebanon also encourages the promotion of
cooperation between the European Union and other
regional organizations in the exchange of expertise,
information and lessons learned in terms of human
resources, training and capacity-building, in particular
with the League of Arab States and the African Union.
That could help to maintain peace and security in the
Arab world and Africa. Regional organizations can
play an effective role in preventing conflicts and
facilitating
post-conflict
reconciliation
and
reconstruction.
In conclusion, Lebanon encourages greater
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations in order to achieve a safer and more
stable world.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
should like to extend a warm welcome to High
Representative Baroness Ashton and to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing on the role of the European
Union (EU) in the United Nations and its views on
some contemporary issues that are on the Security
Council’s agenda. Clearly, given the limitations of
time, the wide canvas that the High Representative has

11-22784

covered will prevent me from commenting on each of
the issues that are currently before the Council and on
which my delegation’s views are, in any case,
reasonably well known.
The EU is the largest economy in the world in
terms of nominal gross domestic product. It is one of
the largest trading blocs; the largest exporter and
importer of goods and services; and the largest trading
partner of the leading economies of the world,
including India. It is also one of the biggest
development aid donors and the largest provider of
humanitarian assistance. With a membership of
27 countries and five candidate countries, the EU is
already an important voice in its region and beyond.
With the greater cohesiveness that the EU seeks in
foreign affairs and security policy, its role will only
become more significant in the world in the coming
years.
India therefore welcomes stronger cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Indeed, Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides for such cooperation between the
Organization and regional organizations. Article 54 of
the Charter enjoins the regional organizations to keep
the Security Council fully informed of their activities
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that spirit, we welcome today’s briefing and
congratulate the European Union on its contributions to
global peace and security, in cooperation with the
United Nations. With the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty, India hopes that the European Union’s foreign
policy will show greater coherence and effectiveness
under the leadership of High Representative Baroness
Ashton.
India’s bilateral relations with the EU have
expanded significantly over the years. The EU is
India’s largest trading partner, while India is the EU’s
ninth largest trading partner. The relationship was
elevated to a strategic partnership in 2000. The most
recent summit-level meeting between India and the
EU — the eleventh since 2000 — took place in
Brussels on 10 December 2010. The summit reviewed
a whole spectrum of bilateral, regional and global
issues, and the leaders committed themselves to giving
new momentum to the key areas that already constitute
the bulk of our cooperation. There was also agreement
on the need to step up cooperation in the fight against
international terrorism, as reflected in the India-EU
joint declaration on international terrorism.

15

S/PV.6477

Given this strong bilateral partnership, we look
forward to the EU emerging as an even more important
voice in today’s multipolar world, and attach great
value to the EU’s activities in the United Nations and
its role in preventive diplomacy. We support the EU’s
contributions to capacity- and institution-building in
African States and its support in the training of police
and security forces, electoral assistance, legislative and
judicial reform, and so on, which have all contributed
to international peace and security.
India has also
made contributions in these areas and cooperated with
the EU and other countries in anti-piracy operations off
the coast of Somalia. We look forward to the further
deepening of such cooperation.
India supports the EU’s aspirations to playing a
more significant role in the General Assembly. In this
context, we welcome the ongoing consultations among
Member States, and hope that a consensus will emerge
very soon.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): My delegation associates itself with previous
speakers in thanking you, Madame, on convening this
meeting on cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.
Having heard the briefing of Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union, whom I welcome, my
delegation wishes once again to stress the very
important role of the European Union in achieving the
objectives of the United Nations, in particular with
regard to international peace and security. In her
briefing, Baroness Ashton highlighted a number of
issues of topical interest in the field of peace and
security. I wish to address four of those issues: the
Sudan, Haiti, the Middle East — in particular the
question of Palestine — and Somalia.
Turning first to the Sudan, I congratulate the
countries of the European Union on their assistance to
United Nations efforts to restore peace and stability in
that country through their contribution to the work of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and to the
successful holding of the referendum on Southern
Sudan. We remain convinced that the establishment of
the new State of Southern Sudan will enjoy the
significant support of the European Union in meeting
the many challenges ahead.
Turning to Haiti, we commend the European
Union’s support of the Haitian Government, especially

16

with regard to its efforts following the earthquake of
January 2010. We are confident that it will pursue its
efforts to help that country to rebuild itself
economically and to strengthen its institutions.
With regard to the Middle East, and more
specifically the Palestinian question, we commend the
European Union’s involvement, in the framework of
the Quartet, in relaunching direct Palestinian-Israeli
talks to find a lasting negotiated solution to a conflict
that has persisted too long. The recent meeting held in
Munich, over which Baroness Ashton personally
presided, clearly demonstrates the consistent
commitment of the European Union to peace in the
Middle East and to the creation of a Palestinian State,
which we, too, call for wholeheartedly. I am delighted
by the similar views of the European Union and Gabon
on that issue. We call on the European Union also to
continue its support to the Palestinian Authority.
I cannot fail to mention the European Union’s
efforts in Somalia, specifically with regard to
increasing the capacity of the African Union Mission
and of Somali security and defence forces. We also
share the European Union’s views with regard to
addressing the issue of piracy off the Somali coast,
namely, that the approach to settling this issue must
take into account the general situation prevailing on the
ground.
In conclusion, Gabon would once again like to
welcome the role of the European Union in the work of
the United Nations in its pursuit of peace, justice and
well-being in the world.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Like
my colleagues, I too would like to thank Baroness
Ashton for her presence and her very important
statement today.
The review that we are undertaking reflects one
of the main mandates of the United Nations Charter,
which calls on us to prevent conflict and achieve
international peace and security while serving as a
forum for coordinating efforts to attain those common
goals through political dialogue and cooperation. That
not
only
strengthens
the
effectiveness
of
multilateralism; it also provides an opportunity for
creating models applicable to other areas of the world.
The United Nations and the European Union have
the task of raising awareness about the consequences of
transnational organized crime, both in the various

11-22784

S/PV.6477

relevant forums of the United Nations and in Member
States. That is why there is a need for the
Organization’s contribution in the areas of civilian,
customs and port and airport security.
With regard to development cooperation as an
effective means of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, we underscore the importance of the
assistance provided by the European Union as an
appropriate part of the social development process of
recipient countries in the context of their national
priorities. In cases of natural disasters, for example, in
order to prevent the displacement of populations, an
increase in refugees or migration without sufficient
guidance and information, we believe that cooperation
must focus on reconstruction, the financing of projects,
the rehabilitation of affected farmland and the
restoration of infrastructure in the worst affected areas.
The Baroness also mentioned in her statement the
current impact of climate change and its consequences
on such important issues as natural disasters, which
compromises the safety of the civilian population and
makes the emergence of conflicts much more likely.
We value the contribution of the European Union
and the members of the Quartet in seeking lasting
peace in the Middle East. For Colombia, all approaches
towards achieving and strengthening peace in the
region must be governed by the fundamental principles
of the peaceful settlement of disputes, the obligation on
the non-use of force and the free self-determination of
peoples. Furthermore, they must be in accordance with
due observance of human rights and international
humanitarian law and, of course, respect for the dignity
of all. Historically, Colombia has maintained that the
solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict must lie in the
existence of two States living together in peace, which
are essential conditions to achieving the stability and
security of the region.
The political conditions and the aspirations to
strengthen democratic progress in the Arab world
dominate the world stage today. Those processes will
be strengthened only to the extent that they develop
and conclude peacefully. The current outlook requires
even further efforts to achieve peace.
Today, we are very pleased to note the
developments in the Sudan. With the conclusion of the
referendum, the Southern Sudan has taken an important
step towards achieving a peace that we hope will be
stable and lasting. That requires the full

11-22784

implementation of the provisions of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The birth of a new
State now presents a very delicate process. The
establishment of a road map for good relations and
mutual respect between the North and the South is
essential in all areas — political, economic and social.
We should consider the support to be provided by the
Security Council in the implementation of the
agreements between the parties and the prospects
opening up in the immediate future. The potential for
conflict remains as long as there are no specific
agreements on the status and administration of this
area.
My country and all Latin American nations attach
the highest priority to the situation and future of Haiti.
It is essential to maintain close coordination to promote
cooperation policies aimed at the country’s
comprehensive development as an imperative, given
the sad and desolate reality of that nation.
Strengthening its State structures, social cohesion and
physical reconstruction go hand in hand with its
internal security, well-being and development.
Investing in development is an investment in peace and
security.
We have said, and we reiterate, that the case of
Côte d’Ivoire requires finding a prompt and
appropriate course for the country, along with the
appropriate regional bodies and efforts and in line with
the legitimacy and expressed will of its people to
exercise democracy. The work that can be done among
the United Nations, regional organizations and the
European Union will ensure peace in that country.
We highlight the central role that institutionbuilding plays in efforts to promote peace in countries
emerging from conflict situations. In that context, we
reaffirm the primary responsibility and leadership of
affected States. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, can play a supporting role
in the priorities and agendas set by States concerned.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we believe
it necessary to promote institutional development on
the basis of the existing capacities of a State and its
social, economic and cultural specificities, as well as to
better coordinate the activities of all stakeholders
involved.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

17

S/PV.6477

It is a great pleasure for me to again welcome
Baroness Ashton to the Security Council. Brazil fully
appreciates the valuable contributions that regional
organizations can and do make to an enhanced
multilateral system with the United Nations as its
centre. The High Representative has addressed the
many and varied manifestations of a very active and
ongoing partnership with the United Nations in areas
and activities of common interest. Those range from
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, crisis
management
and
humanitarian
assistance
to
peacebuilding and long-term stabilization and
development.
Brazil appreciates the role that the European
Union plays in bringing about a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian issue, which is long overdue. We hope that
the peace process can soon resume and move forward
quickly so that the international community will
swiftly achieve our common goal of two States living
side by side in peace and stability. Brazil also
recognizes the concrete contributions of the European
Union to peacebuilding around the world, from the
Sudan to Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Haiti.
A situation of special interest to Brazil is that of
Haiti. We hope that the electoral process can soon be
concluded with credibility and full respect for the will
of the people, so that Haitians can focus again on the
much-needed activities of reconstruction and
promoting sustainable development.
Another situation of specific interest to Brazil is
that of Guinea-Bissau. We welcome the continued
engagement of the African Union in our common
efforts to bring sustainable peace to Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that the country needs such engagement to
build democratic governance and to effectively address
its key challenges of stability, reconciliation, fighting
impunity and combating drug trafficking. In the same
vein, we encourage the European Union to continue
investing in local capacity-building and social and
economic development in fragile and conflict-affected
countries.

18

Brazil strongly believes that the interlinkages
between peace, security and development must be
properly acknowledged as the Security Council
discharges its responsibilities. We welcome the EU’s
participation in and support for the high-level debate
that Brazil has proposed on that very important issue,
which will be held this Friday.
As we have been able to note at this meeting,
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is strong and effective. It is our hope
that the changes brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon
will help to further strengthen that important
partnership.
In our own region, through the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), we are consolidating a
genuine zone of peace and prosperity. By promoting
dialogue and understanding among South American
countries, UNASUR is making its own contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Baroness Ashton to make some
concluding remarks.
Baroness Ashton: I will be very brief. I would
just like to thank all members of the Security Council
for their contributions to this debate and for their
encouragement and support of the role of the European
Union.
As I began, I said that I saw this as a critical
partnership and that the European Union would do
everything it could to support the work of the United
Nations. I very much look forward to the post-Lisbon
Treaty building of the European External Action
Service, which will enable us to do that even more
effectively.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

11-22784
