S/2014/319

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 May 2014
Original: English

3

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on
the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained i n the
statement of the President of the Security Council dated 25 November 2013
(S/PRST/2013/18), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed about the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
the progress in the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord ’s Resistance Army (see
S/2012/481, annex). It provides an assessment of the major political and security
trends in the Central African subregion since my last report dated 14 November
2013 (S/2013/671), offers an update on progress in the implementation of the
UNOCA mandate and reports on ongoing efforts to counter the threat and impact of
the Lord’s Resistance Army.

II. Major developments in the Central African subregion
2.
Since the issuance of my previous report, the Central African subregion
continues to be dominated by the deterioration of the overall situation in the Central
African Republic and its growing regional impact, the expansion of the activities of
Boko Haram beyond the territory of Nigeria into some countries in the subregion,
the threat of terrorism and continuing concerns regarding maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea, the illegal wildlife trade and transnational organized crime.
Combined, these challenges have had a negative impact on the humanitarian
situation in the subregion.

A.

Political and socioeconomic developments
3.
During the reporting period, Central African States individually, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC) remained fully engaged and involved in the
search for solutions to the complex crisis in the Central African Republic. The
situation in the Central African Republic was also discussed at the thirty-seventh

14-32067 (E)

070514

*1432067*

S/2014/319

ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, held from 19 to 23 December 2013 in N’Djamena.
4.
At the political level, Chad, as chair of ECCAS, convened on 9 and
10 January 2014 the sixth extraordinary summit of ECCAS, devoted to the situation
in the Central African Republic. This summit led to the resignation of the Head of
State of the Transition, Michel Djotodia, and of the Prime Minister, Nicolas
Tiangaye, on 10 January 2014. Shortly thereafter, the National Transitional Council
elected Catherine Samba-Panza as the new Head of State of the Transition and a
new Prime Minister, Andre Nzapayeké, was subsequently appointed.
5.
During the reporting period, calm and peaceful municipal and departmental
elections took place in Gabon on 14 December 2013, resulting in a landslide win for
the ruling Parti démocratique gabonais. On 24 January 2014, President Ali Bongo
Ondimba appointed Daniel Ona Ondo, a member of the Parti démocratique
gabonais, as the new Prime Minister and Head of Government in replacement of
Raymond Ndong Sima.
6.
In Chad, the cabinet of Prime Minister Kalzeubé Payimi Deubet was reshuffled
for the fourth time since his appointment in November 2013. The last cabinet
reshuffle took place in February 2014. The Government was reduced fro m
42 members to 27 (21 Ministers and 6 State Secretaries) and some departments were
merged with others. It was the most significant reduction in number in more than
10 years.
7.
In Sao Tome and Principe, tensions arose on 12 February following the refusa l
of the presidential guard to report to duty upon the return of President Manuel Pinto
Da Costa from official travel. The resignation of the Chief of Defen ce Staff on
13 February triggered rumours of a possible destabili zation plot. The tensions were
subsequently diffused, following discussions initiated by the Government and the
Prime Minister. The country is expected to hold legislative elections later in 2014.
8.
The application by Equatorial Guinea for membership in the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries was accepted on 20 February after it announced a
moratorium on the death penalty. The decision on Equatorial Guinea’s membership
in the Community will be formalized at the Summit of Heads of State and
Government in East Timor in July 2014.
9.
Efforts towards regional integration and free movement within the CEMAC
region saw a new development on 8 November 2013, when Equatorial Guinea
reconsidered its decision not to implement the planned free movement of people in
the region as at 1 January 2014, despite a previous decision by CEMAC Heads of
State in June 2013. Equatorial Guinea had cited concerns that the visa-free travel
regime would threaten employment opportunities for its citizens. Gabon similarly
reconsidered its decision. The other four countries in the CEMAC zone (Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad and the Republic of the Congo) have proceeded
with putting in place visa-free arrangements for their nationals. On 12 March,
following discussions between the Chairperson of CEMAC, Pre sident Ali Bongo
Ondimba, and the President of the CEMAC Commission, Pierre Moussa, it was
decided to relocate CEMAC headquarters from Bangui to Libreville , given the
ongoing security situation in the Central African Republic.
10. According to data provided by the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa (UNECA), Central African economies grew by 4.3 per cent in 2013,

2/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

reflecting a 1.3 per cent decrease from the 2012 growth rate. The decline is
attributable to a decrease in oil production and stagnation in the region’s agricultural
sector. The economies of Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Republic of th e Congo,
Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe expanded, while the economies of Chad and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo contracted. Negative growth was experien ced in
the Central African Republic (-14.5 per cent versus 3.9 per cent) and Equatorial
Guinea (-12.1 per cent versus 9.5 per cent). In 2014, Central African economies are
expected to grow by 6.7 per cent, driven largely by robust demand for petroleum in
world markets. However, the persistence of the sociopolitical crisis in the Central
African Republic and security concerns in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo are factors that may unfavourably affect the subregion’s overall economic
outlook.

B.

Security developments
11. The security situation in the Central African subregion continued to be affected
by the ongoing crisis in the Central African Republic. Furthermore, developments in
the Sahel-Sahara region, particularly in north-eastern Nigeria and in Libya, as well
as in the Gulf of Guinea, continued to be of concern, given their potential impact on
the stability of Central African States. During the reporting period, numerous
initiatives were launched at the subregional and bilateral levels to strengthen
cooperation and coordination on border control in order to address the increasing
threats posed by terrorism and trafficking.
12. In the Central African Republic, the security situation continued to deteriorate,
with growing security implications for neighbouring countries. Subsequent to
decisions of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, the African-led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) took over from the ECCAS-led Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic on 19 December 2013. Burundi, Equatorial
Guinea and Rwanda deployed forces within MISCA during the period under review,
while Chad withdrew, on 13 April 2014, its 850 soldiers.
13. During the period under review, Boko Haram expanded its activities beyond
north-eastern Nigeria into some countries in the Central African subregion. Boko
Haram is suspected to have carried out three coordinated attacks near the Nigeria Cameroon border and is also believed to be responsible for the kidnapping on
5 April of two Italian priests and a Canadian nun in northern Cameroon. On
13 April, Cameroonian security forces shot and killed three suspected Boko Haram
militants in Amchide near the Nigerian border. On the same day, two security
officers at a Cameroonian checkpoint were wounded.
14. The growing regional impact of Boko Haram’s activities as well as the rising
threat posed by terrorism and illicit activities in Central Africa have sparked a
renewed interest in strengthened bilateral and subregional agreements to address the
security threats posed by terrorism. On 17 and 18 March, defen ce and military
chiefs from the six-member Lake Chad Basin Commission (Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Libya, Niger and Nigeria) met in Cameroon and agreed to
establish the Multinational Joint Task Force, empowered to act against militant
threats. Furthermore, on 26 March, the Nigeria Customs Service and representatives
of Benin, Cameroon, Chad and Niger held an emergency meeting in Abuja, aimed at

14-32067

3/18

S/2014/319

establishing a joint border patrol platform against the increasing threat of
insurgency, terrorism and illicit trade in small arms. Nigeria, Cameroon and Chad
have also strengthened cooperation at the bilateral level to ensure better border
control coordination. On 9 April, the Nigerian army announced that troops of the
Joint Task Force patrolling the Lake Chad Basin had foiled an attempt by suspected
terrorists to attack communities in the area and that arms and ammunition left
behind by fleeing terrorists had been recovered.
15. The situation in the Sahel-Sahara region continued to be of concern to the
subregion. Porous borders and weak State structures throughout the Sahel region,
compounded by specific challenges in Libya and Mali, provide an enabling
environment for increased illicit activities and potential instability in the Central
African subregion. On 16 February, the Heads of State of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and Niger established, in Nouakchott, the Sahel G5, which aims to
strengthen coordination among Sahel States on issues related to infrastructure,
development and security.
16. Piracy, armed robbery at sea, organized crime as well as illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in the Gulf of Guinea region continue to constitute a threat
to the peace, security and socioeconomic development of both coastal and
landlocked States in the Central and West African subregions. The Gulf of Guinea
has now become the region of Africa most affected by piracy and ar med robbery at
sea. The cost of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea owing to stolen goods, security and
insurance is estimated at approximately $2 billion. During the reporting period, the
Global Integrated Shipping Information System of the International Maritim e
Organization recorded 17 cases of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea, of which 30 per cent occurred off the coast of the Republic of the Congo.
Since the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé in June 2013, progress has been
achieved in the establishment of the Interregional Coordination Centre , with the
development of a 2014-2016 action plan.
17. Poaching remained a major concern for several Governments in Central Africa.
On 13 December, ECCAS signed agreements with six agencies for the
implementation of anti-poaching activities: the German Agency for International
Cooperation, Gabon’s National Parks Agency, the World Wildlife Foundation, the
International Union for Conservation of Nature, Conservation Justice and the
Aspinall Foundation. President Ali Bongo Ondimba of Gabon and President Idriss
Déby Itno of Chad attended the Conference on Illegal Wildlife Trade, held on
13 February in London. Together with the leaders of Botswana and the United
Republic of Tanzania, Presidents Bongo and Déby Itno pledged, at that meeting, to
honour a 10-year moratorium on the sale of their ivory stockpiles in an effort to
protect elephants. On the same occasion, Central African leaders, along with the
other participating African Heads of State and government officials, issued a
declaration renewing their commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the relevant resolutions and decisions pertaining to the Convention on Inte rnational
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and to eradicate the market
for illegal wildlife products, strengthen the relevant legal frameworks and support
the development of sustainable livelihoods for communities affected by the illegal
wildlife trade.

4/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

C.

Humanitarian and human rights developments
18. During the period under review, the humanitarian and human rights situation in
the subregion remained of concern, owing in large part to the inter-communal
violence and continued absence of State authority in the Central African Republic
and the resulting regional impact. Numerous human rights abuses, such as violence
against women, including rape, by rebels and other combatants in the Central
African Republic were documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in February 2014.
19. Following the 5 and 6 December 2013 attack of the “anti-balaka” on ex-Séléka
positions in Bangui, the security situation in the Central African Republic
deteriorated dramatically and was marked by an escalation of inter-communal
violence, sparking renewed displacement of people. The targeting of the Muslim
population by anti-balaka militia and their sympathizers resulted in thousands of
persons fleeing from the Central African Republic, dramatically increasing the
impact of the crisis on neighbouring countries. As at 30 April 2014, more than
346,000 Central Africans had fled to neighbouring countries, almost 100,000 of
them since December 2013. It is estimated that more than 1 million people have
been displaced both internally and outside the country.
20. Governments and United Nations agencies in the subregion continue to
struggle to manage the regional humanitarian, social, economic and security
consequences of this crisis, with very limited means and resources. As a result of the
deteriorating situation, Chad and Cameroon facilitated the repatriation of an
estimated 110,000 of their nationals, while other countries requested assistance from
international agencies to repatriate theirs.
21. Activities of Boko Haram have also resulted in adverse humanitarian
implications for Central Africa, in particular Cameroon and Chad. The fighting
between the Nigerian army and Boko Haram has driven an estimated 57,000
Nigerian refugees and returning immigrants into Cameroon, Chad and Niger, with
suspected insurgents among them, and worsened an already dire humanitarian
situation in those countries. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and its operational partners are engaged in the registration
and relocation of refugees away from the border area as stipulated under
international refugee law.
22. In Cameroon, a presidential decree issued on 18 February, led to the freeing of
a large number of Cameroonian prisoners, including a few high-profile individuals
who had been convicted on charges of corruption. On 31 March, however, the
unprecedented arrest of a serving minister was made, on charges of embezzlement.
The arrest warrant was withdrawn shortly thereafter and he was released the
following day.
23. The Republic of the Congo announced that it had ratified the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the instruments for which were signed in
February 2014. It is the second CEMAC Member State to ratify the Convention,
after Gabon in 2008. The Republic of the Congo also advanced the implementation
of a law on the promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples, adopted in February
2011.

14-32067

5/18

S/2014/319

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Supporting Member States and subregional organizations
24. During the period under review, UNOCA remained engaged with key
stakeholders to help to prevent violent conflict and promote regional peace and
security. In line with its mandate, the Office continued to shepherd thematic
activities in the areas of conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
25. My Special Representative continued to hold regular consultations with the
Secretary-General of ECCAS on issues of common interest and senior officials of
ECCAS and UNOCA continued to meet on a regular basis at the political and
technical levels.
26. On 2 December, ECCAS participated in the annual briefing by UNOCA to the
diplomatic community in Gabon. During the event, and for the first time, ECCAS
briefed the Ambassadors and representatives of international organizations on
cooperation between ECCAS and the African Union, in particular with regard to the
transition from the peace operation of the ECCAS-led Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic to MISCA.
27. UNOCA participated in three workshops organized by ECCAS on cross -border
criminality and cooperation between February and April in Burundi, the Republic of
the Congo and Cameroon. A major outcome of those meetings was the identification
of main obstacles to development and regional integration resulting from cross border criminality. A number of practical measures to address related challenges
were also adopted. UNOCA also continued its fruitful cooperation with ECCAS in
order to operationalize the decisions taken during the June 2013 Yaoundé summit on
tackling maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOCA also facilitated the
effective participation of ECCAS in these missions as well as in the thirty-seventh
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.
28. Consultations in Libreville were held with CEMAC officials and with
Equatorial Guinea on the subject of greater regional integration among the six
CEMAC Member States (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon). Given the challenges
encountered in the effective implementation of the visa -free travel regime,
originally planned for 1 January 2014, UNOCA and CEMAC officials initiated
discussions on joint activities to encourage the smooth and speedy implementation
of the envisioned visa-free travel regime (see para. 9 above).
29. My Special Representative undertook missions to Chad, Cameroon, the
Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to assess first
hand the humanitarian and security consequences of the crisis in the Central African
Republic for those neighbouring countries, as well as the social, economic and
political implications.
30. The missions to Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo included the participation of the United Nations resident
coordinators and representatives from the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) and ECCAS, as well as the Office

6/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and OHCHR in some instances. The
delegations held discussions with government officials, members of the diplomatic
community, the United Nations country team and members of the refugee
communities, among others.
31. In Chad, some 92,000 refugees had been registered since December 2013 and a
28 per cent malnutrition rate along the border with the Central African Republic was
reported. Around 80,000 Chadians repatriated from the Central African Republic
were living with host families who themselves were already living in precarious
conditions.
32. In Cameroon, over 178,000 refugees had been registered by local authoriti es
and UNHCR, 81,000 of them since the events of 5 December 2013 in the Central
African Republic, with 4,000 to 5,000 new arrivals weekly. An overwhelming
majority of these refugees were women and children in need of immediate life saving assistance. Refugee areas in the border towns of Garoua Boulai and Bertoua
in eastern Cameroon were characterized by poor sanitation facilities, lack of
drinking water, high malnutrition rates and the persistent threat of endemic diseases ,
including cholera. Health and educational institutions in these areas were
overstretched. The challenges in resettling refugee populations in their host
countries remain enormous and continue to require urgent attention.
33. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo, the
majority of the respective 56,000 and 16,000 refugees from the Central African
Republic currently live with host families in impoverished areas where their arrival
has put pressure on already limited social services and infrastructure.
34. My Special Representative was informed by the authorities of the countries
visited and the United Nations agencies present that they were struggling to cope
with the large number of refugees. While their interventions had thus far been
funded from limited extrabudgetary and emergency resources, the continuing flow
of refugees highlighted the growing gap between their response capacity and the
rapidly expanding humanitarian needs. In response to those growing humanitarian
needs, the United Nations designed an inter-agency Central African Republic
Regional Response Plan to assist the Governments concerned.
35. The security consequences of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
particularly the prospect of armed groups crossing into neighbo uring countries and
fuelling the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, were also troubling. In
Chad, the security situation on the border with the Central African Republic
remained tenuous and volatile owing to the increased activity of armed groups based
in the Central African Republic. The presence of 252 ex-Séléka child soldiers in the
town of Doba was reported by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The
Government of Chad, through its Ministry of Justice, announced its intent to sign a
protocol for the release of 46 children associated with ex-Séléka in Koro-Toro who
were currently detained in Chad. In that regard, appropriate reintegration
programmes are being planned for the 46 children upon their release from detention.
The Government of Chad also expressed concern regarding the suspected inflow of
significant amounts of weapons that could be used to destabilize the country and the
wider subregion in the future.
36. In Cameroon, several armed attacks had been registered in border towns and
villages near the Central African Republic. There were fears that the inter-communal

14-32067

7/18

S/2014/319

dimension of the conflict in the Central African Republic might incite external
armed groups such as the Nigeria-based Boko Haram suspected of having a
presence in the Central African Republic to operate in that country. In the Republic
of the Congo, an upsurge in armed criminal activity in the urban areas of
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire had been noted since the outbreak of the crisis in the
Central African Republic.
37. My Special Representative’s interlocutors also stressed the economic impact
on neighbouring countries of the crisis in the Central African Republic. Owing to
insecurity in the Central African Republic, commercial activity with its closest
neighbours, such as Cameroon, has significantly decreased, in particular on the
Douala-Bangui transit route, cutting off an economic lifeline for the Central African
Republic as well as for Cameroonian suppliers and the port of Douala. Th at
situation has also delayed the supply and increased the costs for urgent humanitarian
aid to affected populations in the Central African Republic.

B.

Preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa
38. UNOCA, in its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, supported the
organization of the thirty-seventh ministerial meeting of the Committee, held from
19 to 23 December 2013, in N’Djamena. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Committee adopted the N’Djamena Declaration, which expresses serious concern
regarding the deteriorating situation in the Central African Republic. Experts
reviewed the overall geopolitical and security situation in Centr al Africa and took
stock of ongoing initiatives to address threats from terrorism, maritime insecurity in
the Gulf of Guinea, the illicit wildlife trade and the activities of armed groups.
Cameroon announced that it is the fifth country to ratify the Kinsh asa Convention
regulating small arms and light weapons, joining the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Republic of the Congo and Gabon. The Convention is due to enter into
force upon ratification by six United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa Member States, and remaining Member States
were encouraged to do so. Member States welcomed the initiative of Equatorial
Guinea to host the thirty-eighth ministerial meeting in Malabo in the first half of
2014.
Counter-terrorism
39. UNOCA facilitated the visit of a delegation from the Counter-terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate from 2 to 5 December 2013 to identify areas of
cooperation with the Government of Gabon on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) on counter-terrorism. UNOCA
and the delegation discussed with Gabonese authorities and experts the progress
achieved to date with regard to the resolutions, notably legislation for the
implementation of a counter-terrorism strategy.
40. In partnership with the Counter-terrorism Implementation Task Force of the
United Nations Counter-terrorism Centre, UNOCA, in cooperation with the
Government of Gabon, organized a workshop from 28 to 30 January 2014 in

8/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

Libreville to advance the road map for development of the integrated counterterrorism and small arms and light weapons control strategy for the Central Africa n
subregion. The workshop brought together national focal points from United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa
Member States. They endorsed principles and identified requirements for the
integrated strategy, specifically with regard to police and intelligence mechanisms.
The integrated strategy should allow the concerned States to strengthen a range of
institutions in line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
while fulfilling relevant obligations set out in Secur ity Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2004) and 1963 (2010).
41. UNOCA, in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, convened the second
in a series of capacity-building workshops on customs, immigration, border control
and small arms and light weapons from 22 to 24 April 2014, in Bujumbura.
Participants made progress in the development of a road map for counter-terrorism
and non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa.
Human rights and peacebuilding
42. Further to Security Council resolution 1738 (2006), which is aimed at
protecting journalists in situations of armed conflict and urges respect for their
rights and professional independence, UNOCA and the OHCHR Central Africa
Regional Office co-organized a capacity-building workshop for journalists in the
subregion from 26 to 28 November 2013, in Douala, Cameroon. The workshop,
which was opened by the Cameroonian Minister of Communication, provided
training on journalistic ethics and standards. Participants adopted a Declaration on
media, peace and human rights in Central Africa and established a subregional
forum to facilitate the role of the media in the promotion of democratic values,
human rights and peacebuilding. UNOCA and OHCHR continue to p rovide support
for the implementation of these activities.
43. On 11 March 2014, my Special Representative met with the President of the
Confederation of African Football, in Yaoundé, to reinvigorate joint actions in line
with the framework of cooperation signed in November 2012 and to discuss ways of
enhancing their partnership in the context of utilizing football as a means to promote
peace and security in Central Africa.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea committed off the coast of the States of the
Gulf of Guinea
44. On 31 January, the twenty-second ordinary session of the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held in Addis Ababa, adopted the
2050 Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy. In line with Security Council
resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) and further to the decisions taken at the
Yaoundé summit of June 2013, UNOCA, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Office for West Africa, actively supported ECCAS, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the
African Union and the Government of Cameroon to convene the first meeting of the
Interregional Working Group, held between 22 and 26 April in Yaoundé. At the
meeting, experts developed a 2014-2016 action plan and a June-December 2014
road map for operationalizing the Interregional Coordination Centre, with a target of

14-32067

9/18

S/2014/319

June 2014 for initial operating capability. Communicatio n and resource mobilization
strategies were also developed at the meeting. The second meeting of the
Interregional Working Group will be held between 10 and 15 May in Yaoundé to
finalize these documents with a view to their adoption in June 2014. UNOCA
continues to participate in an informal experts group, the Group of Eight Plus
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which supports Member States and regional
organizations to tackle challenges of maritime insecurity.

IV. Lord’s Resistance Army
A.

Current situation
45. The Lord’s Resistance Army is currently believed to have split into several
highly mobile groups operating with a significant degree of autonomy in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are involved
primarily in survival mode activities that entail attacking civilians, killing, looting
and kidnapping. There have been no reports of recent premeditated mass killings or
other grave human rights abuses. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 65 presumed attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army were
reported during the first quarter of 2014 in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in 93 abductions and two deaths. The
number of reported deaths decreased significantly compared with the first quarters
of 2012 and 2013 respectively, while the number of abductions, although still high,
declined compared with the fourth quarter of 2013.
46. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs also reported that the
number of persons displaced in Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan
decreased from 326,448 persons as at 31 December 2013 to 159,927 persons as at
31 March 2014. The reduction is due largely to the increased number of returnees in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo thanks to security following operations
against Lord’s Resistance Army bases in Garamba National Park in September 2013
by the Regional Task Force of the African Union-led Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army. As a result,
communities surrounding the National Park have enjoyed a level of security
unprecedented since early 2008, with only nine attacks reported in the last six
months, according to partners on the ground. Overall, the Central African Republic
hosts 21,000 internally displaced persons and 3,225 refugees, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo hosts 113,154 internally displaced persons and 6,574
refugees and South Sudan hosts 15,974 refugees in Lord’s Resistance Army -affected
areas.
47. In the Central African Republic, while international attention has largely
focused on the sectarian violence further west, Lord’s Resistance Army forces hav e
continued to target communities in the eastern part of the country. During the first
quarter of 2014, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded
24 attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army and 45 abductions occurring mostly in the
prefecture of Haut Mbomou, representing a significant upward trend in Lord’s
Resistance Army activity. Increased attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army were
also reported in the prefectures of Mbomou and Haut Kotto. In addition, multiple

10/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

allegations of continuous recruitment and association of children in the Mbomou,
Haut Mbomou and Haute Kotto prefectures by the Lord’s Resistance Army were
reported. However, the allegations could not be substantiated because of insecurity
and inaccessibility in those areas.
48. Senior Lord’s Resistance Army leaders are believed to be based in the north eastern part of the Central African Republic, exploiting the country’s current
internal instability to regroup. It is also suspected that some ex -Séléka combatants
and some community leaders may be in collusion with the Lord’s Resistance Army
and may be providing the group with information about Regional Task Force
operations and supplies, including arms and ammunition.
49. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs reported 41 presumed attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army,
two deaths and 48 abductions during the first quarter of 2014. The number of attacks
by the Lord’s Resistance Army declined by 21 per cent compared with the preceding
quarter, with related deaths and abductions decreasing by 86 per cent and 52 per
cent, respectively. Overall, attacks, killings and abductions declined dramatically
over the past six months, including in their intensity and violence. However, sp ikes
in Lord’s Resistance Army activity in February and March 2014 reflect a westward
shift of their activity from the Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé districts towards the towns
of Niangara and Bangadi. During the months of January to March alone, 10 children
were abducted by elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army in Haut-Uélé (7) and
Bas-Uélé (3) in Orientale Province. The youngest child was four years old and the
eldest was 17.
50. In South Sudan, no Lord’s Resistance Army incidents were reported during the
period under review. Despite reports of Lord’s Resistance Army activity in
November 2013, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) reported
that the last serious attack is still considered to have taken place in June 2011.
51. While cooperation among the countries that participate in the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
and military support from the United States of America have allowed the Regional
Task Force to expand its operations, instability in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan is undermining progress achieved thus far. In the Central African
Republic, the lack of national security forces, including intelligence -sharing
capacity, as well as growing inter-communal conflict and, in some cases, hostility to
foreign Regional Task Force troops present challenges to counter-Lord’s Resistance
Army operations. The redeployment of Ugandan and South Sudanese Regional Task
Force contingents away from Lord’s Resistance Army operations has created
potential security vulnerabilities in Western Equatoria State that could be exploited
by the Lord’s Resistance Army. Armed Janjaweed militias and pastoralists, who
move throughout southern Darfur to the Central African Republic, are an additiona l
source of insecurity as these groups occasionally clash with the Regional Task Force
and are suspected of providing information to the Lord’s Resistance Army regarding
Regional Task Force troop movement.
52. The Government of the Sudan indicates that there are no Lord’s Resistance
Army elements in the disputed Kafia Kingi enclave, on the border between the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan. However, credible sources
suggest that Lord’s Resistance Army leader Joseph Kony and senior Lord’s

14-32067

11/18

S/2014/319

Resistance Army commanders have recently returned to seek safe haven in
Sudanese-controlled areas of the enclave.

B.

Coordination and resource mobilization
53. On 12 February in Kampala, a UNOCA-African Union joint delegation, led by
the African Union Special Envoy for the Lord’s Resistance Army Issue, Francisco
Madeira, met with the Ugandan Minister of Defence. The Minister reaffirmed his
country’s strong political commitment to the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, proposed to review its progress during
the next meeting of the Joint Coordinating Mechanism and pledged to redeploy
Uganda People’s Defence Forces troops from South Sudan back to the Regional
Task Force once the situation in that country stabilized.
54. My Special Representative and the African Union Special Envoy for the Lord’s
Resistance Army Issue co-chaired the biannual meeting of Lord’s Resistance Army
focal points on 13 and 14 February in Entebbe, Uganda. Institutions from the four
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries were represented, including relevant
United Nations missions and agencies, non-governmental organizations and donors.
Participants took note of collective achievements in implementing the United
Nations regional strategy to address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance
Army. UNOCA and the African Union continued to ensure that the commitment of
the Governments of Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries to the United
Nations regional strategy and to the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army was sustained. On the military
front, the Regional Task Force continued to exert military pressure on the Lord’s
Resistance Army. With regard to the civilian dimensio n, United Nations entities and
non-governmental organizations undertook numerous initiatives to enhance the
protection of civilians, child protection and humanitarian assistance; expand
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegrat ion activities;
and support peacebuilding, human rights, rule of law and development. Participants
also reflected on several long-term development issues in anticipation of an
upcoming African Union consultative workshop to identify the way forward on
long-term stabilization in Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries. The workshop
will build on a preliminary assessment conducted by the World Bank.
55. During the meeting, UNOCA facilitated the development of a series of
recommendations to advance progress in the five strategic areas of the United
Nations regional strategy. UNOCA has also improved coordination among all
entities involved and, in that context, recommendations were elaborated to further
enhance information-sharing among global, country-specific and thematic United
Nations entities, between United Nations and non-United Nations entities, and
among security actors such as the Regional Task Force, UNMISS, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), MISCA/United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and troop contributing countries.
56. My Special Representative attended the fourth ministerial meeting of the Joint
Coordinating Mechanism of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination
of the Lord’s Resistance Army on 25 March 2014 in Addis Ababa. The four

12/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

participating countries renewed their commitment to Regional Task Force
operations, with South Sudan and Uganda pledging to return the troops they had
withdrawn from the Regional Task Force once the political situation in South Sudan
permits. The countries endorsed the proposed restructuring at Regional Task Force
headquarters, decided to reconvene quarterly Joint Coor dinating Mechanism
meetings to reinvigorate the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the Lord’s Resistance Army and requested the African Union to deploy a technical
assessment mission to the Central African Republic for the development o f
modalities of coordination between the Regional Task Force and MISCA. My
Special Representative reiterated the Security Council’s recommendation, in its
presidential statement of 19 December 2012 (S/PRST/2012/28), for the convening
of a high-level meeting of Lord’s Resistance Army-affected States to further
consolidate political cooperation, which was endorsed by the Joint Coordinating
Mechanism.
57. The European Union and the United States continue to provide critical support
to the functioning of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army. In March, the European Union released 1.9 million euros
to support the Regional Task Force and the Office of the African Uni on Special
Envoy for the Lord’s Resistance Army Issue, while the United States increased its
support to the Regional Task Force with the provision of specialized military aircraft
and personnel to facilitate the rapid transport of troops. However, many pro jects in
the implementation plan of the United Nations regional strategy remain under resourced.

C.

Implementation of the United Nations regional strategy

1.

Operationalization and full implementation of the African Union Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
58. The operations of the Regional Task Force continue to make a difference in the
fight against the Lord’s Resistance Army, although recent setbacks threaten to
undermine the full operationalization of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army and the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy. Of the 5,030 troops originally pledged to the Regional
Task Force by participating Regional Cooperation Initiative countries, 3,380 troops
have been contributed. Its current standing capacity is 2,147 troops owing to the
temporary redeployment of Ugandan and South Sudanese contingents by their
respective Governments to respond to the internal crisis in Sout h Sudan. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo contingent remains active albeit underequipped,
while only 60 of the pledged 150 members of the contingent have been deployed
(55 in Obo, Central African Republic and 5 in Yambo, South Sudan). Meanwhile,
MONUSCO forces continued to provide support to military operations carried out
by the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo.
59. Although communication is now established between the Regional Task Force
headquarters and African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa, the full
operationalization of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army is dependent on mobilizing the resources and equipment
required to establish reliable communications between Regional Tas k Force
headquarters and the three sectors concerned. Resources are also required to further

14-32067

13/18

S/2014/319

support the functioning office of the African Union Special Envoy for the Lord’s
Resistance Army Issue and to address existing logistical gaps.
2.

Enhancement of efforts to promote the protection of civilians
60. United Nations missions and agencies, bilateral donors and non -governmental
organizations are actively engaged in efforts to promote the protection of civilians in
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas. UNICEF continued to provide ongoing
training for Regional Task Force officers on child protection and prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence and supported cross-border sharing of lessons
learned on protection and reintegration and strengthening of intergovernmental links
in Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries. In that regard, a workshop organized
by a non-governmental organization was held in Kampala in January 2014 to
examine current practice, challenges and priorities in the area of protecti on and
reintegration in Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.
61. In the Central African Republic, increasing Lord’s Resistance Army activity in
Séléka-controlled Mbomou and Haut Kotto prefectures, where there is a minimal
presence of humanitarian actors, has exposed communities in those areas to greater
risk of attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army. However, UNICEF continued its
protection-related interventions by providing assistance, through a non-governmental
organization on the ground, to enhance the resilience of Lord’s Resistance Armyaffected communities, including interim care and family tracing and reunification
activities for unaccompanied and separated children, as well as the promotion of
early child development activities, vocational training programmes and support for
income-generating activities. Through its partners, the agency also renewed its
programme to provide reintegration and psychosocial support to children and other
victims of attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army in the country. Th e United States
Department of State and the United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) funded communication networks to enhance community-based protection.
62. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, efforts by MONUSCO included
establishing mobile operating bases in vulnerable areas jointly with the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo, installing mobile operating bases
in Nambia, conducting patrols to reassure civilian populations, constructing bridges
along the Dungu-Faradje road, training community alert network focal points and
designing a local community protection plan. Under a USAID-funded public-private
partnership with Vodacom Congo, cellphone towers are now operational in Lord’s
Resistance Army-affected areas. Non-governmental organizations on the ground are
currently running protection committees in eight vulnerable villages of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

3.

Expansion of current disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration activities to cover all Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
63. Collective efforts by counter-Lord’s Resistance Army regional military forces,
United States military advisers, non-governmental organizations and local partners
continue to encourage defections. It is reported that 37 members of the Lord’s
Resistance Army who had been with the group for six months or longer have
defected since December 2013, including 11 Ugandan Lord’s Resistance Army
combatants. These figures include 19 Lord’s Resistance Army combatants who

14/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

defected in Zemio, Central African Republic in December 2013 — the largest single
Lord’s Resistance Army defection since 2008.
64. Efforts by MONUSCO included community sensitization and the organizing of
workshops in Dungu, Niangara and Faradje to establish safe assembly points. The
Mission and its partners conducted aerial messaging and recorded video messages to
encourage defections, while continuing to participate in exchange visits between
actors in Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.
65. The United States military advisers expanded efforts to promote defections
through leaflet drops, radio broadcasts, aerial loudspeakers and the establishment of
safe reporting sites. More than 1 million leaflets encouraging defections at 17 locations
across Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries have been dropped.
66. UNICEF continued to work with the Regional Task Force, United Nations
missions and civil society to support the return and reintegration of children
throughout the region. In cooperation with UNICEF and South Sudanese local
authorities, a non-governmental organization involved on the ground plans to
convene a meeting of local leaders to map needs, identify gaps and develop common
approaches for the reintegration of returnees as well as the annual meeting of the
Regional Civil Society Task Force. The Task Force will bring together community
leaders and representatives from Lord’s Resistance Army-affected communities
across the subregion. Both meetings are scheduled to take place in M ay 2014. In
addition, UNICEF supported the rehabilitation and reintegration of children affected
by the Lord’s Resistance Army, including former abducted children.
4.

Promotion of a coordinated humanitarian and child protection response in all
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
67. The humanitarian situation in many Lord’s Resistance Army-affected countries
remains precarious. Non-governmental organizations are present only in some
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas of the Central African Republic, given the
limited access, while they continue to phase out from non-emergency areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo despite outstanding humanitarian needs. Despite
such challenges, several actors remain actively engaged.
68. UNICEF and partners developed training materials and conducted training for
over 300 Regional Task Force officers on child protection and prevention of sexual
violence, who, in turn, provided training to subordinates. In March 2014, UNICEF
documented the need to extend protection and humanitarian assistance to Lord’s
Resistance Army-affected populations in south-eastern Central African Republic and
is currently working to deploy child protection staff in that country. In cooperation
with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and United Nations missions, UNICEF continues to monitor
and report on child rights violations in Lord’s Resistance Army -affected areas and to
support interim care, family tracing and reunification s ervices for children who
escape the Lord’s Resistance Army.

14-32067

15/18

S/2014/319

5.

Provision of support to Lord’s Resistance Army-affected Governments in the
fields of peacebuilding, human rights, rule of law and development to enable
them to establish State authority across their territory
69. In Uganda, development interventions for northern Uganda have been
mainstreamed into the National Development Plan. OHCHR, meanwhile, has
provided technical advice to Ugandan national institutions in a range of Lord’s
Resistance Army-related areas, including in the development of a draft national
transitional justice policy framework and on the rules of procedure and evidence to
facilitate prosecution of those implicated for serious crimes and gross violations of
human rights during the Lord’s Resistance Army conflict. OHCHR is also
supporting the Uganda Human Rights Commission, as part of the Uganda Country
Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting on Grave Violations against Children in
Situations of Armed Conflict, to fulfil its protection mandate by documenting
serious crimes and gross violations of human rights committed during the Lord’s
Resistance Army conflict in northern Uganda.
70. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA will continue to hold meetings of
its Lord’s Resistance Army Inter-Agency Task Force. The new transitional
authorities have appointed focal points for Lord’s Resistance Army issues at the
strategic and working levels and have committed to take part in the Mission’s
Inter-Agency Task Force meetings. The Mission has also advocated for the new
transitional authorities to revisit the development of a national Lord’s Resistance
Army strategy and offered its technical support in that regard.
71. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO supported a range of
activities to facilitate the establishment of State authority in Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas. The Mission funded the construction of the tribunal de paix in
Dungu and facilitated the deployment of its three judges. It provided assistance to
the military court for conducting mobile court sessions and facilitated improved
prison conditions. The reopening of police stations was supported, including the
Doruma substation, which became operational during the current reporting period.
Successful MONUSCO advocacy for the deployment of policemen in Lord’s
Resistance Army-affected areas has allowed the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo to focus counter-Lord’s Resistance Army military
operations. Capacity-building workshops were also organized for local authorities in
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.

V. Observations and recommendations
72. I reiterate my appreciation to Central African States and institutions for their
important and valuable role in addressing the ongoing crisis in the Central African
Republic, in collaboration with the African Union. ECCAS and CEMAC have
shown unwavering commitment to finding a solution to the crisis in the interest of
fostering peace and greater stability in the subregion.
73. I commend the efforts of the Governments of the subregion, United Nations
entities, national and international non-governmental organizations and other
partners in addressing the consequences posed by the crisis in the Central African
Republic on neighbouring countries. In that regard, I call upon the international
community to urgently provide the requisite financial support to the inter -agency

16/18

14-32067

S/2014/319

Central African Republic Regional Response Plan to assist the concerned
Governments to address their growing humanitarian needs.
74. I am deeply concerned about the impact of fighting between the Nigerian army
and Boko Haram, which has now resulted in the displacement of tens of thousands
of Nigerian refugees and returning immigrants to northern Cameroon and Chad.
I am further concerned about the activities of Boko Haram in some States in the
subregion, including kidnappings and deadly bomb attacks. I welcome ongoing
efforts to strengthen border cooperation and encourage countries concerned in
Central Africa to work in concert with Nigeria to urgently bring to an end the
violent activities of armed and extremist groups which continue to threaten regional
peace and stability. I also welcome the commitment of Governments in the region to
make headway on the road map for development of the integrated counter-terrorism
and small arms and light weapons control strategy for the Central African subregion.
UNOCA will continue to support those efforts in collaboration with the relevant
United Nations entities involved.
75. The financial losses to the economies of Central African Member States caused
by piracy and maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea are massive. I commend the
important strides made to strengthen sustainable maritime governance in West and
Central Africa and welcome the formal adoption of the 2050 Africa’s Integrated
Maritime Strategy by the twenty-second ordinary session of the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government. I also welcome the development of a
road map as well as an action plan towards the establishment and operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre and call upon States and subregional
organizations of the Gulf of Guinea to pursue their efforts in the implementation of
the decisions of the Yaoundé summit. UNOCA will continue to assist t he region and
to mobilize support in order to achieve that goal.
76. I welcome the initiatives of the Heads of State, Central African Governments
and ECCAS to tackle the issue of illicit wildlife trade. I remain concerned about the
links between illicit wildlife trade and armed groups in the subregion, including the
Lord’s Resistance Army. UNOCA will continue to support the subregion to identify
collaborative approaches to address this issue.
77. While noting the concerns of some States regarding the free movement of
persons and goods, I encourage CEMAC to continue to work with UNOCA towards
the objective of greater political and economic integration for Central African States
as a means of catalysing greater regional development.
78. I welcome the continued progress made against the threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army and acknowledge the fruitful cooperation between UNOCA and
the African Union in that regard, as well as the contributions from Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected countries, the United Nations system, non-governmental organizations
and donors. I recognize, in particular, the critical support provided by the United
States and the European Union.
79. Until the transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA on 15 September
2014, I urge greater coordination between MISCA and the African Union Regional
Task Force. In that context, I welcome the decision of the fourth ministerial meeting
of the Joint Coordinating Mechanism requesting the African Union Commission to
deploy a technical assessment mission to elaborate the modalities for coordination

14-32067

17/18

S/2014/319

between the two African Union forces and to hold a summit of Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected countries.
80. Despite the continuing decline in Lord’s Resistance Army activity overall, the
Lord’s Resistance Army still remains a serious threat, with its senior leadership
intact and with the potential to destabilize the subregion. Furthermore, instability in
the Central African Republic and South Sudan is seriously undermining progress
thus far achieved. I call upon the participating Regional Cooperation Initiative for
the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army countries to fulfil their troop
commitments to the Regional Task Force.
81. I wish to reiterate that the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army provides a comprehensive
approach to address a range of pressing needs in Lord’s Resistance Army -affected
areas and call upon the international community to provide financial support for the
activities detailed in the implementation plan adopted by the Security Council in
December 2012. Given the minimal presence of humanitarian actors in many Lord’s
Resistance Army-affected areas, I draw particular attention to the need for donors to
support early recovery activities in order to restore basic livelihoods and essential
services for affected communities in those areas.
82. I would like, once again, to express my appreciation to the Governments of
Central African countries, ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gu lf of Guinea
Commission, the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region and other
subregional and regional institutions for their continued collaboration with UNOCA.
I thank the various entities of the United Nations system working in Central Afric a,
including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional offices, country
teams and other relevant entities, for their support and cooperation with UNOCA.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Abou Moussa, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the
cause of peace and security in Central Africa.

18/18

14-32067
