UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/46
4 December 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3720th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 December 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council warmly welcomes the Peace Agreement signed by
the Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front in
Abidjan on 30 November 1996. The Agreement brings to an end a bitter
conflict which has caused appalling suffering to the people of Sierra
Leone. The Council pays tribute to the courage and determination of all
those who have worked tirelessly towards this end. The Council hopes that
the Agreement will provide encouragement to those working for peace in
other parts of Africa.
"The Security Council commends in particular the role played by the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire whose commitment and determination in the
chairmanship of the negotiations between the parties have been crucial to
this successful outcome. The Council also pays tribute to the support
provided to the negotiations by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
in close coordination with the Organization of African Unity, the
Commonwealth, the Economic Community of West African States and other
organizations and neighbouring countries.
"The Security Council continues to follow developments in Sierra Leone
with close interest. The Peace Agreement is an essential first step
towards national reconciliation and reconstruction. The Council will
continue to support the development of peace and democracy in Sierra Leone.
It notes in particular the need for a successful process of demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants and stands ready to assist in this
process. It stresses the importance of a coordinated international effort
to alleviate the humanitarian situation in the country.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor the situation in Sierra Leone and to keep the Council informed of
further significant developments."

96-34924 (E)

041296

*9634924*

S/PRST/1996/46
English
Page 2

-----
