S/PV.8382

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8382nd meeting

Thursday, 25 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz/Mrs. Cordova Soria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Ms. Brandt
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Wallström
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Promoting the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda and
sustaining peace through women’s political and economic empowerment
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2018/900)
Letter dated 9 October 2018 from the Permanent Representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/904)
.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34014 (E)
*1834014*

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Election in Ethiopia
The President: In my national capacity, I should
like to break with protocol. We all woke up this morning
to the very good news that, today, Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde has been elected the first woman President of
Ethiopia. I think that news is a very good way to start
this important debate.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Promoting the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda and sustaining
peace through women’s political and economic
empowerment
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2018/900)
Letter dated 9 October 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2018/904)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
2/108

25/10/2018

the Empowerment of Women; and Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah, General Director of the Women’s Centre for
Legal Aid and Counselling.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender and
the Implementation of United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women and Peace and
Security of the European External Action Service of
the European Union; Ms. Narjes Saidane, Permanent
Observer of the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the United Nations; Ms. Amarsanaa
Darisuren, Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative of
the NATO Secretary-General of for Women, Peace
and Security.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/900, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/904, which contains a letter dated
9 October 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of Bolivia for give me the opportunity
to address the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda through the political and economic
empowerment of women. I congratulate the Council
on its efforts this past year to increase the number of
speakers from civil society, for the work of its group
of experts on women and peace and security, and to
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

achieve parity between genders and guarantee the
gender perspective among the speakers during the
presidencies of some of its members.
(spoke in French)
Never, over the past 30 years, has the number of
countries in the grip of some form of violent conflict
been so high. Forced displacements due to wars and
persecution are more numerous than never. Climate
change and underdevelopment are increasingly
threatening to our security, while the question of
human rights has been relegated to the background.
There is every reason to worry, but we must resist the
ambient pessimism and not lose sight of the fact that
solutions exist. Hope has always guided our steps in
the action we collectively take on behalf of women
and peace and security. This is in issue that promises
change, which includes many elements we need to
address the complex challenges the world is facing:
climate change, disarmament, equality and inclusion. It
is also a fundamental question in terms of reaching our
main goal of preventing conflict and human suffering.
(spoke in English)
Over the past year, we have seen positive examples
of progress. Women’s organizations continue to have an
impact, from keeping dialogue alive in Guinea Bissau
to rebuilding communities in Colombia. In the Central
African Republic and Mali, women successfully
contributed to negotiating between armed actors to
halt the escalation of intercommunal tensions. In the
Syrian Arab Republic, women have negotiated local
ceasefires, mediated the creation of civilian safe zones
and coordinated humanitarian and relief initiatives;
they have done similarly in Yemen.
I can personally attest to the critical importance of
the work done by the women peacemakers I have met
around the world, from Mali to Bangladesh. Here at the
United Nations, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund is channeling resources to women’s organizations
that need them. The Peacebuilding Fund invests more
than 30 per cent of its resources in gender equality
programming, and a growing number of donors are
earmarking funds for gender equality.
We are placing this agenda at the heart of our
partnerships with regional organizations. The Deputy
Secretary-General has made several high-level
missions with the African Union, focused on women,
peace and security and development. Last month, the

S/PV. 8382

Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Dr. Denis Mukwege
and Ms. Nadia Murad, two champions of women, peace
and security who exemplify the power of individuals
to make a difference and the fact that survivors and
advocates are best placed to determine the changes
needed to build sustainable peace.
But despite this progress in some areas, the facts
on the ground show that we still have far to go. The
participation of women in formal peace processes
remains extremely limited. Between 1990 and 2017,
women constituted just 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per
cent of negotiators and 5 per cent of witnesses and
signatories in all major peace processes. Conflict
continues to have a devastating effect on women and
girls. The United Nations documented more than 800
cases of conflict-related sexual violence in 2017 — a
56 per cent increase since 2016.
Women human rights defenders, political leaders,
journalists and activists, who play an important role
in addressing the root causes of conflict, are targeted
at alarming rates. Women’s marginalization, lack of
access to health and education services, and economic
disempowerment continue to be both a cause and an
effect of conflict. Funding for programmes to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women in
countries affected by conflict is just 5 per cent of total
bilateral aid to such countries.
The evidence linking gender equality and peace
was recently set out in our joint study with the World
Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Violent Conflict. It is convincing and wellknown. Maybe that is why the list of speakers for this
debate is so long every year In 2015, the open debate
on this item had the highest number of speakers in the
history of the Security Council (see S/PV.7533).
But there is a significant gap between what we
say in this Chamber and what we do outside it. Every
year, we make laudable commitments, but they are
not backed with the requisite financial and political
support. We repeat statistics about the sustainability
of inclusive peace processes, but that is not how we
mediate most conflicts. We extol the positive influence
of women peacebuilders, but provide little space
for their participation. We rely heavily on women’s
organizations, but do not fund them adequately. We
recognize the importance of gender analysis, but cut the
budgets for such expertise. To address this gap, I intend
to prioritize several action points in the coming year.

18-340143/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

First, gender parity has the greatest potential
impact on effectiveness and credibility in our field
operations. But this is where the numbers are lowest,
and the rate of change is slowest. Women now comprise
41 per cent of heads and deputy heads of our peace
operations — more than ever before. Their differing
perspectives are already having a positive impact,
but the number of women in peace operations overall
has stagnated. Without decisive action, they will go
backwards as some missions are downsized. I have
therefore formed a working group to put emergency
measures in place to address this issue. Some elements
will need approval from Member States, and I hope the
commitment of the participants in this Chamber today
will be reflected in their support for these reforms when
we seize the General Assembly to change some of our
rules and regulations.
It is also crippling to our credibility and
protection-capacity that women represent only 4 per
cent of our military peacekeepers and 10 per cent
of police. The United Nations fully supports the
innovative efforts launched by Member States this year
to incentivize greater representation.
I remain committed to ending all forms of sexual
exploitation and abuse within the United Nations — one
of the first initiatives I took when I assumed office. I
will continue to work with my Special Coordinator
on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, the Victims’ Rights Advocate
and Member States on this issue. I am pleased that
nearly 100 Member States have now signed voluntary
compacts with us to tackle sexual exploitation and
abuse, and I call on others to join them. The Circle
of Leadership of Heads of State and Government is
committed to zero tolerance, to preventing and ending
this scourge and to addressing its impact effectively
and humanely.
Secondly, with respect to mediation, we know
that the meaningful participation of women is directly
linked to more sustainable peace. And yet we continue
to support and lead processes that are not inclusive.
The establishment of several women’s networks in
recent years is an important trend, as they can play
a role in influencing processes for the better. I am
pleased that members of my High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation — which is gender-balanced to
the level of full parity — are here this week to work
with representatives of these networks. Women’s
participation should not be confined to advisory roles
4/108

25/10/2018

or parallel structures, and I welcome the growing sense
of urgency from Member States, civil society and others
to ensure that we are designing more effective peace
processes with much stronger women’s participation.
Thirdly, a gendered approach to peace and security
means supporting peacebuilding at the local level, even
during conflict. As peace processes falter at the national
and international level, we must consistently support
the local women’s groups that negotiate humanitarian
access and support community resilience, learn from
them and build peace from the ground up.
Fourthly, financing this agenda is critical, and
the United Nations intends to lead by example. I have
created a high-level task force to review our funding
on gender equality, including in the peace and security
pillar. I will hold United Nations entities accountable
with respect to their commitments to increasing
spending on women and peace and security, with a
target of reaching or exceeding 15 per cent by 2020.
Finally, from now on I will include gender analysis
in my reports to the Security Council whenever it is
relevant to inform its decisions.
In two years’ time, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the fifth
anniversary of the global agreement giving rise to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration.
Gender equality and women’s participation are a
unifying thread running through the implementation of
these landmark agreements for human rights, sustainable
development, and peace and security. In preparation for
these landmark dates, my report on women and peace
and security next year will include an assessment of
implementation of the relevant recommendations in the
three peace and security reviews undertaken in 2015,
particularly the Global Study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), together with resolution
2242 (2015), adopted three years ago. The findings
and recommendations from this assessment will be
the basis for increased efforts in the year leading up
to 2020. I encourage Member States to initiate similar
preparations and reviews.
As we look forward, I urge the Security Council to
invest in gender equality and women’s empowerment,
not only as an end in themselves, but as a critical means
of achieving our overarching aim of preventing and
ending conflict and building peace and prosperity in
the world for all.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary General for his briefing and above all for the
leadership he has shown in this and other areas.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour for me
to address the Security Council and speak on the
Secretary-General’s report on women and peace and
security (S/2018/900).
I thank Bolivia for all the support it has given us in
preparing for today’s debate.
The Secretary-Genera’s report sounds a loud
alarm bell on systemic failures to bring women into
peacemaking in a meaningful manner. Trends show
that women are being excluded from peace processes.
Those who do not wage war seem to be disqualified
from making peace, while those who may be implicated
in making war tend to find it easy to be at the peace table.
I, together with representatives from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, have just
come back from a joint United Nations/African Union
mission to South Sudan. The women we met there told
us that they long for peace and to resume their lives.
Their nearly five years of suffering from a civil war,
which they kept on repeating they were not responsible
for waging, was taking a toll on them, and they said,
“we are here because we want to reconcile even though
we have never quarrelled.”
While they still fear for the future, they appreciated
the Revitalized Agreement on the resolution of the
conflict, which offers new hope for the country and an
unmissable opportunity to build peace, with a 35 per
cent quota for the representation of women. Their fears
are bolstered, however, by the fact that, in these early
days of the Revitalized Agreement, there is just one
woman among the 10 persons nominated to be members
of the National Pre-Transitional Committee, which is
not the agreed 35 per cent.
The report today inescapably details how that is not
an exception but the rule. How there is at the same time
hope for progress, and how we are failing to make this
hope a reality. Nevertheless, we can never and must not
lose hope. It shows us an undeniable possibility with
undeniable failures, which are costing the lives of
women and girls, who, as we have said, suffer and die
from a war they are not waging.

S/PV. 8382

A year ago, in this Chamber, I raised the alarm at
the numbers shown by the indicators we track year on
year with regard to peace processes and mediation (see
S/PV.8079). Today, I want to raise the alarm once more,
with the hope that it will jolt us into greater action.
Indicators show that we have stagnated or dropped
again. For that reason, we have focused this year’s report
on the need for women’s meaningful contribution to
peace. We call on all of us to make sure that we take the
much-needed concrete actions. We need the Security
Council to be vigilant about the ending of superficial
efforts to include women that do not genuinely extend
the opportunity to influence outcomes. We also want
to show that the extreme political marginalization at
peace tables is often worse in the institutions set up to
implement these agreements.
And we wanted to spotlight the many ways in
which women keep on being active and resilient.
Women in the front lines are negotiating ceasefires,
civilian safe zones, the demobilization of fighters and
humanitarian access at the local level. In Syria, Yemen,
Afghanistan and the Central African Republic, they are
drawing up protection plans at the community level.
We want the States Members of the United Nations to
pay due attention to these dynamics, make them visible
in forums like the Security Council, and use them to
support women’s political agency, provide financial
resources and enable women to do even more. The
continued tolerance for the limited recognition of
women’s expertise and lived experience is a setback for
all of us.
Statistics on women’s involvement speak for
themselves. On this issue, the report offers more numbers:
between 1990 and 2017, under our watch, women
constituted only 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per cent of
negotiators and 5 per cent of witnesses and signatories
in major peace processes. Only three of 11 agreements
signed in 2017 contained provisions on gender equality,
continuing last year’s worrisome downward trend. Of
the 1,500 agreements signed between 2000 and 2016,
only 25 elevate the role of women in terms of their
engagement in the implementation phase.
In Yemen, current efforts at resuming dialogue do
not include women, beyond setting up observer bodies
to advise the United Nations Special Envoy. Even in a
consultative meeting in London this summer organized
by the United Nations and convening 22 prominent
Yemeni leaders to discuss the peace talks, only three
Yemeni women were invited.

18-340145/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

In Mali, women average a dismal 3 per cent of the
membership of the multiple national committees set up
to monitor and implement the Peace Agreement.
In the Central African Republic, mediation efforts
are focused on the presidency and the 14 armed groups.
They, too, exclude women altogether.
In Afghanistan, the Government and its international
partners invest efforts in including women in the High
Peace Council and provincial peace councils, but when
it comes to actual talks with the Taliban, the absence of
women is noticeable. Undeniably, there are possibilities,
but there are also undeniable failures, and there are also
determined women. In the 23 rounds of AfghanistanTaliban peace talks held between 2005 and 2014, women
were at the table just twice. Now that there are offers
to resume peace talks without preconditions, Afghan
women peacebuilders want to be at the table, and they
want to make a difference.
Finally, a positive number: Security Council
decisions about country-specific or regional situations
that contain language on women and peace and security
increased from 50 to 75 per cent. This must lead to
increased action on the front lines. The number of
women leaders and civil-society representatives who
briefed the Security Council also increased significantly.
I thank Council members for these efforts and their
continued participation in the Informal Expert Group
on Women, Peace and Security, currently co-chaired
by Sweden and Peru, in collaboration with the United
Kingdom. But we need to use all available diplomatic
channels and political influence to ensure that these
decisions in New York are making a difference on the
ground, because this is simply not happening in the
most meaningful way.
The bigger picture of gender inequality in conflict
and post-conflict countries is something we need to
continue to watch. Today’s report gives us a broad
picture of the many remaining areas where challenges
remain to reaching equal representation of women in
the vital processes of our nations. For example, only
16 per cent of parliamentarians in conflict-affected and
post-conflict countries are women, the same percentage
as last year and the year before. There is 20 per cent
representation in countries that use quotas and just
12 per cent in countries that do not. It is for that reason
that we appreciate the fact that our Secretary-General is
leading from the front, and we call for special measures
6/108

25/10/2018

to be taken regarding the manner in which we are
driving the parity process within the United Nations.
The Council just visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo ahead of crucial elections. Only 12 per
cent of registered candidates are women, just as in the
previous elections seven years ago, and women are
suffering from intimidation. Of the 17 countries that
have elected a woman Head of State or Government,
none are post-conflict countries at this point. I will say
this again, as I did last year: we need to heed the call
and address the patterns that these numbers show us.
On our part, we will continue to follow up with the
Council on how we can together address the situation
with greater vigilance and make a significant difference.
It is not only women whose opportunities are being
limited. In many conflict settings, girls are one and a
half times more likely to be out of primary school, and
whole communities therefore experience setbacks. The
number of children lacking education in conflict areas
calls for a concentrated response and solution involving
schools and second-chance education.
Child marriage rates are also affected by war. In
Yemen, the rate of child marriage was 66 per cent in
2017, 52 per cent last year and 32 per cent before the
recent conflict erupted.
Unsurprisingly but tragically, in conflict and
post-conflict countries maternal mortality rates are
almost twice the global rate. Of the 830 women and
adolescent girls who die every day from causes related
to pregnancy and childbirth, 507 die in countries that
are considered fragile because of conflict and disaster.
To address these issues and support the regeneration of
families and communities, we need strong and targeted
investments in women in conflict areas. This is just not
happening enough, despite the undeniable goodwill
towards the women and peace and security agendas in
conflict-affected countries.
This clear gender inequality in women’s access
to resources is not caused simply by the presence of
conflict. It is also a reflection of the non-prioritization
of women’s needs and the relegation of women to smallscale and local peripheral initiatives. In the Sahel,
where we visited with the Deputy Secretary-General,
African Union representatives and Minister Wallström,
we saw the dire poverty of the women and community
in the Lake Chad basin. We saw households with no
electricity in the part of the world that has the highest
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

penetration of the sun on Earth and is more suitable
than anywhere else in the world for sustainable-energy
generation from solar power. Yet clinics lack power and
women have no cold storage for their fish or for the
fresh produce needed for food security, which in some
cases contributes to peace and security more than the
efforts of the military.
In conflict-affected countries, only 11.5 per cent
of landholders are women. Although bilateral aid to
promote gender equality in fragile country situations
rose by 17 per cent compared with the previous year,
it still amounts to only 5 per cent of the total bilateral
aid spent on programmes with gender equality as the
primary objective. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, aid from the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development allocated
to the promotion of gender equality was only $8 per
capita last year. The same year, the United Nations
documented a 56 per cent increase in sexual violence.
The share of the aid channeled through
non-governmental
women’s
organizations
has
stagnated. Our financial commitments just do not
match the extent to which we rely on these groups. Yet
there has been undeniable progress because the number
of actions to be taken and the collaboration intended
with civil society continue to be favoured as a way to
operate; however, this must also translate into concrete
action and better investment in such groups.
Civil-society and women’s organizations have been
failed in the midst of record-breaking numbers of side
events at intergovernmental meetings. Our plea is to
refocus our energies and resources. I believe that there
is goodwill, and we all want what is best for women
and girls. Even as we have disappointing indicators on
women and girls, global military spending has reached
$1.74 trillion, a 57 per cent increase since 2000. Some
countries allocate more public money to the military
than to education or health. Ninety per cent of grassroots women’s organizations working in areas directly
impacted by terrorism and violent extremism state that
current counter-terrorism measures have an adverse
impact on the work for peace, women’s rights and
gender equality.
We must respond to the many violations against
the human rights of women and girls within violent
groups and to the social stigma, economic hardship
and discrimination that women and girls experience

S/PV. 8382

when returning to their homes and communities when
they have been part of such a group. These challenges
are best addressed by actions that protect and promote
the rights of victims and are fundamentally based in
human rights law. Women human rights defenders
are on the front lines and are fighting a lonely battle.
Many die a lonely death from weapons that are meant
to protect them.
Let us look ahead with hope and the knowledge of
what we are capable of doing together. This includes
what we can do with women, such as the African
Women Leaders Network, which has been given a
boost by the support of the German Government, and
the focal points have already been established in 30
African countries.
We are already gearing up for the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which will be
an opportunity to shape the agenda for the next decade
with new commitments and priorities. We have to start
now to gear up for better results. We need more positive
signs, such as those I saw in Somalia, where we need
to help to accelerate the positive change. There will be
opportunities for everyone to weigh in, including at
next year’s meeting of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network in Windhoek, which will carry a
special symbolism for those who have been part of this
movement for a while.
For now, I want to share three priorities for 2020.
This August, we mourned the loss of Kofi Annan.
Part of his legacy was that the United Nations debated
and decided to stop supporting peace agreements that
included blanket amnesties. I think that, two decades
later, it is time for the United Nations to have a similar
conversation about supporting, brokering and paying
for peace negotiations that exclude women. This issue
is in the Council’s hands. It was raised by women from
civil society at the forum the Council was invited to
earlier this week, at the initiative of Sweden.
Secondly, one of the many positive examples in the
report is the Peacebuilding Fund’s steadily growing
support to projects advancing gender equality and
women’s empowerment. Finding ways to make the
15 per cent minimum target a reality across all relevant
entities and other peace and security funds is another
important take that we can focus on going forward. Of
course, joint programming on the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict areas, addressing the educational and
economic resilience of women and multi-partner trust

18-340147/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

funds in fragile settings should be at the start of all
conversations about financing.
Finally, we need to do much more to protect women
activists, peacebuilders and human rights defenders in
conflict-affected countries. We applaud the historic
participation of Palestinian women, representing
civil society, in addressing the Security Council for
the first time. We commend the Nobel Peace Prize
Committee for recognizing Dr. Denis Mukwege and
Ms. Nadia Murad for their advocacy on behalf of
victims of wartime sexual violence. It is an example
of the importance of this issue, to which my colleague
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Pramila Patten, devotes all her time and energy.
I have met many exceptionally courageous women
in my many recent travels to Somalia, South Sudan and
the Sahel, and my visit with Rohingya women refugees
was no exception. Many of them are here today, but
many could not be here.
In 2017, half of the women honoured in the annual
tribute of the Association for Women in Development
were murdered in conflict-affected countries, but the
list is much longer when we include women political
leaders, journalists, justice actors, security sector
personnel, those perceived to be lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons or who challenge
traditional gender roles by simply being involved in
public life. It is my strong wish that we will find the
political will to do much more about the epidemic of the
killing of women, which we have seen over this decade
as it comes to a close.
Change is in our hands. Let us work for positive
indicators for the next report, and let us make sure that
the next report of the Secretary-General will be able to
show that we are turning the corner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Siniora Atallah.
Ms. Siniora Atallah: Today, I speak in my capacity
as the General Director of the Women’s Centre for
Legal Aid and Counselling. I also speak on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. I
speak to the Security Council as a peace leader and as a
human rights defender who has witnessed, documented
and spoken out for three decades about violations in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Today, I bring to
Council members the voices of Palestinian women,
8/108

25/10/2018

who still face violence, discrimination, deprivation
and systematic violations of their human rights on a
daily basis.
Mervat, a resident of the old city of Hebron, stepped
out of her home one day to take out the garbage, when
she was violently attacked by a group of settlers.
Neighbours who heard Mervat’s screams witnessed
them beating her and raised the alarm. Mervat was four
months pregnant at the time and lost her baby as a result
of her injuries.
Last September, Sana, living in Jerusalem, awoke
to find Israeli police at her front door. A young mother
of two, she listened shocked as they informed her that
they were going to demolish her home under the pretext
that her family did not have a building permit. They
were given one week to move out.
Earlier this May, during the recent marches of
return on the eastern border of Gaza, Nisreen, a mother
of three, was shot in the chest by the Israeli military.
Nisreen had been peacefully demonstrating with a
group of women and children. Two days later, Alan was
shot in the stomach while walking with her friends to
watch folk dancers perform near the same border.
These stories illustrate what life under occupation
is like for ordinary Palestinian women and girls. They
live at risk of violent attacks while going about their
daily lives. Their homes can be snatched from them at
a moment’s notice. Participation in public life is under
a shadow of fear.
The Israeli occupation and the resulting humanitarian
crisis are deeply gendered and exacerbate existing
gender inequalities. Women disproportionately endure
the violence of occupation borne by all Palestinians,
and often with gender-specific consequences.
Palestinian women face attacks, threats, intimidation,
discrimination and restrictions on their movements by
the Israeli military on a daily basis. Night raids, the
destruction of property and violence at checkpoints
are also routinely committed by the occupying forces.
Palestinian women lose their homes and cannot reunite
with their families owing to restrictions or the denial
of residency permits. They look on as their husbands
and children are detained, attacked or killed in front
of them. Women often suffer gender-specific torture in
Israeli prisons, and the discrimination experienced by
refugee women is compounded by displacement.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

The occupation reinforces the patriarchal structures
of Palestinian society. Women must earn a living on top
of their responsibilities to care for the young, sick or
injured, often isolating them from their communities
and public life. In efforts to protect their families from
violence or arrest, women often become prison guards
to their own children. Political violence in the public
sphere leads to spikes in violence in the private sphere.
Domestic violence is shockingly high and femicide is
on the increase.
Not only do women suffer these abuses; they are
also starved of the resources to respond to them. The
fragile conditions created by the occupation mean that
Palestinian women lack access to justice and the means
to live. The recent funding cuts to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East have also disproportionately impacted
the lives of Palestinian women, especially in health
and education. The destruction of infrastructure has
had a devastating impact on families and the lives of
women and girls by cutting off their access to food,
water, sanitation, electricity and life-saving medical
care. As the Special Rapporteur on violence against
women noted in 2017, economic deprivation and high
levels of unemployment, compounded by the pressure
of the occupation, have also made Palestinian women
vulnerable to violence. More resources for Palestinian
women not only would make them less prone to
violence but are essential to their participation in
their communities.
For women, the fear and deprivation accompanying
occupation have meant their being unable to join public
life or defend our rights. The Israeli occupation has
shrunk the space for a free and independent civil society
by banning peaceful demonstrations and persecuting
journalists who are critical of the occupation. Women
human rights defenders are accused of incitement by
Israel. In July, thousands of Palestinian women marched
on the eastern borders of the Gaza Strip in peaceful
protest against the occupation. Israeli snipers shot at
and used tear gas against protesters, injuring thousands
and killing almost 100 civilians. In addition, civil
society volunteers — including medical workers — are
targeted by the army, despite being clearly identifiable
in uniform. Female journalists reporting on the conflict
are assaulted and detained. Retaliation for their work
deters them from reporting on the occupation. This
serves to further marginalize women’s voices from the
public sphere.

S/PV. 8382

In committing to women and peace and security,
the Security Council recognized the importance of
women’s meaningful participation and that without
women, there can be no peace. The lives of Palestinian
women are evidence that these commitments have not
been met. Although women have been at the forefront of
the Palestinian liberation movement and the Palestinian
Authority worked with grass-roots women leaders to
create the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000),
few have been represented in peace talks. Women are
underrepresented, both as official negotiators and as
technical advisers, despite clear evidence that they have
often been critical in working across political divides,
building grass-roots support for peace and providing
essential expertise on human rights and issues like
health and access to resources.
Little space has been made to integrate Palestinian
women’s concerns into key political processes,
including for achieving Palestinian statehood and for
national reconciliation. Representation of women in
key decision-making positions, including in Palestinian
Authority institutions, is barely 5 per cent. Only 4 out
of 30 members of the internal reconciliation team are
women. Palestinian women have not been consulted
in shaping political or humanitarian responses in our
country and our needs have therefore been overlooked.
The situation of Palestinian women today has been
further compounded by a real and serious crisis of
legitimacy and trust in the United Nations. The Security
Council was first established to maintain peace and
security, not to manage conflict. Its chronic inability to
take effective action to end the Israeli occupation, with
little hope that this will change, exemplifies that crisis.
On the contrary, Member States continue to trade arms
with and offer political support to Israel, while Israel
continues to impose policies and practices that are in
clear violation of international law.
Israel’s occupation and the prevailing culture of
impunity have not only destroyed the lives of Palestinian
women and men; they have jeopardized peace and
security across the Middle East. The international
community can no longer look away from the plight
of my people, who have endured the world’s longest
occupation. We call on the Security Council to address
the root causes of the conflict and support our right to
self-determination. We call for an end to the occupation
as the first step towards building peace and for women
to be at the forefront of these efforts.

18-340149/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Therefore, the Security Council must act to
ensure women’s meaningful participation in conflict
prevention, democratic transition, reconciliation
efforts, and any humanitarian work; call on the
Palestinian Authority to implement its 1325 national
action plan by allocating sufficient funds and providing
high-level and ongoing political support for the
meaningful participation of Palestinian women in all
stages of peace processes; call upon Israel to end its
military occupation and settlement expansion, commit
to a political solution and immediately cease violations
of its commitments under international law; and call on
States to stop exporting arms to Israel, where there is a
risk that they may be used to commit serious violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law, in
line with the Arms Trade Treaty. Governments, arms
companies and arms dealers must be held accountable
for transferring arms in situations where they fuel
conflict and grave breaches of international law.
The Security Council must also act to end the
culture of impunity and ensure accountability for
abuses and violations against women and women
human rights defenders by Israeli forces or any other
actor; ensure that all humanitarian efforts are genderresponsive; and use all tools at its disposal to ensure
women’s meaningful participation and that gender
analysis is integrated into any discussions of the
situation, including by adding the occupied Palestinian
territory to the agenda of the informal expert group
on women and peace and security and inviting women
civil society representatives to brief the Council during
country-specific discussions.
Palestinian women who have grown up under the
occupation have been on the front lines defending our
lands, our homes and our families. We continue to
lead efforts to demand accountability and advocate for
equality. We therefore have not only the right, but also
the ability, the expertise and the experience to forge the
path towards sustainable, just and durable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Siniora Atallah for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): Council members may
be aware that when the formal peace talks between
the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) opened in Havana
in November 2012, only 1 of the 20 negotiators around
10/108

25/10/2018

the table was a woman. A year later, civil society leaders
organized the first-ever national summit on women and
peace, and from that summit came a clear demand for
an inclusive peace process. Two years later, women
comprised 20 per cent of the Government’s negotiating
team and 43 per cent of the FARC representatives.
What happened? By organizing themselves, these
women contributed in crucial ways to the peacemaking
effort, including by broadening the agenda. Women
addressed some of the primary grievances of affected
communities, such as land restitution and the right to
justice and reparations for victims. Women furthermore
negotiated local ceasefires and thereby improved the
local security situations in towns and villages across
the country.
In addition, because of the demands of female
negotiators and civil society, FARC undertook several
confidence-building measures — such as an apology
process and the release of child soldiers — that
allowed the process to continue, thereby increasing
accountability. Finally, women built coalitions and
rallied public support in favour of the peace talks.
By repairing relations in communities affected by the
conflict, women and civil society laid the groundwork
for the peacebuilding efforts necessary to the longterm success of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The
peace agreement in Colombia is a model when it comes
to inclusion. Women were key to the success of the
peace process and their continued involvement will be
key in its implementation, as well as for consolidating
the peace.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900), which made for chilling reading, in part,
but also presented us with an enormous challenge. I
also thank him for the to-do list that he presented here
of things to do for the United Nations system and for us
as Member States. I hope that we will all bring it back
home with us and start to implement it.
We welcome the focus on participation in this year’s
debate and wish to thank Bolivia for putting emphasis
on political inclusion and economic recovery. We also
thank Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, General Director of
the Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women; and the Secretary-General for their
valuable input.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Participation is not about counting heads, but about
having influence; about being recognized as a party
to peace; about making sure that women’s and men’s
situations are taken into consideration when making
plans for the economy, for the infrastructure and for the
justice system.
That is evident in the Sahel, where decreasing
livelihood opportunities are directly linked to the risk
of conflict and women play a role as agents of change.
I had the pleasure of visiting the region this summer
with colleagues from the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Lake Chad region, where people
are facing a food and nutrition crisis, we heard about
how the shrinking lake and growing insecurity have
had severe consequences for people who traditionally
have sustained themselves by fishing activities. The
fisherwomen whom we met in the village of Bol told
us that they wished for only three things: bigger boats,
better nets and not to get raped. Many of the women
and girls whom we met had suffered from violence
and inequality, and are now seeking to use their
experiences to transform societies and structures.
We were encouraged to see that women were coming
together in networks to address the challenges they
faced, including sexual and reproductive health and
rights and access to basic social services.
The roles women have played and continue to
play in Colombia and the Sahel demonstrate the very
apparent need for including women in all aspects of
decision-making and how that, in turn, leads to more
sustainable peace. That is why we, as a member of
the Council, have consistently asked: Where are the
women? We will only ever be effective if we translate
the women and peace and security agenda into concrete
action and tailor responses to the specific situations on
our agenda.
That has yielded results. All political and
peacekeeping missions now have a women, peace
and security mandate. Discussions in the Council are
better informed, mandates are more precise, decisions
are more inclusive and the number of civil society
organization briefers has increased considerably,
leading to better input. In July, for the first time — but,
we hope, not the last — there was gender parity among
briefers to the Council. However, agreements in the
Security Council or advancements in our work do not
automatically translate into changed realities on the
ground. There needs to be a shift in mentality, a shift in
analysis and a shift in action.

S/PV. 8382

First of all, making tangible progress requires
ownership and accountability at the highest levels
of leadership in the United Nations system, as well
as among us Member States. In the United Nations,
Special Representatives and Special Envoys should
be measured on how they implement and deliver on
women, peace and security.
Secondly, the agenda must be taken seriously
in the field. Senior gender expertise in political and
peacekeeping missions should be strategically positioned.
Thirdly, a gender dimension must always be taken
into account throughout strategic planning processes
in conflict situations and never become an add-on or
an afterthought. Such approaches must permeate all
sectors, be they military, police or civilian.
Fourthly, missions must also step up efforts to engage
with civil society, not least women’s organizations.
Fifthly, we need better analysis. Conflict analysis
that informs decision-making must include gender
equality. Much work remains to do to make women’s
and men’s situations visible in each setting. Gender
disaggregated data in reporting from the field should
be a minimum, including in the reports to the Council.
Lastly, peacekeeping and political mission budgets
must be gender responsive. We have shared more
detailed recommendations on all of these aspects with
the Secretary-General.
We still witness too many peace processes in which
the absence of women is apparent. That should no
longer be accepted. I would like to dispel, once and for
all, four myths on gender in peace mediation.
The first myth is that there are distinct women’s
issues. While conflict affects women and men
differently, that does not mean that certain topics are
only relevant to only one gender.
The second myth is that peace processes starts
at the negotiating table. Women are usually invited
when formal talks are already convened, long after
pre-negotiations, consultations and agenda-setting have
already started. In the earlier phases, a broad range of
perspectives about the drivers of conflict and peace are
urgently needed.
The third myth is that mediation is political magic
in smoky rooms — or, as somebody has said, men in
fancy hotels. Mediation is not some political game
played by charismatic, mysterious personalities. Such

18-3401411/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

25/10/2018

a narrow view of mediation risks closing the door to
many skilful women. A group of people who challenge
that myth is in the audience today — the representatives
from five regional women mediator’s networks. They
bring incredible experience as negotiators, mediators,
political decision-makers, civil society leaders and
experts, and must be recognized and drawn upon by the
United Nations and its Member States.

Mrs. Brandt (Netherlands): First of all, I wish to
sincerely thank the briefers for their insight and urgent
advice — the “to-do list”, as Minister Wallström
called it.

The fourth myth is that we need more evidence.
Women frequently need to justify their participation
by presenting evidence of the benefits of women’s
participation. Male counterparts never have to do that.
Women should be able to participate simply because it
is their right to do so. I believe that the inclusion of
women mediators from all around the world will change
the dynamics of peace processes.

If we want to build lasting peace and security, we
need women. It is as simple as that and makes perfect
sense. All of us present here support that. After all, it
was the Security Council that unanimously adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), 18 years ago. Subsequently,
several more resolutions were adopted, further
strengthening our commitment to women and peace and
security. We did that because it makes perfect sense;
because we know that, when women are involved, there
is a better chance for lasting peace; because we know
that inclusive peace is lasting peace.

No woman needs to be given a voice; everyone
has a voice. What is needed is more listening. Sweden
had the pleasure of hosting the first Multi-stakeholder
Forum on Women, Peace and Security earlier this
week, at which Security Council members had the
opportunity to listen to more than 50 civil society
representatives. Among the many themes that were
raised, representatives of civil society stressed the need
for addressing root causes, investing in the protection
of human rights defenders and addressing gender
equality within economic recovery efforts. They also
called on the Security Council to act as a role model
and an influencer within the system.
Empowering women and increasing women’s
political participation is one of the most effective tools
for advancing global peace and security. It is also a
prerequisite for preventing sexual and gender-based
violence, which, sadly, still affects an appalling number
of women every day. We salute the heroic efforts of
Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege, the winners of
the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize, who treat, speak up for
and seek justice for women who fall victim to such
violence. Their work, as well as the work of thousands
of activists, peacebuilders and women human rights
defenders around the world should be an inspiration to
us all.
In conclusion, let me pose a challenge to all present
ahead of 2020. In two years’ time, resolution 1325
(2000) will turn 20. By then, we need to ensure that the
commitments we have made matter. Let us collectively
pledge — politically and financially — to ensure that
the agenda becomes a priority and a reality.
12/108

I would also like to state that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

If we know all of that and if the rationale is so
clear, why is it that women are still excluded from
peace processes? Why is it that women still make up
only 8 per cent of negotiators — a percentage that
has hardly moved in recent years? The statistics were
clearly pointed out today by the Executive Director of
UN-Women. Is it because, although we know, we still
have not been able to sufficiently change our mindset,
to change the way we think about leadership, roles and
power? Have we therefore not acted with the urgency
that is needed?
We see the same in the world of business. Research
has shown that diverse boards with men and women at
the top perform better and actually make profits go up.
We therefore know there is a clear business case, but we
hardly see the needle moving. We see the rationale but
we do not act on it, because we have not changed who
we see as leaders and whose experience and judgment
we value most. The same applies to involving women in
peace and security. In our eagerness to stop violence,
we first make place at the table for those who picked up
arms, largely men. Women, whom we know are crucial
for peaceful solutions, are left out or relegated to a
second or third track, despite what we know.
That is why we are happy that the focus of
this debate is not on why but on how we move from
knowing to truly believing and then acting. We can act
in our own organizations and countries by including
women in decision-making processes and through our
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

national action plans. When it comes to women and
peace and security, the Council has shown that, if it
wants to act, it can. For example, the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
now calls for the full and effective participation of
women in decision-making. For the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the Council requested an
increase the number of women and ensuring their
meaningful participation in all aspects of the operation.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, we have now
significantly increased the number of female briefers,
including from civil society, and on 8 March we held a
Council meeting with a two-thirds majority of women
around the table for the first time.
We have begun to tackle impunity for sexual
violence in conflict through the use of sanctions by
including a stand-alone criterion on sexual violence in
the South Sudan sanctions regime. Last Monday’s Arria
Formula meeting again reinforced the message that
sanctions are a tool that could be used more effectively
by the Council when it comes to combating sexual
violence in conflict. There still is a lot to do to translate
that into change on the ground, but I agree that we have
to resist pessimism. If we really move from knowing
to acting, we can make further progress together. Let
me ask for attention to two areas in which we need to
act now.
The first is that we need to stand up firmly against
violence inflicted upon women leaders, because it is
precisely those women active in providing support and
contributing to peace processes who are targeted by
those who have no interest in peace. Just think of the 83
women human rights defenders who have been killed
since the signing of the peace agreement in Colombia,
or think of the brave women who worked in Nigeria
and were murdered for saving other women’s lives.
We must stand up for them and act. The Council has
a critical role to play in preventing and responding to
such horrific violence.
The second area is that we need to get better at
learning from what works. As Minister Wallström just
pointed out, the 2016 comprehensive peace agreement
in Colombia has set an international example for
women’s involvement. Civil society played a big role
by demanding an inclusive peace process, and so we
saw much higher percentages of women in the two
negotiating teams and women contributing to the peace
process at all levels. We must learn from that and make
that a reality in other parts of the world as well by

S/PV. 8382

appointing female mediators and including women at
the negotiation table in places such as Syria and Yemen.
Women candidates are available. Women are more
than ready to play their part. We should make sure
that they can. I think that we have run out of excuses.
We know, so we now need to act. Let us make women
participate. Let us protect those that do. Let us listen to
them and empower them. Women are ready, so surely
we should be as well. Together we can make inclusive
peace a reality.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for choosing this
important topic for an open debate today. We also thank
the two Ministers for joining us. I found their briefings
very powerful and it is excellent that they have given
up time to be with us today. Minister Wallström is a
very frequent visitor to the Security Council, which
is extremely welcome, and I think that all I can say is
that I wholly endorse what both of those Ministers have
said in the Council today. We thank them very much for
that. This is a very important opportunity. We thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UNWomen and Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah.
I would like to digress briefly, if I may, to repeat
what I said on 17 October about the content of briefings
to the Council (see S/PV.8373), but we do believe that
civil society’s contribution is essential. I want to add
our voice to those congratulating the Nobel Peace Prize
winners. I think that in this year it is a very important
signal of the criticality of their work, not just for the
communities that benefit from it and are protected
by it, but what it says overall about the international
community’s priorities when it comes to putting the
issue of women and girls, and women and peace and
security, at the centre of policymaking.
Two years ahead of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are very pleased to have this
important moment to reflect on progress and consider
what more can be done. It is not just a moral issue, the
issue of women’s political and economic empowerment.
Fundamentally, it is an economic issue. Countries that
enable equal opportunities for all of their people, equal
access to the law and services and equal participation
in the economic life of the country are much more
likely to thrive and prosper than countries that do not.
Fundamentally, enabling half of a country’s population
to participate fully is much more likely to improve
inclusive growth and sustainability. I think that is a

18-3401413/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

very important economic point that we all need to bear
in mind.
Successive Council resolutions have, of course,
argued that the greater political and economic
empowerment of women is a key element of conflict
prevention. And I think that is all part of the SecretaryGeneral’s core agenda. He spoke very powerfully today.
We welcome his leadership and that of the Secretariat
and we look forward to working more with them. When
women meaningfully participate in peace processes, the
resulting agreement is 35 per cent more likely to last at
least 15 years. It would be more inclusive and therefore
better serve the community that it represents. I would
like to echo what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden said about the importance of participation
being a right and not a bonus.
As conflicts around the world become more
complex and formal peace processes risk stalling,
women’s efforts to tackle conflict have never been more
needed or more vital. In that regard, we as the United
Kingdom were pleased to bring members of the Women
Mediators across the Commonwealth network to New
York this week to exchange experiences with other
regional networks of women mediators and to explore
ways to collectively drive the agenda forward. I think
such mediation networks, whatever their affiliation
and wherever they originate, are an important resource
for us all. The Executive Director was able to describe
some of the very important work on the ground. I am
sure that they would be delighted to work even more
closely with the United Nations.
Sustainable Development Goal 5 makes clear that
empowering women is not only about communitybased actions. It also requires addressing systemic
challenges and structural issues and getting to the core
of the barriers to women’s full and equal participation
and exercise of basic rights. In line with that, the United
Kingdom has a cross-Government national action plan
committed to increasing women’s participation in
decision-making and to scaling up initiatives to prevent
and to respond to gender-based violence. I commend
such plans to all those countries that do not have them.
We also commend signing up to the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, which the Secretary-General
also mentioned today.
We often hear about the importance of
mainstreaming gender equality in all policies. As an
14/108

25/10/2018

example of that, the United Kingdom has opened all
military roles to women and we are close to meeting
our target of women making up 15 per cent of our
armed forces. That is not enough but we believe that it
is a good start.
Representatives may not know that today there is
a British aircraft carrier lying just off Staten Island. It
is on a friendly visit to New York. I want to stress the
word “friendly”. However, what I also want to stress
is that 13 per cent of that ship’s company are women.
Eighty-three of the 650 personnel on board are women.
It is the highest number within our Royal Navy fleet.
As I said, that is not enough but it is a good start, and
we hope very much to build on that.
I would like to talk a little about education, which
is key to achieving our ambition. That means educating
women, men, boys and girls if we want to change
attitudes and behaviours. We have a Leave No Girl
Behind campaign. It has the goal of empowering women
and girls through quality education, including education
in emergencies. I would like to stress the word “quality”.
A great deal of excellent work has been done around the
world in getting girls into school. I previously had the
honour to be the British Ambassador to Afghanistan. I
saw the girls there going to school and the difference
that it made to their lives. The next challenge is to make
that a genuine quality education so that they obtain the
skills and the tools necessary to be able to play a full
role in the political and economic life of their country
as they grow up. Also, as part of that campaign, we
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that
that represents an important step forward.
We have also talked about sexual and gender-based
violence. By definition, that prevents women from
being active participants at school, in the workforce and
in other political and economic areas. I want to endorse
what the Minister of the Netherlands said in particular
about speaking out against violence against women
leaders because they are the people who at the moment
will drive that forward, and we support her in that.
Finally, as we collectively look towards 2020, the
ambition for all of us should only continue to grow.
I want to clearly echo what the Ministers and other
representatives said about the need to translate our
plans into concrete implementation. I think that that is
very important. I hope that we will be able to continue
to address such issues in the Security Council. I would
like to conclude by referring to Minister Wallström’s
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

quote from the women whom she met about wanting
bigger boats, bigger nets and not to get raped. There is
a wealth of meaning and description in that very simple
sentence. If we do nothing else, we ought to be able to
provide them with better equipment, better safety and
the personal security that they require.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I commend the
Bolivian presidency for having convened this debate
on sustaining peace through women’s political and
economic empowerment. I express warm appreciation
to the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for
his astute recommendations, as well as to UnderSecretary-General Mlambo-Ngcuka and UN-Women
for their leadership and groundbreaking work. We
would particularly like to thank the women Ministers
of Sweden and the Netherlands, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom and civil society
representative Randa Atallah for their moving and
insightful statements and updates. We also welcome
and appreciate the presence of civil society colleagues
in the Chamber.
I take this opportunity to join the Bolivian
presidency in congratulating most sincerely our
Ethiopian sisters and brothers on electing the famous
diplomat Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde as President of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. It is very
symbolic that the country has elected its first female
President today, when on this global platform we are
discussing the empowerment of women and its role
in peace and security. As a member observer of the
African Union, we support and associate ourselves with
the statement of Côte d’Ivoire to be delivered today on
behalf of the African troika.
We join other speakers in calling for an increased
use of the women and peace and security agenda as an
important tool for conflict prevention and resolution
and for transformative change across the three pillars
of the United Nations. There is a need to bridge the gap
between words and deeds so as to effectively implement
the robust women and peace and security agenda and
to decisively mobilize the newly established United
Nations mechanisms, such as the Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security
and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
Equally critical are the Women, Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network and the Peacebuilding
Commission’s gender strategy, which serve as platforms
for sharing best practices and lessons learned.

S/PV. 8382

Furthermore, we must support the SecretaryGeneral’s reforms focused on placing gender at the
centre of conflict prevention and resolution efforts.
Gender parity must feature at the highest levels
across the United Nations and across his peace and
security architecture reform. Efficiency should be
enhanced through increased collaboration between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNWomen in the field and at Headquarters. We must
support the United Nations initiative to double the
number of women in military and police contingents
by 2020. It is critical to build capacity among women
through South-South, North-South and triangular
cooperation and to empower them to be engaged in
early warning, mediation, peace negotiations, peace
agreements and confidence-building measures.
True progress on women’s empowerment across
the globe requires a complete social transformation,
involving the State, communities, the judiciary and
educational systems. It is evident that the lack of
access to quality and inclusive education, especially in
rural areas, is the main obstacle to achieving women’s
empowerment. We welcome the intention of the European
Union to launch a pilot project worth €2 million to
conduct educational programmes for Afghan women, in
line with Afghanistan’s National Priority Programmes,
at institutions of higher education in Kazakhstan and
Uzbekistan. We encourage other donor countries to
allocate a greater number of scholarships for women
and girls from conflict-affected countries.
Efforts also must be made to strengthen women’s
economic security and to improve their access to
markets, bilateral trade diplomacy and exchange
programmes. We therefore need public-private
partnerships to enhance entrepreneurship and access
to technology. We call on all stakeholders to promote
women’s economic empowerment in cooperation with
the private sector, to provide access to regional and
global markets and to ensure their inclusion in the
supply chains of multinational enterprises.
It is clear that the women and peace and security
agenda needs adequate and sustainable financing,
especially in countries affected by conflict, in order
to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Secretary-General’s new agenda
for peace and to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
missions have sufficient gender expertise, authority
and capacity. The funding gap in the United Nations
system should be bridged through more streamlined

18-3401415/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

and better-coordinated strategies, in collaboration with
other partners.
In addition, grass-roots communities, religious
leaders and civil society must be encouraged to improve
women’s access to a country’s political and religious
leadership and to participation in peace processes.
Member States, in turn, must be encouraged to engage
with civil society organizations, including women’s
and youth groups, and work towards enhanced data
collection with upgraded timely gender analyses and
desegregated data to monitor commitments.
The women and peace and security global agenda
will be effective only when each Member State and
region enacts national legislation, in accordance with
international norms, with the right policies and legal
and institutional environment to foster gender equality.
Kazakhstan is working to achieve the highest world
standards in gender policy and to strengthen the role
of women in the sociopolitical life of the country. Our
country integrates all four pillars of the women and
peace and security agenda in its national legislation
by formulating new strong pro-women policies to
achieve gender parity in decision-making at all levels.
For instance, women currently occupy 50 per cent of
the positions in the Foreign Ministry and other public
institutions in my country. We also provide training on
gender equality for our armed and security forces and
in connection with women’s deployment to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
National efforts must be reinforced by
commitments at the regional level and strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In that context, we commend regional
structures for implementing the women and peace
and security agenda in their respective regions. A fine
example is the African Union, with its progressive
gender mainstreaming within the African Peace and
Security Architecture, as well as the efforts of the
African Women Leaders Network, which was launched
last year.
On its part, Kazakhstan is focusing at the regional
level on Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach
to conflict prevention and resolution, recovery,
reintegration and humanitarian assistance. My country,
in cooperation with Japan and the United Nations
Development Programme, has been implementing a
project for gender equality in Afghanistan, including
providing policy support and capacity development. We
16/108

25/10/2018

are also financing a $50 million programme to educate
Afghan youth in our universities. In addition, last
September, in cooperation with the European Union,
Kazakhstan organized in Astana a regional conference
on empowering women in Afghanistan.
To conclude, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to the women and peace and security agenda
and reaffirms that women can be powerful participants
in any realm — from the corner store to activists, and
from the seats of Parliament to the peace table.
Mr. Adom (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Мy delegation commends the Bolivian presidency for
organizing this debate on the role of women in the
promotion of peace and security. I would also like to
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their very informative briefings,
which reinforced our conviction that it is essential
to step up our support for women’s contributions to
conflict prevention and resolution.
In that regard, I welcome the leadership of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, whose report (S/2018/900) provides an
encouraging assessment of the efforts undertaken to
date by the international community and, at the same
time, calls for continued efforts to place women at the
centre of strategies to restore peace and stability.
The statement I am making now on behalf of the
three African countries that are members of the Security
Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia and Equatorial
Guinea — is intended to showcase our common
commitment to promoting the role of women in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and economic development,
in the light of the strategic priorities identified by the
African Union.
At this stage, allow me to express heartfelt and
respectful congratulations to Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed and the people of Ethiopia, who have just elected
a women to the presidency, our colleague and friend
Her Excellency Ambassador Sahle-Work Zewde, and
a Government that is characterized by perfect parity
between men and women. That is an example to follow.
It is also testimony that women’s leadership is becoming
increasingly necessary and decisive in the harmonious
conduct of world affairs. And as Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, said, it
is important to ensure that gender equality in politics is
respected. Allow me also to recognize President Paul
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Kagame, President of Rwanda, and his Government for
spearheading efforts to that end.
The briefing delivered by the Executive Director
of UN-Women provided an overview of the status
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), 18
years after its adoption by the Security Council. That
resolution carries a fundamental message that is more
relevant than ever, namely, that the participatory role of
women is crucial and even decisive in peace processes
and policies to strengthen the security of our States.
Today there is general consensus that restoring
sustainable peace and stability in a post-crisis context,
for example, requires the active participation of women
in the political processes of crisis resolution and
peacebuilding. The recognition of that fundamental
requirement, enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as in the subsequent resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122
(2013) and 2242 (2015), underlines women’s leadership
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding by sufficiently
showing the international community’s resolute
commitment to translate that into concrete action.
As an institution that speaks on behalf of a
continent where challenges persist with regard to the
inclusion of women in peace processes, the African
Union fully subscribes to that commitment. To that
end, our common efforts must converge towards the
implementation of those multilateral commitments, by
further opening up political spaces and peace processes
to women and by strengthening their role as actors in
economic and social development.
This debate provides us with an opportunity to
deliver two messages.
First, we affirm the African Union’s unequivocal
commitment to working to strengthen the role of women
in peace and security processes. The main objective
at the continental level with regard to the women
and peace and security agenda is to obtain tangible
results through the operationalization of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) contained in the
national action plans. Promoting gender equality in the
executive and legislative systems and strengthening
of the role of women in mediation and prevention
strategies were identified as priorities, which must
now be diligently implemented in close collaboration
with the United Nations and other bilateral partners,
including FemWise-Africa and the African Women
Leaders Network.

S/PV. 8382

Those platforms ensure, it should be stressed, the
effective implementation of commitments made to
include women in the restoration of peace, stability
and sustainable development. In addition to those
platforms, in March, the African Union adopted the
Continental Results Framework for Monitoring and
Reporting on the Implementation of the Women,
Peace and Security Agenda in Africa, which enables
the collection of quantitative and qualitative data on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Continental Framework promotes the development and
refinement of evidence-based policies that reflect the
reality of women on the ground.
Secondly, we are deeply convinced that the quest
for peace and security in Africa is inextricably linked
to the unwavering struggle against unacceptable acts
of violence suffered by women that constrain their
economic empowerment. In that regard, I recall the
African Union’s adherence to a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual violence linked to conflicts
and peacekeeping missions. Accordingly, mediators,
as well as support systems that include a gender
perspective and women’s participation, have been
deployed in peace-enforcement missions in Somalia
and Darfur. The African Union and its member States
have established several programmes that integrate
peacebuilding and economic empowerment initiatives
for the benefit of the women of the continent.
In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
vision of the women and peace and security agenda,
which is a top priority in Agenda 2063 of the African
Union, the African Peace and Security Architecture
and the African Governance Architecture. The
African Union will continue to strengthen its strategic
partnership with the United Nations through increased,
robust cooperation between its Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council in confronting the
most urgent challenges together. The contribution
of women to promoting peace and development, the
struggle against the devastation wrought by firearms
with the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative of the
African Union and financial support for African
peacekeeping operations, among other things, will play
a prominent role in that undertaking.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
today’s meeting. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their briefings. China also

18-3401417/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

listened attentively to the statement by Ms. Siniora
Atallah, the representative of civil society.
More than 60 years ago, Chairman Mao said
that women hold up half the sky. China has today a
population of 1.4 billion people, of whom 678. million
are women. Women play a role in holding up half the
sky in China’s socioeconomic development. They
also play an irreplaceable role in terms of peace and
stability stability in the country. The theme of today’s
meeting is very meaningful, as it brings to mind the
Chinese female peacekeepers who have demonstrated
their commitment and dedication to the cause of
peacekeeping. In the Mediterranean, in Sector East of
the area of operation of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon Ms. Mao Ping, the first female commanding
officer ever sent to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission, received the Outstanding Female award from
the Lebanese Government in November. The Chinese
peacekeeping medical team led by her is well known in
local communities and beyond for their healing hands
and loving hearts. They have provided medical services
to local people and poor families and are planting the
seeds of friendship and peace in the land of the cedars.
In South Sudan, more than 10,000 kilometres from
China, there is a combat unit of 10 female fighters in the
peacekeeping infantry battalion that China dispatched
to that country. In addition to fulfilling their mandate,
they also pass out stationery to children in the refugee
camps and disseminate knowledge about the protection
of women’s rights and interests, bringing joy and smiles
to the children.
Among the more than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers
currently serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, more than 50 of them are women. Since China
began participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations almost 30 years ago, Chinese female
peacekeepers have served thousands of times. Those
respectable and beloved Chinese female peacekeeping
soldiers are quietly dedicating themselves to their
responsibilities, while contributing to safeguarding
world peace. I would like to take this opportunity to pay
deep tribute to all women peacekeepers contributing
to peacekeeping.
Women are an important force for maintaining
international peace and security. Over a nearly 20-year
period the Security Council has adopted a series of
resolutions on women and peace and security, which
constitutes a positive framework for protecting women’s
rights and interests in conflict and promoting women’s
18/108

25/10/2018

increasing role in maintaining peace and security.
Women are vulnerable to harm in war and conflict, and
they are a vulnerable group in general. But they are
increasingly becoming important participants, builders
and contributors to peace processes. Women play an
indispensable role in preventing conflict, maintaining
peace, reconciling differences and integrating social
groups. The international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation so that women can fully
play their role in maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, I would like to propose the
following suggestions.
First, we need to strengthen our political resolve
to settle hotspot issues and create a favourable
international environment for the survival and
development of women. The international community
should commit to a vision of peace and development
and win-win cooperation, and help countries in conflict
achieve peace and stability in a timely manner. Given
the responsibilities conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council should actively
encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue and negotiations and provide solid guarantees
for the protection of women. Women should be ensured
of their full participation and roles in decision-making
in peace processes.
Secondly, we must resolutely counter any acts
that violate women’s rights in conflict and support
the efforts of the countries concerned to shoulder the
primary responsibility for the protection of women in
conflict. Efforts should be made to stop sexual violence
in armed conflict as part of a concerted effort to respond
to the threat of terrorism, to adopt comprehensive
measures to protect women from harm by terrorists and
extremist forces, and to provide security guarantees and
humanitarian assistance to women affected by conflict.
The international community should fully respect the
leadership role played by the country concerned in that
regard and provide constructive assistance in view of
its needs.
Thirdly, we must solve the problem by treating
its symptoms, as well as its root causes, and promote
the advancement of women together with economic
and social development. The international community
should actively help the countries concerned with
post-conflict reconstruction, while according priority
attention to the strengthening of their capacity-building,
work to eradicate the root causes of conflict and ensure
that all people, including women, can enjoy the benefits
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

of development. The international community should
provide support to conflict-affected countries in the
areas of gender equality and women’s empowerment
and work to guide women’s organizations and civil
society so that they can play a positive and constructive
role in the peace process.
Fourthly, we must ensure that there is synergy among
all the relevant United Nations bodies. The Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic and Social Council, UNWomen and other agencies should follow their respective
mandates, bring into full play their own advantages and
strengthen cooperation in jointly responding to issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda.
The United Nations should enhance cooperation, unlock
potential and improve efficiencies with regional and
subregional organizations in training and fundraising
in the area of women and peace and security. Recently,
there has been cooperation between the Chinese
Ministry of Defence and UN-Women. Together, they
have jointly hosted international workshops for women
peacekeeping officers to encourage troop-contributing
countries to actively assign and dispatch female officers
to peacekeeping missions, as well as to enhance their
capabilities and skills.
When presiding over the Global Leaders Meeting
on Gender Equality and Empowerment in September
2015, President Xi Jinping stated that without women’s
liberation and progress, the liberation and progress of
humankind would not be attainable. China would like
to work with the international community and continue
to push for the realization of the goals of the agenda on
women and peace and security. It wishes to pursue its
unrelenting efforts towards the advancement of women
worldwide in order to jointly build a community — a
shared future — for humankind and create a better world
for women and for all.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Sweden
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. I would like to thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and discussing this important topic.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900) and for his valuable briefing. I would
like further to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under Secretary-General and Executive Director of

S/PV. 8382

UN-Women, and Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for their
informative briefings.
The Security Council has without a doubt
succeeded in highlighting the centrality of the role of
women in achieving international peace and security
in its various stages, from conflict prevention to the
settlement of conflicts. The United Nations and all
its organs have sought to empower women politically,
socially and economically, and to ensure gender parity.
That is best exemplified in the Secretary-General’s
successful strategy on gender parity among higher
administration staff and resident coordinators.
Through consecutive Security Council resolutions,
beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), a solid
framework of standards has been established to
strengthen the role of women in maintaining peace and
security. Now we have to bridge the resolutions gap to
make them a reality and ensure that the participation
of women is neither secondary nor symbolic for the
purpose of filling quotas.
According to the latest statistics for the period
from 1990 to 2017, women represented 2 per cent of
mediators and 8 per cent of negotiators. If we are to
achieve positive peace, as the Secretary-General has
called it, which is a more comprehensive concept of
peace that is not limited to stopping violence, but also
includes accountability and full enjoyment of human
rights, we must intensify our efforts aimed at the useful
participation of women in mediation and negotiation
processes so that our resolutions will not be useless.
That begins with ensuring the political, social and
economic rights of women, empowering them to secure
an education and basic services, as well as empowering
them economically. Communities where there is gender
parity are more stable and resilient against disorders
and disputes.
In addition, we must address obstacles that hinder
the participation of women in the achievement of lasting
peace, particularly violence against women in political
life; high poverty rates and food insecurity; low political
participation of women in the stages of peace; and the
denial of their rights in general. When conflicts break
out, women should participate in the political processes
that take place prior to peace consultations, as well
as in the consultations themselves. Women should
be empowered to participate in the implementation
of peace agreements through specific and tangible
procedures and mechanisms. Experience has proven

18-3401419/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

that the participation of women in peace processes
is directly linked to achieving improvement in the
outcome of those processes and to the implementation
of peace agreements. The participation of women
would also lead to longer-term agreements, whereby
communities become more stable and less liable to fall
back into conflict.
The best example of the effective participation of
women in the peace processes is Colombia. Colombian
women have attained high positions in transitional
justice in their country. We encourage Colombian
women to continue participating in the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
At the regional level, we commend the effective
participation of Yemeni women in the inclusive
national dialogue, which is still the key factor for the
realization of the desired peace in brotherly Yemen.
Yemeni women also participated in the Yemen peace
talks hosted by the State of Kuwait.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
efforts to improve gender parity in United Nations
peace operations. It is important to provide training
and capacity-building to all participants, military and
civilian, in issues pertaining to women, including
sexual violence in conflicts.
We understand that troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries, as well as host
countries, are mainly involved in realizing the effective
participation of women in peace processes. We
encourage the strengthening of cooperation with those
States, as well as building their national capacities
to ensure that the participation of women is of real
measurable value.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that women have the
inherent right to participate in issues of peace and
security. We support the United Nations efforts to
empower women, in cooperation with Member States,
to effectively participate for achieving lasting peace.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the initiative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia in convening this timely open debate. Peru
is committed to the women and peace and security
agenda. Together with Sweden, we have the honour
of chairing the group of experts that promotes that
agenda in the Council. As such, we fully support
the statements of Minister Wallström of Sweden and
20/108

25/10/2018

Minister Brandt of the Netherlands, who today honour
us with their presence. We would also like to commend
the important briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and, on behalf of
women’s organizations, Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah.
Peru emphasizes the importance of women’s
participation and leadership in the maintenance of
international peace and security and, in relation to
that, the primary responsibility of national States in
promoting their political and economic empowerment.
Since 2000, the Council has adopted eight resolutions
that have served to set an agenda and develop good
practices in that area. Nevertheless, barriers and
challenges persist, forcing us to redouble our efforts
as we approach the commemoration in 2020 of the
twentieth anniversary of the historic resolution 1325
(2000).
The evidence shows that when women participate
more at every level of political life, societies are less
inclined to conflict and more inclined to maintain
and consolidate peace. Women bring perspectives
on future and unity that are essential to building and
sustaining peace. In that regard, we emphasize that
gender equality and women’s economic and political
empowerment contribute to reducing their particular
vulnerabilities during conflict and in general to
preventing violence and advancing human resilience,
as well as achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. An investment in women’s empowerment is
an investment in peace and development as well as in
protecting and promoting their human rights. That is
why we want to highlight and support the SecretaryGeneral’s vision and the priority he gives to developing
and implementing this agenda, based on the concept of
sustainable peace. With regard to the role of women in
the maintenance of international peace and security, we
underscore the Secretary-General’s views on the need
to promote their participation and leadership in every
peace effort, starting with active collaboration with
women’s civil-society organizations. In that regard,
we wan to emphasize the importance of contributing
to financing the women’s organizations that have been
asked to participate in the peace processes launched by
the Council.
We also underscore the importance of incorporating
gender perspectives into peace operations mandated
by the Council. In our view it is crucial to train Blue
Helmets in promoting and protecting women’s and
children’s human rights. In that regard, and in view
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

of the provisions of resolution 1820 (2008), Peru has
been gradually increasing women’s participation in the
armed forces we send to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we have already surpassed the minimum
15 per cent required in the resolution.
Still with regard to the agenda on women and peace
and security, our Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations has created a displaced persons registry
that enables us to quickly recognize and address issues
relating to the rights of women and girls who were
affected during the years in which Peru was battling
terrorism. Our Government has also committed to
implementing policies aimed at empowering women
in the political and economic life of the country,
with a decentralized approach that includes the need
to guarantee the election of women to positions
of authority.
I would like to conclude by citing in this debate
the voice of Flora Tristán, a Peruvian citizen who was
one of the great nineteenth-century pioneers in the
vindication of the rights of women:
“All of the world’s misfortunes stem from the
oblivion and contempt in which the natural and
essential rights of being a woman have been held
until now”.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you for organizing
today’s meeting, Mr. President, as well as the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women, for
their participation in our discussion. Our thanks also go
to to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for her participation.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/900)
presents a fairly complete and objective picture of the
state of affairs in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as subsequent resolutions aimed
at protecting women in armed conflict, enhancing
their role in peace processes and unlocking their
potential. If I may, I would like to note that as part
of its consideration of the agenda item on women and
peace and security, the Security Council should focus
specifically on issues directly related to establishing
and maintaining international peace and security. In
our view, attempts to exploit these issues — in order
to advance the cause in the Council of human rights
and gender issues traditionally covered by other bodies
of our Organization such as the General Assembly, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights Council
and the Commission on the Status of Women — are

S/PV. 8382

damaging and unfounded. Such tactics lead to pointless
duplication of effort and an imbalance in our system’s
overall coordination, and ultimately create obstacles to
the effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Russian Federation consistently supports all
measures aimed at increasing the influence of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well
as women’s active participation in peace negotiations
and electoral processes. The key document in the
context of post-conflict restoration is the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, which, together with the Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and
security, establishes the essential legal and political
basis for effective cooperation. At the same time, the
classic negotiating process, founded on the goals and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with its
effectiveness confirmed and in demand among Member
States, has in no way lost its relevance. Our task is to
create the conditions for the full inclusion of women in
every possible aspect of that process.
Considering the importance of this topic, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his proposals
for organizing the work of the departments of the
Secretariat in preparation for the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). While a
comprehensive review of actions for implementing
the women and peace and security agenda in the
upcoming period will be extremely helpful, it will be
important to focus on evaluating the effectiveness of
the performance of the relevant areas of the Secretariat
while sticking strictly to the principle of the division of
labour. In that regard, we expect to see information on
the evaluation of the effectiveness of the Secretariat’s
gender parity programme, and an expansion of the
number of specialist advisers in peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations country offices. We hope that
in the framework of the forthcoming review, proposals
and assessments from Member States, including those
dealing with armed conflicts, will be considered from
the point of view of the practical implementation of
Security Council resolutions in the area.
We would like to say a few words about the
practice of developing regional and national strategies
and establishing national structures for implementing
this issue. We firmly believe that such measures
should be adopted out of objective necessity owing
to the existence of an armed conflict or post-conflict
settlement. Unfortunately, we cannot support a policy

18-3401421/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

of mathematically enlarging this or that bureaucratic
structure in the absence of conflict, threats of
infringements on the rights of women or crimes
committed against them. In my opinion, today’s
discussion clearly demonstrates the substantial progress
that has been made in creating equal opportunities for
women’s active participation in the maintenance of
peace and security, as well as enhancing their role in
decision-making. We are ready to continue constructive
dialogue on the subject.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate, and the Secretary-General for his briefing and
strong commitment to supporting women’s meaningful
participation with regard to issue of peace and security.
I also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women and
the Ministers of the Netherlands and Sweden for their
important contributions to today’s discussion.
The United States is committed to exercising
leadership in terms of implementing the global women
and peace and security agenda. The effort requires
action from Member States and the United Nations
itself. Today I would like to discuss how we are working
to advance women’s participation in peacemaking
and security issues, as well as how we are furthering
women’s economic empowerment. Promoting women’s
equal and meaningful inclusion and participation across
efforts to restore security, promote democracy and good
governance and support economic development are not
women’s issues. They are vital national security issues.
This month we celebrated one year since the
United States became the first country to translate
this agenda into a comprehensive national law with the
passage of the Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017.
A cornerstone of implementation of that landmark
legislation will be the development of bold new
strategies on women, peace and security, anchored in
the United States’ national security strategy and longstanding commitment to women’s empowerment. That
historic milestone reaffirms the United States’ longstanding belief that the meaningful participation of
women is at the heart of efforts to promote security and
to advance peace. Our renewed commitment to women
and peace and security aims to ensure that women’s
voices are at the centre of efforts to secure peace.
Our legislation also provides an opportunity to
renew efforts to bring women from all backgrounds
to the peace table. Our experience shows that women
22/108

25/10/2018

often have the best understanding of the needs of
their communities. In one example, our Government
collaborated with Notre Dame’s Kroc Institute to
monitor the implementation of the Colombian peace
accord, including its inclusivity and gender provisions.
The parties to the accord used Kroc’s data to guide
strategic decision-making at the national and territorial
levels. The United States has also identified Yemeni
women experienced in conflict resolution, security
and policing, and is encouraging the United Nations
Special Envoy for Yemen and UN-Women to expand
female involvement in the peace process and conflictresolution efforts there.
While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900) points to progress in the United Nations
system and at the regional and national levels, there is
much more work to do. Translating the women and peace
and security agenda into action requires long-term
commitment. At the United Nations, we continue to call
for the integration of the tenets of the women and peace
and security agenda across all operations, which will
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of our work.
Through efforts like the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, we
are better integrating gender analysis into the Council’s
discussions and decisions. The women and peace and
security agenda is now in more peacekeeping mandates
than ever before. However, it is only when that agenda
is a priority task in mandates, as is the case with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that we really
start to see the issue treated as the priority that it is and
should be.
We encourage United Nations leadership here in
New York and through the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General in the field to take the lead on
the women and peace and security agenda, empowering
gender advisers and facilitators to support their work.
It is up to leadership to drive the culture change that we
need to deliver results we want to see. We know that
the best ideas on the women and peace and security
agenda often come from outside the Secretariat, outside
the Council and outside ministries and capitals. That is
why it is essential that we fight efforts to limit the space
for civil society and bring outside voices in, particularly
women’s voices, to inform and drive our work here.
From women civil-society leaders to human rights
defenders, to peace negotiators, the work women do
is essential, often dangerous, and we should look to
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

leverage their successes. We also continue to call on
and support more Governments taking leadership on
this critical issue. The United States strongly supports
the design and implementation of national action plans
on women and peace and security worldwide. In Iraq
and Afghanistan, we have supported civil-society
monitoring and advocacy initiatives related to national
action plans. We are also working with the African
Union to strengthen its capacity to review, monitor
and implement national action plans on the continent.
Finally, we have provided support to develop national
action plans in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
But the women and peace and security agenda is
about more than peace; it is also about security. The
United States believes strongly that countries with high
rates of gender inequality are more likely to experience
instability and deadly conflict. The meaningful
participation of women at all levels of security work,
including in uniform, can help counteract that worrying
trend. When women serve as military members, they
make the security sector more representative of the
population. They help security forces understand the
communities in which they operate, serve their needs
and earn their trust. Women’s leadership in the security
sector also reinforces the importance of women’s
participation in every aspect of society and opens up
opportunities for other women. While we support those
efforts in our own armed forces, we are also working
with Governments around the world to support them in
bringing the skills, leadership and untapped potential
of women into their security forces. That focus on
the substantive inclusion of women is particularly
important in United Nations peacekeeping.
Turning to women’s economic empowerment, the
United States is working to build communities that are
more resilient to conflict. We have invested $50 million
in the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative,
an innovative multi-donor facility that is aimed at
expanding access to finance and technical assistance
for women entrepreneurs. Fourteen other Governments
have already joined us since we launched this initiative
at the Group of Twenty summit last year. Together we
have committed more than $340 million to the fund and
leveraged more than $1.6 billion from public and private
sectors to support women entrepreneurs in developing
countries. It has unlocked the multi-trillion-dollar
investment opportunity that women’s economic
participation truly represents.

S/PV. 8382

Empowering women economically starts with
ensuring that girls have access to education. That is a
complicated issue, but I want to highlight one particular
area: the attacks on schools and their misuse in armed
conflict. Girls suffer most when there are attacks on
schools or when combatants misuse schools to support
combat operations. Even when the fighting ends,
parents are particularly wary of sending their daughters
to school where there is a risk of violence. Girls are
also less likely to return to education once conflict has
interrupted schooling. Terrorists, with their disregard
for the welfare of civilians, are among the worst abusers,
as we have seen with Hamas, among others. That is why
the United States strongly supported language in this
year’s renewal of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy condemning the use of civilians to
shield military objectives from attack, including when
terrorists are using schools or other civilian facilities to
advance their violent aims.
If we hope to prevent conflicts and build lasting
peace, promote better governance and advance
sustainable economic growth, we must empower
women as full and equal partners at every step. Women
are half the population. It is only right that they be full
participants in the discussions and decisions that shape
our present and those that will shape our futures.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for having organized this open debate on the women
and peace and security agenda, which, as everyone
knows, is one of France’s top priorities. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their briefings, their commitment
and their concrete recommendations, which should
guide the Council. Finally, I wish to thank Ms. Randa
Siniora for her powerful statement, which eloquently
demonstrates the extent to which economic and social
hardship and violence against women are both strong
and unacceptable barriers to women’s participation in
political and economic decision-making processes.
I welcome the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to
Nadia Murad and Dr. Mukwege and, through them, to
all those who work courageously to promote the rights
of women, sometimes at the risk of their lives. Their
commitment must inspire the Council and encourage
it to accelerate the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, 18 years after its inclusion
on our agenda. That is a top priority for France.

18-3401423/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

In that context, it is imperative that sexual violence
be brought to an end. We are at a time when — let us
face facts — sexual violence is used more than ever
as a weapon of war and terrorism tactic. That is why,
during an Arria Formula meeting last Monday together
with the Netherlands, Côte d’Ivoire and Peru, we
continued our process of reflection on ways to promote
the use of individual sanctions as a tool for deterring
sexual violence, and we will translate that process into
sanctions. As all here know, France has supported the
inclusion of a specific criterion on sexual violence in
the sanctions regime concerning the Central African
Republic and the inclusion of gender-related issues in
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which in many respects is a model to follow.
Our mobilization is also essential to bridge the yawning
gap that separates us from women’s full participation in
peace processes.
I will first make several observations, which
in our opinion are reasons for us to become actively
engaged, before proposing several courses of action in
the context of the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2020. Indeed, this anniversary is an opportunity that
we must take together to give a new and strong impetus
to the women and peace and security agenda. Let us not
miss this opportunity.
First, I would like to make some observations.
Women’s participation and equality between women
and men is not only a moral and political imperative,
but also a key conflict-prevention instrument that
has proved effective and is a factor for lasting peace.
Everyone should know that when there is real equality
between women and men, the risk of conflict is lower.
Everyone should know that when women participate in
political processes, such processes are more sustainable.
And how could peacekeeping operations effectively
protect the entire civilian population without women
being engaged as agents of peace and security at all
levels, in all pillars — military, civilian, political
and economic?
Enabling women to be agents of peace and security
also means guaranteeing their economic, social and
cultural rights. Yet their frequent lack of access to
education, property, employment, appropriate financial
structures and health services makes women more
vulnerable to the consequences of conflicts, of which
they are most often the primary victims.
24/108

25/10/2018

Last year, the number of peace agreements
incorporating gender-related provisions decreased.
Moreover, women are still far too often excluded from
discussions at any stage of the negotiation process or
confined to discussions that perpetuate stereotypes
about their role in society. It is also sadly indicative
to note, as the Secretary-General so aptly pointed out
this morning, that over the past 25 years only 2 per
cent of mediators and 8 per cent of negotiators have
been women. I would like in that regard to commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his team to
achieve parity among his Special Representatives. He
can, of course, count on our full and complete support.
In that context, I would like to reiterate, on behalf
of France, our call to action. We know that the Security
Council has begun to take stock of these issues. But let
us be realistic: it has not been not enough. We can and
must do more and better. Together we must make a real
qualitative leap; this is within our reach. I would like
in particular to welcome the commitment and concrete
recommendations of the Swedish Minister for Foreign
Affairs in this regard.
The Council now includes provisions on women’s
rights and participation in more than 70 per cent of its
resolutions and nearly 90 per cent of its presidential
statements. We must reach 100 per cent. Let us
therefore set ourselves this target of 100 per cent. In
the same spirit, it is important that the Council adopt
specific press statements as part of the women and
peace and security agenda. Similarly, we must continue
to systematically invite civil-society leaders, especially
women, to give us an accurate picture of the reality on
the ground.
Security Council field visits must also give full
consideration to meetings with women and to the
challenges that specifically concern them. This was the
case with a meeting we held in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo recently, which to me was one of the most
striking and inspiring during our recent mission to the
country, and I think that in saying so I also speak for the
vast majority of my colleagues. The same must apply
to the highest United Nations representatives in crisis
situations. I would like to welcome in this regard the
joint initiative of the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations to travel together to South Sudan.
But we can all see that we must go further. The
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020 provides
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

us with a unique opportunity that we must take together.
Follow-up of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda must be more robust,
and the 76 action plans and 11 regional frameworks
established within that framework must be monitored
more closely so as to better identify problems and
promote good practices. We are ready to work with all
our partners to define the outlines of a mechanism that
would effectively review these national and regional
processes, as the Secretary-General states in his report
(S/2018/900). Our actions must be consonant with our
goals. We must develop the regional dimension, and we
welcome the ownership of the agenda by regional and
subregional organizations. This is a fundamental point
if we really want to be effective in the long term.
Finally, the United Nations needs to raise the
profile of women’s participation in peace processes,
just as it did for the demobilization of child soldiers.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director of UN-Women in this area,
and we are at their disposal to continue the process of
reflection together.
France will remain fully committed to women’s
rights, both within the Security Council and in all
other relevant bodies. The President of the Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, has made equality between women
and men the great cause of his five-year term and a
top priority of the French Group of Seven presidency
next year. The women and peace and security agenda
will be an important element of this priority. France is
currently developing its third national plan of action for
the women and peace and security agenda, which will
be presented in the first quarter of 2019, and France will
once again make that agenda a priority of its presidency
of the Security Council in March 2019.
As part of its second national plan of action, France
has provided direct support in several areas of conflict.
In Syria, for instance, France funded an initiative
to provide emergency medical assistance to protect
women in a conflict where they are too often targeted,
in particular through assistance in terms of sexual and
reproductive health or psychological support services
designed to improve the living conditions of women,
especially those giving birth in very difficult conditions.
In Libya, France has supported training workshops
for young entrepreneurs in Misrata, 50 per cent of
whom were women, with the aim of strengthening the
Libyan economic fabric by assisting young Libyan
entrepreneurs and start-ups.

S/PV. 8382

Our third national plan of action will resolutely
pursue France’s commitments in the framework of
the inclusion of women in peace processes and State
reconstruction. The close involvement of civil society in
the elaboration of the plan, its concrete implementation
in France and abroad and the assessment of its results is,
of course, vital. The challenge of the women and peace
and security agenda, in addition to its implementation,
lies in ensuring that genuine ownership is taken at all
levels of society by the actors involved in issues of
peacekeeping and the rebuilding of peace and security.
In conclusion, I would like to say that France’s
deep conviction is that, at a time when multilateralism
is being criticized and put to the test, women have a key
role to play in giving new impetus to multilateralism, in
which France believes more strongly than ever. Parity
and diversity are at the heart of the DNA of the United
Nations and must therefore be at the heart of our actions.
Simone de Beauvoir wrote that “the present is not
a potential past; it is the moment of choice and action”.
So, dear friends, let us get to work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to commend
Bolivia for having convened today’s important debate.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable remarks. I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing. We are also pleased to see Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah with us in the Chamber today; the voice of
civil society is important for us to hear. We are also
honoured by the presence of ministers from Sweden
and the Netherlands.
The need to include women in peacebuilding and
conflict resolution has been gradually acknowledged in
the international peacebuilding arena. The women and
peace and security agenda has been greatly enriched,
including by highlighting the disproportionate impact
of armed conflict on women and girls, the great
benefits of enhancing the involvement of women in
peace processes, and the absolute necessity of tackling
the question of sexual violence as a tactic of war. It
is also widely understood that women and men have
different experiences both during and after conflict and
that women have a unique set of challenges related to
peacebuilding and security.

18-3401425/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

There is no doubt that in spite of the achievements
registered, much remains to be done. There has been
a marginal increase in the number of women involved
in formal peace talks, and, consequently, women’s
concerns are rarely on the agenda of peace talks. A
major challenge is that women are often perceived as
not having the skills, knowledge or social status needed
to bring about change in post-conflict environments.
Changing this requires a shift in mindset by negotiators
and mediators as to how they view the role of women.
We welcome the focus of this year’s debate on
political and economic empowerment. We believe
there is a need for a broader discussion in the Security
Council on the importance of women’s empowerment
in conflict and post-conflict settings. In this context,
I would like to focus on the following key points:
leadership, empowerment and education.
The meaningful participation of women in peace
processes and broader political processes is reflected in
the quality of such participation, not in the number of
women who participate; it is about women’s leadership.
We need to identify and support policies that strengthen
not only women’s voices but also women’s leadership
in decision-making processes during peacebuilding,
and also to ensure that women have a strong voice in
decision-making, from the initial peacemaking process
to the establishment and development of local and
national governmental institutions. We know that there
are women who are adequately trained for these roles,
that women are available for high-level appointments
and, further, that qualified women are everywhere.
One of the factors that enables women to participate
more actively in society and peacebuilding processes
is economic empowerment. Basic economic stability
helps women live securely, have greater leverage to
earn respect in their communities, and become active
and contributing members of society. It gives them
the courage to speak up about violence and abuse.
Empowerment is about much more than acknowledging
the important work that women already do. It is also
about how power and resources such as land and water
are distributed and who makes the decisions. Fostering
and consolidating women’s economic empowerment
is crucial to the full participation of women in society
and must therefore be a collaborative effort. It requires
action to be taken within United Nations bodies and in
cooperation with other international organizations and
the international community and, most importantly,
26/108

25/10/2018

it requires action by local communities in postconflict countries.
I very much agree with my predecessor that we
need action. In this context, allow me to share some
information about Polish development assistance and
our projects. Over the past several years, Poland has
been supporting women’s economic recovery and
empowerment in Palestine. This year we have focused
on enhancing women’s entrepreneurship, supporting
newly established, women-run businesses and creating
jobs. Polish aid has also financed the implementation
of sustainable irrigation systems in home gardens in
the West Bank. This new irrigation technology can
save water and increase crop yields by up to 20 per
cent. Larger crops will not only enhance the food
security of Palestinian women and their families, but
also constitute a source of additional income. This
project has not only given those women a strong tool
for their economic empowerment but also contributed
to fostering gender quality.
Allow me to make my last point. No discussion
of women’s empowerment would be complete without
a reference to the role that education must play in
this process. Education is a catalyst for achieving
equal participation in society and achieving women’s
integration into long-term economic recovery. It is
also an important step towards removing the obstacles
that impede women’s full participation in political
life, conflict prevention, and peace and transitional
justice processes.
I am very pleased to inform the Council that Poland
has just adopted its first-ever national action plan on
women and peace and security. This clearly shows
our comprehensive commitment to implementing the
Council’s resolutions on women and peace and security.
The plan set four main outcomes for the period 20182021: the meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping; the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda; the protection
of and support for victims of conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence; and, finally, the promotion
and development of the women and peace and security
agenda in Poland.
If we are serious about our commitment to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, there is
simply no alternative to investing in women, giving them
a voice in all relevant decision-making processes and
supporting their political and economic empowerment.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

We need to stop seeing women as victims of war and,
rather, look at them as leaders for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres not only for the report (S/2018/900) that
he presented today but also for his commitment to
the issue that has brought us here today and for his
noteworthy efforts to ensure that our Organization
as a whole sets an example in terms of ensuring the
equitable representation of women. I should like
also to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the representative
of Palestinian civil society, Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah,
for their briefings.
History was written by men — men who have
relegated women to a secondary status, devalued
their role in society and engaged in inexcusable
forms of violence against them. We are the victims
of a patriarchal system, rooted in capitalism, that
exacerbates inequalities and the economic, social and
cultural oppression of women throughout the world.
This is the fundamental problem. This is the system
that social organizations, civil society, regional
organizations and the international community as a
whole must fight.
However, there is no doubt that it is States that bear
the primary responsibility for promoting structural
changes that grant women the place that historically has
been denied them. It is only through gender equality
and the empowerment of women that we will bring
about more just, inclusive and peaceful societies.
Women face many forms of violence on a daily basis
and in various situations, but none is more cruel or has
such devastating consequences as the violence resulting
from armed conflict — hence the importance of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000), which recognizes this
fact and underscores the fundamental link that exists
between respect for gender equality and international
peace and security. On the basis of that resolution and
the seven resolutions adopted by the Council on the
subject, the United Nations has undertaken many efforts
and made significant progress in their implementation
in order to effectively integrate a gender perspective
in peace processes and promote the participation
of women in them. Among those advances, we can
mention the establishment of UN-Women, the Office

S/PV. 8382

of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security and others.
However, despite those efforts, the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda continues
to pose important challenges, mainly in this last
point: the inclusion of women in peace processes.
There are four pillars that make up the normative
framework created by the Security Council: prevention,
participation, protection and recovery. Each is equally
important and they complement each other to ensure
the optimal implementation of the agenda. Today we
would like to emphasize the importance of prevention
and how to achieve the active participation of women in
peace processes.
While there are similarities, each country has its own
reality and different challenges. We have highlighted the
Colombian peace process because of the mechanisms
used to promote women’s participation and incorporate
a gender perspective in the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace;
and because of the gender balance in the personnel of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which is not seen in other peace missions.
Another historic example of women who promote
peace and reconciliation in my region are the heroic
Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo. We also highlight
progress made in parliamentary representation achieved
in Somalia, the advances made in the Sahel region and
Afghanistan, among others. Those are clear examples
of the importance of women’s political empowerment.
Other cases with many challenges include those
faced by the countries of the Lake Chad basin and
their fight against terrorism imposed by Boko Haram,
the stigma faced by its victims, as Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed reported after her visit to
that region, after which she went to the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where she stressed the need to
encourage women’s participation in the electoral
process. Other places where women face even more
humanitarian complications are Yemen, Palestine and
the Central African Republic, among others.
Every year we meet to highlight the importance
of implementing the women and peace and security
agenda, ending sexual violence in conflict, ensuring
accountability and calling for the inclusion of women
in peace processes. But how do we do that? First, we
need empowered, free women, who are masters of

18-3401427/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

their decisions and bodies, and who are economically
independent. That is how they will be true agents of
change. How do we achieve that? This is where States
must show leadership and promote structural changes
to combat inequality, poverty and discrimination. They
should focus, first and foremost, on women.
Bolivia was an unstable country. Between 2000
and 2003, social conflicts broke out against the
privatization of water and in defence of national
sovereignty over our hydrocarbon resource reserves.
We needed a fundamental change. Therefore, one of
the first measures of the current Government was to
establish the Constituent Assembly, which was presided
over by a woman indigenous leader. We drafted a
new Constitution, which was adopted in 2009 and
established the right of women and men to participate
freely in the creation, exercise and control of political
power, on equal footing and under equal conditions.
On that basis we focused on adopting measures to
make progress in dismantling the patriarchal system
and thereby breaking down structural barriers, mainly
through the political and economic empowerment
of women. We promoted women’s participation in
decision-making roles through the Electoral System
Act, which establishes parity and alternation in the lists
of male and female candidates for representative posts,
making Bolivia the second country in the world with
the highest representation of women in the Legislative
Assembly. In Bolivia, women have a majority not only
in Parliament, but also in the other elected bodies.
In the same vein, one of the most important
measures for women’s economic inclusion was the
Community-based Agrarian Reform Renewal Act,
which not only guarantees the participation of women
in land restoration and distribution processes, but also
prioritizes women’s right to own land. Twelve years
ago, only 10 per cent of women in Bolivia were owners
of land. Today, in 2018, 45 per cent of land ownership is
in the hands of women.
Bolivia has experienced 12 years of fundamental
change, and without the role of women as agents of
change, that transformation would not have been
achieved. Today we enjoy economic, political and social
stability that we did not have before. That is why we
would like to reiterate our commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda.
We thank the Secretary-General for the
recommendations he presented today in the run-up to
28/108

25/10/2018

the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). All
States, together with the United Nations system and civil
society, must work together in a coordinated fashion to
achieve optimal implementation of this agenda.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Ms. Michelle Müntefering,
Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.
Ms. Müntefering (Germany): May I begin with
a quote:
“I would like to state here, and I believe that many
agree with me on this issue, that we women do not
owe a debt of gratitude in the traditional sense of
the expression.”
Those words were uttered by Marie Juchacz almost
100 years ago, on 19 February 1919, in the German
Parliament — during the first German democracy
immediately after the introduction of women’s suffrage.
As the first woman to speak in Germany’s Parliament,
she boldly continued:
“It will not occur to us to deny our femininity
because we have entered into the political arena
and are joining the fight for the rights of the
people. There is no part of the new governmental
programme that we women are not interested in.”
That is precisely the way things are today, 100 years
after this speech — also and especially internationally.
Foreign and security policy can and must no longer take
place without women in the twenty-first century: neither
in national parliaments, nor in the United Nations, nor
in its international peace missions. The United Nations,
as a central, rules-based, multilateral regulatory
framework, was created more than 70 years ago, after
two world wars. For us, women are more important
than ever before — and not only with a view to our own
history, but to a common and peaceful future.
That is why I wish, first of all, to offer my sincere
thanks to Bolivia, the current holder of the Security
Council presidency, for this open debate on resolution
1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for their important
statements, as well as Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, in
her capacity as a civil society representative.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

We cannot afford to talk about peace and women
and security in the twenty-first century without women
sitting at the table as equal partners. They must be
actors and shapers of peace and security policy, and not
just recipients of political decisions. We cannot afford
to neglect women’s potential for promoting security,
stability and sustainable peace, as still remains the
case today.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a
milestone, and a new generation of our countries’ sons
and daughters has grown up in the intervening years.
A great deal has happened since that time. We may
be taking small steps, but we are making progress.
Therefore, it is decisive for us now to continue
addressing this topic in view of the crises and conflicts
in the world and to build steadily on experiences and
successes and drive them forward with vim and vigour.
In response to our European partners, it might not be
the same procedure as before, but we will do our best.
Germany aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We also support
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Ghana on behalf of the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network, in which Germany serves as
Vice-Chair.
Allow me, above and beyond that, to mention three
of Germany’s priorities with regard to women and
peace and security.
First, we will place the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the heart of our work as a member of
the Security Council during the period 2019-2020.
We look forward to working closely together with
Peru as we take over as Co-Chair of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. We
will build on Sweden’s excellent preparatory work
and raise the profile of the Group’s recommendations
still further. We will give civil society a voice that is
heard in the Security Council, including women human
rights defenders.
Secondly, we will continue to lend our full support
to the important work of the United Nations to prevent
and eliminate conflict-related sexual violence. We will
use the annual open debate on that issue during our
presidency in April 2019 to strengthen the normative
framework of the Security Council with respect to
conflict-related sexual violence. We look forward to

S/PV. 8382

working with all members of the Security Council,
especially with our French friends. This year’s Nobel
Peace Prize laureates — Nadia Murad from Iraq, who
now lives in Germany, and Dr. Denis Mukwege from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — underscore
in their work how important the fight against conflictrelated sexual violence continues to be.
Thirdly, and lastly, Germany intends to achieve
tangible progress regarding the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020 — the twentieth
anniversary of the resolution. We will continue to draw
on the important and practical exchange of experiences
in the focal points network. I am most delighted that we
are due to hand over the presidency of that network to
Namibia in 2019, especially since it is one of the driving
forces behind resolution 1325 (2000). Moreover, we
will continue to lend political and financial support
to the African Women Leaders’ Network, as well as
with regard to the establishment of national chapters as
soon as possible, such as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We are talking here about resolution 1325 (2000),
namely, the decision adopted unanimously by the
Security Council in October 2000. It is important to
ensure that we strengthen women at all sociopolitical
levels — locally, regionally and globally. I firmly
believe that women can do anything, but they must also
be allowed to do so.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs
of Slovenia.
Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset, let me say
that Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Let me also commend Bolivia for organizing
today’s debate to highlight the role of women in peace
and security. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report (S/2018/900) and express
our appreciation for his commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda.
The meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peace processes is
enabled through their effective political and economic
empowerment, their access to resources and the
realization and exercise of their fundamental rights.
Their voices in politics, including in Parliaments and
Governments, in the military, in business and the

18-3401429/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

corporate world and in civil society lend credibility
and sustainability to the measures that address security
concerns at all levels. We concur on the need for
improved data and measurements for monitoring trends
and progress in the relevant areas.
Obstacles to women’s political and economic
participation contribute to prolonged insecurity and
threaten solutions for sustainable peace. Sexual and
gender-based violence continues to represent one such
obstacle, and we must do more to hold perpetrators
accountable. With regard to accountability, let me
reiterate Slovenia’s strong support for the International
Criminal Court and the work done in previous years
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
I would also like to stress the need for an active role
on the part of men in promoting the women and peace
and security agenda, both with regard to the prevention
and elimination of conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence and by promoting the meaningful
participation of women in peace efforts.
Let me inform the Concil oubriefly about our
national efforts. Slovenia’s second national action plan
on women and peace and security for the period 20182020 will be adopted by the Government in the coming
weeks. The new action plan is based on a review of the
implementation of the first action plan and takes into
account emerging challenges and trends. It encompasses
activities in five thematic areas: the integration of
a gender perspective, women’s participation, the
protection of women and girls and putting an end to
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, education,
training and awareness-raising about women and peace
and security issues, and accountability for conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence. The plan
includes a monitoring and reporting mechanism, and
we believe that it will improve our results in terms of
the women and peace and security agenda. We are also
working on a new directive for the Slovenian armed
forces on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We have defined gender equality as one of our
thematic priorities and a cross-cutting issue in terms
of our international development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance, and we are supporting projects
on the empowerment of women in the Western Balkans,
Lebanon, Jordan, Uganda and Rwanda. Those projects
contribute to women’s resilience by encouraging
30/108

25/10/2018

awareness-raising,
education
and
employment,
balanced representation and the promotion of economic
and psychosocial empowerment.
Given the importance that my Government attaches
to the women and peace and security agenda, we have
decided to dedicate part of our biggest foreign policy
event — the Bled Strategic Forum, which we host
every summer — to marking the fortieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the efforts of the Security Council’s
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security to stress coordinated and specific countrylevel action. We join others in encouraging the Security
Council to pay due regard to the Group’s work in its
deliberations and outcomes.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the appeal of the
Secretary-General for all of us to do more to close
the gap between what we are saying in this Chamber
and what we are doing outside of it in order to provide
more space for women’s participation and secure more
resources, including financing. I assure the Council
that Slovenia remains firmly committed to the women
and peace and security agenda and to a comprehensive
approach to its implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Herashchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I
represent Ukraine as the President’s special envoy for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in Donbas and
as a direct participant in the Minsk peace process.
I would like to thank the presidency of Bolivia
for convening this open debate and the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women for
their statements.
Ukraine also endorses the statement to be made
later today by the observer of the European Union.
We are pleased with the inclusion in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on today’s topic (S/2018/900) of
information on the measures that the Government of
Ukraine is taking to implement Council resolution 1325
(2000), particularly on the start of the implementation
process for our national action plan. I have to agree
with the Secretary-General’s observation that 2020 will
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8382

be a test of our obligations in that regard, and we must
speed up our efforts to implement its main priorities.

legislation and introducing gender quotas, which have
already proved their worth in elections at the local level.

I believe that the United Nations has a unique
opportunity to fulfil one of its founding principles,
which is

In September, the Government approved a national
action plan to implement the recommendations outlined
in the conclusions of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, defining specific
measures for the period leading up to 2021. Our work
on a national strategy for gender equality in the security
and defence sectors continues, and there are now more
than 25,000 women, of whom 3,400 are officers, in
contract-based military service in the Ukrainian armed
forces on an equal footing with men. The number of
posts to which women can be appointed has increased
significantly, ensuring their equal access to military
ranks. This year for the first time a woman received
the rank of major-general and leads our military’s
medical service.

“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights,
in the dignity and worth of the human person, in
the equal rights of men and women and of nations
large and small”.
The equal participation of women, and their access to
high-level Government positions and decision-making
processes at every level, is vitally important to achieving
gender parity. That is not only affirmed in article 2 of
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, it is also reinforced
in the Sustainable Development Goals. Data from the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, and from the International
Labour Organization only emphasizes the importance
of ending the gender gap in the representation of
women at every level, in political decision-making and
in ensuring equal pay.
Considering that the armed aggression against
Ukraine is now in its fifth year and that it is women
and children who are the war’s primary victims,
the Government of Ukraine has launched efforts to
effectively implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to
guarantee and protect the rights of women in every
public arena. Our national action plan for implementing
the resolution for the period leading up to 2020 is
proceeding successfully. It provides for the inclusion
of the principle of gender parity in professional
training, a policy on expanding women’s participation
in peacebuilding processes and a system for protecting
women and girls who are victims of the conflict. One
important component is preventing and combating
gender-based violence during military action.
Within the framework of creating an institutional
mechanism for establishing a gender policy, the Deputy
Prime Minister of Ukraine has already been tasked with
its coordination and a position of special Government
representative for gender policy issues has been
established. We are currently working on broadening
women’s participation in Ukrainian political life.
Unfortunately, women make up only 12 per cent of the
Ukrainian Parliament, which is certainly not enough and
does not correspond to Ukrainian women’s professional
potential. We are therefore working on changing our

The numbers of civilian and military victims of the
Russian Federation’s armed aggression against Ukraine
have risen every year, and I would particularly like to
address the humanitarian disaster caused by the war
against Ukraine. Women serving in our armed forces
have been dying in Donbas since 2014. A few days ago,
Olesia Baklanova, a soldier, was killed. She was just 19
years old. In February, Sabina Galitskaya, a nurse, died
when her car, which was clearly marked as a medical
vehicle, was hit by a Russian anti-tank missile. She was
23. How many more Ukrainian women will have to die
defending their motherland in order to stop the armed
conflict in Donbas instigated by Russia?
A huge continuing problem are the mines and
explosive devices that are literally all over 7,000 square
kilometres of Ukrainian territory. They have killed 92
women in Donbas over the years. A few days ago three
children were blown up by a mine near occupied Horlivka
in the district of Donetsk. The Ukrainian Parliament
is now planning to adopt a major law on humanitarian
demining. Military technology and resources,
including mines marked as manufactured in the
Russian Federation, are coming in over an uncontrolled
400-kilometre stretch of the Russian-Ukrainian border.
That is why Ukraine has been insisting on the speedy
launch of a peacekeeping mission for Donbas under the
auspices of the United Nations, with a broad mandate
for an interim administration. That is essential if we
are to prevent a humanitarian disaster and protect the
civilian population, especially women and children,
who are the most vulnerable of all. Needless to say,

18-3401431/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Ukraine would welcome a mission that included as
many women peacekeepers as possible.
As Ukraine’s representative to the humanitarian
group in Minsk, my main efforts have been aimed
at freeing hostages. Over the course of the war, we
have been able to liberate or find 258 women who
were hostages of illegal armed groups. Right now six
Ukrainian women are still held captive, and 21 have
been declared missing, while about 1,500 women have
been widowed and more than 2,000 have lost their sons.
Many people here will have heard the names of Oleh
Sentsov, Serhiy Glondar, Uzair and Teimur Abdullayev,
Volodymyr Balukh and 70 other Ukrainian political
prisoners held in Russian Federation jails, as well as the
dozens of prisoners illegally imprisoned on the territory
of occupied Donbas. Their families — mothers, wives,
sisters and daughters who are unable to see or speak to
them — continue to wait for them. Today the European
Parliament awarded Oleh Sentsov the Sakharov Prize
for Freedom of Thought. We welcome that decision and
encourage all States Members of the United Nations to
make every effort to liberate Oleh Sentsov and the other
political prisoners. Oleh should be able to receive his
prize in person, not through intermediaries.
This year, as Ukraine’s representative to the Minsk
humanitarian group, I have made dozens of proposals to
the Russian Federation to hand over to Moscow Russians
who have been convicted of serious crimes in Ukraine
in exchange for our prisoners in Crimea, a humanitarian
gesture that would ease the lives of hundreds of women
and children. However, so far Russia has not responded
to our proposal and has blocked questions about freeing
its hostages and political prisoners. Incidentally, it is
not only Ukrainian women who have been hoping for
a large-scale liberation of prisoners on both sides,
which Ukraine has proposed doing as soon as possible.
Russian women — the wives and mothers of Russian
soldiers detained in Ukraine — are also asking the
Russian Federation to do this. It would be a wonderful
humanitarian gesture on both sides. All that is needed
is the political will.
With a view to defining the full extent of the
violations of human rights, including sexual violence, in
the occupied territories of Crimea and Donbas, Ukraine
has been insisting that special observers be sent from
the special monitoring and humanitarian missions
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), the United Nations and the
32/108

25/10/2018

International Committee of the Red Cross. Incidentally,
the International Committee of the Red Cross has never
been given access to Ukrainian political prisoners held
in Russian territory or in the occupied areas, which is
a gross violation of their human rights. Prisoners who
have been released have spoken about the existence of
sexual violence. The militants have not shrunk from
assaulting members of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission. Last year, in May 2017, a representative of the
Special Monitoring Mission was sexually harassed by
an armed militant who simply refused to let her pass.
The crime was prevented only by the intervention of
her colleagues from the Mission. We were also told
about sexual violence by 12 prisoners who were freed
in December 2014, who included both men and women,
and many of them mentioned incidents of group
sexual violence.
In conclusion, I would like to quote Max van der
Stoel, who said that
“[m]ankind has spent centuries perfecting the art
of war. We are still in our infancy when it comes to
building peace.”
That is why I believe that the problem of ensuring
peace in any part of the world is key to guaranteeing
human rights and sustainable development. Not only
has the time come for a decisive increase in the role
of women in that process, it also demands practical
realization. We have a unique opportunity to reject
bureaucratic declarations and take practical steps to
advance women’s rights, enable their participation in
peace negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction and
protect them from sexual and gender-based violence. I
urge us to ramp up those efforts without delay.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their text in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I also want to
inform everyone that we will be continuing this open
debate through the lunch hour, as we have a long list
of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking up this very important topic
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

today. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
very powerful statements.
Past experience demonstrates that women’s
effective participation and influence in the peace
process are closely linked to sustaining peace.
However, we must admit the reality of women’s poor
representation in major peace processes and the lack
of progress in their participation. As we approach
2020 and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we need more vigorous efforts on the part of all
actors in the international community if we are to fully
implement the normative framework.
Japan attaches great importance to supporting
women’s participation and protecting their rights in
the area of peace and security, as one of the three core
pillars of our efforts to create a society where women
shine. Today I would like to share two examples of what
we are doing in that area. First, Japan supports the UNWomen project in Kenya designed to promote women’s
substantial participation at the community level. In the
past year, more than 8,000 Kenyan civilian women and
female police officers have been given prevention and
response training for combating violent radicalization,
with an additional 1,000 women and young people
receiving income-generating skills training. The
project encourages women to be confident, active
players in protecting their communities from violentextremist influences.
Secondly, Japan has been helping to strengthen the
capacity and representation of female police officers in
Afghanistan, who have increased their knowledge and
skills relating to the provision of effective protection
and support to women who have experienced violence.
Their strong motivation in working for peace and
security encourages other women, including the
survivors of violence. Japan believes that the leadership
of women in the area of peace and security is key to
realizing sustaining peace.
In order to promote women’s political and economic
empowerment and their meaningful participation
in sustaining peace, Japan intends to strengthen
cooperation in multilateral fields, especially in the
following aspects. First, sexual violence in conflict is
a major obstacle to sustaining peace, and commitments
are necessary from both donor and conflict-affected
Governments. Japan is one of the top donors to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict through

S/PV. 8382

contributions totalling $9.5 million, and we have seen
substantial results from those efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We reiterate our ongoing
support for its work.
Secondly, Japan is proud to support the Women’s
Leadership, Empowerment, Access and Protection in
Crisis Response programme, also known as LEAP, under
the UN-Women’s Flagship Programming Initiatives.
In that regard, Japan has contributed $8.7 million in
2018 to promote women’s resilience. Thirdly, Japan has
designated Sri Lanka as a partnership country under
the Women, Peace and Security Partnership Initiative
of the Group of Seven, based on our historically
excellent bilateral relationship. We would like to
expand our assistance targeted towards the meaningful
involvement of conflict-affected women in order to
promote the women and peace and security agenda in
Sri Lanka.
Before concluding, I would like to mention that
Japan will host the World Assembly for Women in
Tokyo on 23 and 24 March 2019. Women and peace and
security will be one of the main topics of discussion.
We are looking forward to welcoming guests and
participants from all over the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate on this important
issue. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900) and all of the briefers for their statements.
The normative and operative frameworks relating
to the women and peace and security agenda have been
considerably strengthened across the United Nations
system over the past two decades. Today there is a greater
awareness of the centrality of women’s meaningful
participation in peace processes and of the incorporation
of gender perspectives into United Nations peace and
security efforts. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
emphasis and achievements on gender parity among the
United Nations senior leadership.
The importance of women’s active engagement
and leadership is now well established in peace and
reconciliation processes and in countering the spread of
violent extremism. Action-oriented initiatives such as
the African Women Leaders Network, and encouraging
results from peace processes, including in Colombia
and Guinea-Bissau, affirm women’s important role in

18-3401433/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

bringing transformative changes. Despite those efforts,
women’s roles and perspectives in peace processes
remain largely neglected. Sexual violence, abductions
and human trafficking continue to be used as weapons
of war by non-State actors and terrorist organizations
in armed conflicts. Rapidly expanding transboundary
criminal networks finance terror, supply arms, recruit
and train foreign fighters, and destabilize whole
regions, which disproportionately affects women.
The large-scale movements of refugees resulting from
armed conflicts increase women’s vulnerability to
discrimination and exploitation. No country is in a
position to effectively counter those challenges alone.
The issue of women and peace and security also
has to be viewed in a wider societal context, involving
gender and development issues that are dealt with
outside the Council. The mutually reinforcing roles
of gender-responsive development and the building of
peaceful and resilient societies are well recognized.
The normative work being done outside the Council in
that regard, including in the Commission on the Status
of Women and the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women must continue to
inform our actions. The normative work done by
UN-Women and other agencies such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is of relevance
for building capacities. The Peacebuilding Fund has
committed more than one third of its funding to gendermainstreaming programmes.
As the General Assembly focuses on gendersensitive and inclusive development to build peaceful
and resilient societies, the Council must push for
effective cooperation on countering terrorism, which
threatens peace and security. It must make every effort
to realize the full potential of integrating considerations
of women and peace and security into sanctions regimes.
The Council’s Sanctions Committees should address
the issue of proactively listing terrorist individuals and
entities involved in sexual and gender-based violence
in armed conflict. International cooperation on the
prosecution of criminals engaged in transnational
crimes is important in order to ensure justice for the
victims, many of whom are women and girls.
In India, the discourse on women’s empowerment
has progressed from viewing women as beneficiaries
of welfare schemes to mainstreaming their concerns
and harnessing their leadership for inclusive
development. More than 1.3 million directly elected
women representatives participate in formulating and
34/108

25/10/2018

implementing gender-responsive policies in India.
Gender-based budgeting has proved beneficial for
the mainstreaming of gender perspectives in policy
implementation across sectors.
India is committed to a higher representation of
women in peacekeeping missions and has fulfilled its
pledge to ensure that 15 per cent of military observers
are women. The landmark first-ever deployment by
the United Nations of an all-female Indian formed
police unit in Liberia became a role model for local
women to participate in policing and the relevant
rule-of-law frameworks. India is also committed to
providing a second such formed police unit. India
partners UN-Women in capacity-building initiatives
at the New Delhi-based Centre for United Nations
Peacekeeping, which has now conducted a third United
Nations female military officers course for 40 women
officers from 26 countries. We also provide adequate
predeployment training on gender sensitization to our
peacekeeping forces.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse
and his strong commitment to achieving gender parity
in peace operations. India stands ready to engage with
our partners to work towards ensuring the meaningful
participation of women and the mainstreaming of
women and peace and security considerations in
building inclusive, peaceful and resilient societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernández de Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you, Sir, in
your capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening today’s open debate on women and peace
and security. It is a special privilege for me that my first
statement as Permanent Representative of my country
is on that topic, on which Colombia has so many lessons
learned to share with the international community.
I would also like to express my appreciation for the
briefings and contributions of Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, and civilsociety representative Randa Siniora Atallah.
We appreciate the reference to Colombia and
its peace process in the concept note for this open
debate (S/2018/904, annex) as a positive example of
the implementation of the contents of resolution 1325
(2000), although, as you rightly said, Mr. President, we
still have many challenges ahead of us.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

We know that women’s participation and political
and economic empowerment, and the promotion of
their leadership, are essential to achieving the goal of a
peaceful and inclusive society based on the principles
of legality, entrepreneurship and equality. That is why I
would like to highlight two milestones that have marked
the two months since the Government of President
Iván Duque Márquez took power. For the first time
in its history, Colombia has a woman in the position
of Vice-President of the Republic, who, in addition to
her own duties, has been tasked with supporting the
President in promoting gender parity. The President
has also formed the first gender-balanced Cabinet in
the history of Colombia, since eight of the 16 ministries
are led by women. It is crucial to promote women’s
political and economic empowerment by example and
through concrete actions. It is the only way we can help
to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination
against women.
In Colombia’s view, with regard to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, gender parity and
women’s empowerment must continue to be critical
issues on the international agenda. International
commitments in that area should reflect the recognition
and guarantee of women’s rights. We must ensure that
they are integrated into foreign policy and all sectors
at the State level. In that regard, and with the aim of
promoting women’s participation and empowerment
in delivering sustainable development throughout our
country, our forthcoming new national development
plan will include a section on gender parity in public
policy, a plan to guarantee a life free of violence, the
prevention of adolescent pregnancy, the establishment
of a gender equality centre and care for victims
of conflict.
Colombia’s experience with regard to the topic
of this open debate is known to the entire Security
Council. It is important for us to continue to prioritize
the promotion of women’s participation in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in peacebuilding.
During the peace process we signed nearly two years
ago, there were women among the peace negotiators at
the negotiating table and a gender subcommittee was
formed to ensure the inclusion of a gender-sensitive
approach in the peace agreement. That achievement
was acknowledged by the Secretary-General when he
affirmed that Colombia’s peace agreement contained
more than 100 gender-specific provisions. This week,

S/PV. 8382

President Duque announced that we had to make rapid
progress in achieving the highest rate of women’s
participation in our armed forces’ leadership, for which
Colombia has made major reforms that we will continue
to strengthen. We share the concerns expressed by civil
society about situations in Colombia in which women
social leaders and human rights defenders have been
threatened or killed. We will continue to redouble
our efforts to strengthen the existing institutional
framework and to accelerate investigations and
protection measures against that scourge. Our lessons
learned on the role of women in achieving and building
peace can be applied in other contexts and regions.
Women and girls play a fundamental role in my
country. We believe firmly in their role in the building
of democratic and inclusive societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important annual debate on women and peace and
security. I would also like to thank all the briefers
for their comprehensive presentations. I would like to
particularly acknowledge the significant contribution
of the Secretary-General in promoting and upholding
the agenda of women and peace and security in United
Nations peace efforts.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later today by the observer of the
European Union.
The role of women and girls in peace processes
and humanitarian response, and women’s active
participation in mediation, conflict prevention,
security-sector
reform,
peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping, is huge but nevertheless often neglected,
or at least underappreciated. Today I would like to limit
my statement to three key areas that are important
to Slovakia.
First, let us look at the normative framework and
reality on the ground. We have created a sufficient
framework, we believe, of resolutions and commitments,
but their implementation is still insufficient. Women’s
role in sustaining peace is undoubtable. Even though we
agreed to promote women’s meaningful participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
have not borne witness to a rising number of women
peacekeepers. In fact, that number has not changed
drastically over the past 10 years; it has only risen from

18-3401435/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

2 to 4 per cent of women soldiers. One year after the
Secretary-General launched the system-wide gender
parity strategy, we still have only about 28 per cent of
women deployed in the field. That is the same figure as
about 12 months ago. We should reflect carefully on the
recently-published report of the Secretary-General on
women peace and security (S/2018/900), which, among
other things, highlights gaps and challenges that remain
ahead of us. The report, together with resolution 2242
(2015), provides a clear road map of what needs to be
done and how to do it in an efficient and timely manner.
Secondly, women’s political and economic
empowerment must be at the centre of our women and
peace and security efforts. Focus must be put on ensuring
women’s economic rights and their full participation in
economic processes, access to resources, employment
and education. We need to do better in the protection of
women human rights defenders and women key actors
in politics, public life and society. Only that way will
we be able to ensure their political empowerment and
equal participation in all spheres of life. To successfully
achieve that, we also need to ensure the sufficient
funding of and resources for the women and peace and
security agenda, mostly in conflict-affected country.
I know that earlier today we all had a chance to
congratulate the newly elected President of Ethiopia,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, with whom I had the privilege
of working in Nairobi for three and a half years. It was
really a moment of importance to all of us to have one of
the Under-Secretaries-General become the first woman
President of Ethiopia. Of course, examples such as that
are critical, and we all look forward to supporting her
role and continuing to work with her.
Thirdly, women’s role in the security sector should
not be underestimated. Resolution 2151 (2014) on
security sector reform (SSR) underscores the importance
of women’s equal and effective participation and full
involvement in all stages of SSR processes. Slovakia, as
a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, works closely with the Group of Friends of
Gender Parity to explore opportunities to strengthen
United Nations support for gender-responsive national
SSR processes, enhance gender parity and gender
equality and improve programming and advocacy
efforts. Therefore, the United Nations approach to
security sector reform must be gender-sensitive in
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation phases. Only with increased female
participation in civilian oversight and SSR processes
36/108

25/10/2018

can we achieve the broad trust of the people in the
security sector, in particular in post-conflict societies.
Just last week the Group of Friends of SSR
organized a dialogue on SSR in the Central African
Republic with the participation of the Minister of
Defence of that country. Among the key messages was
also the need to build not only an efficient but also a
fully inclusive security sector. A strong commitment of
the Government is crucial in that regard.
In conclusion, the more we focus on the practical
implementation of what we have politically declared
and agreed upon, the sooner we will observe more
tangible and positive results on the ground and in the
everyday lives of people. That is what I believe should
be strongly at the centre of our attention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Ms. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the MIKTA countries,
namely, Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia. At the outset, we would like to
express our appreciation to the Bolivian presidency for
convening today’s open debate on the women and peace
and security agenda. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report (S/2018/900).
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which set the foundation for
the women and peace and security agenda, the MIKTA
countries believe that it is critical to take stock of our
achievements and discuss our further collective and
individual efforts.
The MIKTA countries recognize the key role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
remain committed to increasing women’s participation
in all aspects of peace and security, including women’s
political participation and leadership. We believe that
women’s political and economic empowerment is crucial
to both the prevention of conflicts and the stabilization
of societies emerging from armed conflict. We also
attach importance to our commitment to achieving
gender equality, which is key to the fulfilment of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that
regard, we would like to note that all MIKTA countries
are members of the Group of Friends of Gender Parity.
The MIKTA countries acknowledge the importance
of seven subsequent resolutions of the Security
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Council in establishing a sound normative framework
for the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda by the United Nations system and
Member States. As a result, there has been increased
development of programmes to increase women’s
participation as leaders in military and law enforcement
and as peacebuilders in treaty and peace agreement
negotiations. There has been deeper awareness and more
serious attention to the vulnerability and asymmetrical
impact of conflict on women.
Despite the progress made, women and girls still
face daunting challenges. We note with deep concern
that sexual violence has become a routine tactical
element of war and armed conflict. Rape, sexual
exploitation, forced marriage, sexual abuse and torture
constitute abhorrent violations of human rights and
human dignity. We underscore that sexual abuse and
gender-based violence are linked to gender inequality,
poverty, exclusion and discrimination.
The MIKTA countries therefore believe that it
is imperative to directly address those root causes of
conflict, including through the promotion of gender
equality and the greater and meaningful participation
of women in all forms of mediation, the prevention of
conflicts, United Nations peacekeeping operations,
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding processes.
We also support the importance of increasing gender
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8382

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): At the outset, let me thank
Bolivia for organizing this open debate on this very
important issue. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Ending conflicts, forging peace, alleviating human
suffering, addressing injustice, protecting human rights
and placing the world on a safer path are at the heart of
our work here at the United Nations, whose seventythird anniversary we marked only yesterday. While
considerable progress has been made at the normative
level on several counts, conflicts and violence are in
fact on the rise. According to the Secretary General’s
report (S/2018/900), more countries are experiencing
some form of violent conflict than at any time in
the past 30 years. Conflicts are also becoming evermore complex and protracted. Delayed and weak
responses — often dictated by big-Power rivalry
and expedient policies — are perpetuating human
suffering. In all that turmoil, instability and chaos,
women, especially young girls, continue to suffer
disproportionate and lasting consequences. In many
conflict zones, they remain soft targets, often exploited
by aggressors with impunity as a war tactic to humiliate
and terrorize civilians.

Further efforts are required to see more women
gain leadership seats at the negotiating table,
enhance their engagement in political and economic
decision-making at all stages of the peace process, and
implement peace agreements. According to UN-Women
statistics, civilians — the majority of whom are women
and children — constitute almost 90 per cent of the
casualties in contemporary conflicts, whereas fewer
than 4 per cent of signatories to peace agreements are
women and fewer than 10 per cent of negotiators at
peace tables are women.

The Security Council’s landmark resolution
1325 (2000) was a watershed moment that rightfully
brought women’s issues to the centre of the global
conflict prevention debate and in the larger context
of international peace and security. Women across
the world, as other speakers acknowledged earlier,
have emerged as leaders and consensus-builders,
inspiring hopes of peace and prosperity amid conflict
and violence. Over the years, the women and peace
and security agenda has become a powerful vehicle
to ensure the feminization of peace in a post-conflict
environment. Yet — and here is the paradox — women
remain largely invisible to and excluded from peace
processes and negotiations.

At a time when the causes and effects of conflicts
easily spread across borders, regional and international
coordination and cooperation remain important
tools in addressing the challenges we face. With that
understanding, MIKTA, as a cross-regional group
of countries on different continents, underscores its
readiness to contribute to international efforts to
advance the women and peace and security agenda.

The women and peace and security agenda, at its
core, is an attempt to bring new perspectives to conflict
resolution. It focuses on the root causes and drivers of
conflicts and shines a much-needed light on the most
oppressed and marginalized. By focusing on creating
an enabling environment for the more meaningful
participation of women, it also aims to bring them to
the table as true stakeholders, able to define and protect

18-3401437/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

their interests. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
briefly five specific points.
First, the Security Council must play its primary
role of maintaining peace and security by focusing on
the root causes of conflicts, especially on the protracted
disputes on its agenda, like Jammu and Kashmir and
Palestine, where women suffer disproportionately from
the violence caused by foreign occupation.
Secondly, the international community must ensure
that equal attention is given to all four pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda — prevention,
participation, protection and recovery — and that the
framework is implemented at all levels.
Thirdly, national human rights institutions are a
critical link in the chain of accountability for women’s
rights violations, as well as their prevention. Efforts to
strengthen their work should be supported.
Fourthly, despite clear evidence to suggest that the
active participation of women during peace processes
significantly enhances the prospects for success,
women continue to remain on the sidelines of the peace
continuum. Women’s special skills in mediation makes
them particularly suited as the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoys and Special Representatives. Yet there
are few who head such missions. That clearly needs
to change.
Fifthly, to ensure the greater participation of
women in peacekeeping mandates, gender perspectives
need to be fully integrated into the peacebuilding
paradigm to reinforce the protection environment.
That would greatly enhance women’s role in peace
accords, as well as in post-conflict stabilization and
reconstruction phases.
My country’s own experience shows that giving
women a key role brings fresh perspectives and builds
a solid foundation for a vibrant society. We remain
determined to carry forward our ambitious domestic
agenda for women’s empowerment and gender
mainstreaming, which my country’s new Government
has made a top priority, and we will continue to engage
constructively with the international community in
that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Norway. Ms. Skåre
(Norway): I am making this statement on behalf of
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.
38/108

25/10/2018

We thank Bolivia for initiating this open debate and
welcome the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900).
We are no closer to peace. Women’s security and
rights are still threatened, specifically targeted by
violent extremists. Women refugees are exposed to
violence. Women’s rights defenders are increasingly
vulnerable. Sexual violence is endemic. This year’s
Nobel Peace Prize laureates expose human suffering
that tears people apart and undermines peace and show
us how to respond. Let us.
It has become decidedly harder to ignore women
in peace and security efforts. The Secretary-General’s
strong leadership is crucial, as evidenced by the
United Nations system-wide gender parity strategy;
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security; the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network; the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security; networks, including the Women’s
Military Network; and the increasing number of
national action plans and strategies to implement
them effectively.
We benefit greatly from the consistent work of
civil society, including the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security and organizations like
the International Civil Society Action Network, the
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom,
and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, local
women’s groups and others. In South Sudan, Yemen,
Afghanistan, Colombia, Syria and Liberia, women
have found ways to engage. Their efforts increasingly
coincide with those of the United Nations and regional
organizations, as innovative inclusion mechanisms
evolve, including subcommissions, situation rooms,
women’s advisory boards, and the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund.
We would like to congratulate Ethiopia on its
recently elected Madam President Sahle-Work Zewde.
There is progress, but, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we aspire to more.
Women fill more leadership positions in the United
Nations and elsewhere, but are still underrepresented
at all levels of peacekeeping. We must connect the
peace mediation tracks better and ensure that inclusion
mechanisms complement, rather than replace, efforts to
include women on the formal track. We must enhance
conflict analysis with a gender perspective and support
the gender mainstreaming of peace operations.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Our support for United Nations reform, UN-Women,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations is part of our response, as
are the women mediator networks. Regional networks
of women mediators are in New York now to explore
opportunities for further cooperation. We must prepare
the ground for inclusive processes even in initial peace
talks and focus as much on women’s inclusion and
rights in the implementation of peace agreements as in
the negotiation phase.
A gender adviser position should be established
in all operational headquarters, while leaders bear the
ultimate responsibility to deliver. The United Nations
high-level seminar on gender and inclusive mediation
processes builds leaders’ competence and capacity.
Men must champion this cause as eagerly as women.
We founded the Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations to engage with military actors in their work
related to women, peace and security.
We are your consistent partners, Mr. President,
for a common, peaceful and secure future. Promoting
women’s participation is not a gesture to women; it is a
question of effectively and sustainably preventing and
resolving conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania welcomes this
open debate on such an important theme, and I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900), as well as the briefers for bringing to this
Chamber the perspective of civil society.
Albania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
and I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
We now have clear evidence that the meaningful
participation of women contributes to the success of
peace talks, accelerates economic recovery, improves
humanitarian assistance, helps counter violent
extremism and prevents human rights violations. Since
the landmark adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there
has been significant progress, and Member States have
gradually integrated its principles and obligations into
their national legal frameworks.
Nevertheless, a clear gap persists between
achievements on paper and the reality on the ground.
Despite international commitment, the meaningful

S/PV. 8382

inclusion of women in preventing conflicts and
negotiating peace processes is still negligible, and
it is challenged by the lack of access to political and
economic resources, as well as a predominantly
masculine mentality of domestic and international
politics. The facts speak for themselves — from 1990
to 2017, only 2 per cent of mediators in formal peace
processes were women.
In response, we need to strengthen our resolve
and increase the cooperation among Member States,
the United Nations and civil society in order to impact
change on the ground. In that regard, the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network and other
concrete mechanisms such as the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network, of which Albania is an
active member, have great potential to prevent and
resolve conflicts through the increased and meaningful
participation of women.
Albania has made significant progress in adopting
policies relevant to the empowerment of women,
the political participation of women in all levels of
governance and the achievement of gender equality.
I am proud to announce today that in September the
Albanian Government approved its first national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000). With the support of
our Dutch partners, UN-Women and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, we brought
together not only the Government stakeholders, but also
civil society and women’s groups, in order to increase
ownership, legitimacy and sustainability. While the
adoption of the national action plan was an important
milestone, we are well aware that its implementation
remains a challenge, especially in terms of financial
support. In that context we will continue to work closely
with donors and partners and will spare no effort in
ensuring the full implementation of the plan.
In terms of women’s participation in political
and public life in Albania, the percentage of women
members of Parliament is 29.3 per cent, with 41 female
members of Parliament. Our current Government, led
by Prime Minister Rama, has achieved full gender
parity, with half of its members being women, including
the Minister of Defence. In 2017, the number of women
ambassadors increased to 26 per cent and the number
of consuls to 33 per cent, thereby reaching the highest
percentage ever of high-ranking women in the Albanian
foreign service.

18-3401439/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

25/10/2018

In conclusion, we invite the United Nations to ensure
that qualitative gender perspectives are integrated
across all its activities. Albania strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts and personal commitment
to placing women at the centre of the United Nations
conflict prevention platform, and also to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations system. We
need a gender equal United Nations to achieve a gender
equal world.

conflict resolution and sustainable peacebuilding, in
August the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina
and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights launched
the creation of a federal network of mediators, with a
gender perspective. The network is made up of more
than 50 professionals from all the provinces of our
country and promotes the substantive involvement of
women in peacebuilding processes and in the handling
of crisis situations and everyday community conflicts.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Argentina.

Similarly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in
coordination with the Embassy of Canada in Buenos
Aires and the non-governmental organization Latin
American Security and Defence Network, has begun to
develop an assessment project about the status quo of the
inclusion of the gender perspective in the 10 ministries
involved in the implementation of the resolution 1325
(2000) national action plan. In that regard, it is expected
that the results of that mapping will be ready by March
2019. Those are some examples of concrete measures to
increase the participation of women in conflict prevent
and resolution processes, and we hope that they can
serve as the basis for a fruitful exchange of relevant
good practices.

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
I will deliver an abbreviated version of my
statement. The complete version will be made available
to the Secretariat.
At the outset, I should like to thank the Bolivian
presidency for taking the initiative to organize this
debate, and for the special emphasis on the issue of
women’s participation in the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Woman and
Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for their briefings.
Argentina reiterates its firm commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the continued development of the women and peace
and security agenda. Education is an essential factor
in promoting the comprehensive empowerment of
women of all ages and their effective participation in
decision-making processes at all levels, with a view to
promoting peace, security, development and the full
enjoyment of human rights. In that regard, protecting
education and guaranteeing continuous access to safe
education during conflicts is a fundamental objective
that would help to protect women and girls from the
risks of armed conflict. In that framework, in 2017
Argentina and Norway organized the second Conference
on Safe Schools to disseminate the Safe Schools
Declaration and Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we encourage all Members of the United
Nations, and especially the members of the Council, to
endorse the Declaration.
With regard to concrete actions to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), on women’s participation in
40/108

In conclusion, we reiterate once again the strong
support of Argentina for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, and the
fundamental role played by gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls in promoting
the agency and the active participation of all women
in the prevention of conflicts, the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, peacebuilding efforts and postconflict accountability.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for organizing this
important debate, as well as for the concept note that
your delegation has prepared (see S/2018/904, annex).
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their remarks.
Eighteen years have passed since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. Its adoption was a recognition of
the participation of women, whose contribution is very
significant to peacebuilding. Each year, the Council
has witnessed the relevance of resolution 1325 (2000),
which reminds us that without the safety of women and
girls, lasting peace cannot be achieved. It is precisely
through debates like the one that brings us together
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

today that we contribute added value to ensuring
the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
During our membership in the Council during the
2012-2013 biennium, Guatemala deemed it important
to discuss this issue, taking into account the fact that
violence against women in armed conflicts is a flagrant
violation of human rights that requires the appropriate
attention to prevent such abuses. During this debate,
we have broached strategies that would allow us to
diminish the tragic effects of armed conflicts on
women and girls, particularly — and sadly — murder,
systematic violations of their rights, sexual slavery and
forced pregnancies, among others.
Once again my delegation reiterates to the Council
the importance of the leadership and participation of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and peacebuilding. We believe that it is necessary
to increase women’s representation at all levels of
decision-making in such institutions as national and
regional mechanisms set up for conflict prevention and
resolution and that, above all, it is important to examine
issues related to women’s participation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
We have witnessed that gender discrimination
remains an obstacle to women, and consequently is
also an obstacle to their overall human development.
Greater participation by women has a positive impact
on addressing some of the most urgent challenges of our
time, including migration, climate change and, indeed,
conflict prevention. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to reiterate that the proper implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) requires political will on the
part of all the competent bodies of States. Owing to
the importance that my country attaches to the proper
implementation and application of the resolution,
we actively participated in the two meetings of the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network, the
first having taken place in Alicante, Spain, in 2016,
and the other in Berlin, Germany, in April 2018. The
meetings made it possible to establish a platform for
the exchange of experiences and best practices at the
international level on the global women and peace and
security agenda. We are convinced that the strategic
alliances that have been generated within the Network
are of special importance to achieving the goal of a
world with inclusive peaceful societies that advocate
for protecting and strengthening women’s rights in all
their aspects. We wish Namibia, which will host the

S/PV. 8382

next meeting of Focal Points Network, a successful and
fruitful meeting.
Finally, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. To achieve that goal, it recognizes
the need for a set of mechanisms and instruments
applicable according to the situation and circumstances.
We therefore recognize that the magnitude and nature
of the challenge of sustaining peace calls for close
strategic and operational partnerships among the United
Nations, Governments and other key stakeholders with
a view to jointly achieving sustainable peace on the
ground. Accordingly, Guatemala reiterates its position
that, within the framework of international human
rights, in particular the obligations of States signatories
to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
provides a solid basis for sustaining peace, we as an
Organization are clear that the collective work of the
United Nations system to promote human rights should
help identify root causes and prevent conflict through
the greater participation by women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): On the occasion of
the eighteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the Philippines reaffirms its commitment
to promoting the role of women in peacebuilding.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
In March 2017, the Philippines launched the second
cycle of its national action plan on women and peace
and security and, within 16 months, had achieved
significant milestones under the pillars of empowerment
and participation, protection and prevention, and
promotion and mainstreaming of women’s roles in
peace and security.
Women meaningfully participated in the peace
process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front that led
to the eventual passage of the Bangsamoro Organic Law
last July. Five members of the Bangsamoro Transition
Commission are women. Even during the negotiations,
both panels were composed of female members who
championed the women’s agenda. Among the provisions
of the Bangsamoro Organic Law is the allocation of
reserved seats for women in the Bangsamoro Parliament
and Cabinet.

18-3401441/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

The Government called on women who were
displaced by the Marawi siege to be actively involved
in capacity-building projects for community resilience.
One of the projects resulted in an action plan to ensure
that communities in transitional shelters peacefully
coexist and are protected from any threat or harm. The
action plan will be implemented by women leaders
themselves. The so-called Hijab troopers, an all-female
team within the armed forces and the police, continue
to fight the cultural and psychological aspects of the
battle in Marawi. They assist in the implementation
of programmes that help internally displaced persons
recover from the traumatizing experience of battle.
Their focus is on social healing and reconciliation as
they seek to curb the tide of violent extremism. To
ensure women’s enjoyment of their human rights and
prevent violations of those rights in armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations, the Bangsamoro Organic
Law stresses the right of women to be protected from
exploitation, abuse and discrimination, as embodied
in the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women.
On the implementation of the gender-specific
recommendations of the Transitional Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, the Philippines is the
first country in the world to formulate and implement
a regional action plan on women and peace and
security. The plan is part of the Government’s efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) locally. It is now in
its second year of implementation.
Consistent with our goal to promote and
mainstream gender perspectives in all aspects of
conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding, the
Government established agency strategic action plans
to operationalize the commitments made under the
national action plan on women and peace and security.
The plans constitute the translation of the action points
of the national action plans into concrete programmes,
activities and projects.
Continued capacity-building for local Government
units, Government agencies and civil society is also
being undertaken to ensure that the women and peace
and security agenda is mainstreamed in their gender
and development plans and budgets for sustainability.
As we move the process forward, the Philippines
will continue to support the goal of realizing the
transformational potential of women’s equality and
their meaningful economic and political participation
for peace and development.
42/108

25/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me also
begin by commending your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene today’s open debate on the critical issue
of women and peace and security and by thanking the
briefers for their informative presentations.
While aligning myself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Turkey on behalf of the MIKTA group
of countries — namely, Mexico, Indonesia, South
Korea, Turkey and Australia — I would like to make
some brief comments on this important topic in my
national capacity.
Before I do so, allow me to congratulate this year’s
Nobel Peace laureates, Ms. Nadia Murad and Mr. Denis
Mukwege, for their great contributions in fighting
wartime sexual violence. I see their receiving this
prize as the global community’s solemn declaration of
solidarity with the victims of wartime sexual violence.
It holds all the more meaning for my country, which
still endeavours to support and honour the so-called
comfort women victimized during the Second World
War and turn their painful experience into lessons
of history.
Against that historical backdrop, the Republic of
Korea has the special moral obligation and political will
to make further contributions in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda. As part of our efforts in
that regard, my Government recently launched a new
initiative called “Action with Women and Peace”. The
initiative involves increased funding and a policy focus
directed towards protecting women and girls during
and after armed conflicts and empowering them in
post-conflict recovery and peacebúilding processes.
Nearly two decades of the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda has yielded
considerable progress. However, there remains a
significant gap between our goals and the reality
on the ground. Women are still among the most
vulnerable groups in conflicts, and much needs to
be done in terms of women’s political and economic
empowerment. Bearing that in mind, I would like to
highlight the following three points as we strive to
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

First, we must redouble our efforts to promote
women’s leadership and participation in all aspects of
peace and security.
As the Secretary-General’s report on women and
peace and security (S/2018/900) rightly points out,
women too often remain underrepresented in our
efforts towards conflict resolution. From 1990 through
2017, women constituted only 2 per cent of mediators
and 8 per cent of negotiators.
It is in this context that I commend the SecretaryGeneral’s system-wide strategy for gender parity,
which led to the achievement of gender parity in the
United Nations Senior Management Group and among
Resident Coordinators. I encourage the United Nations
to continue to build upon this remarkable achievement.
In recent years, my Government has put a great
deal of emphasis on increasing women’s participation
in the peace and security arena. We have now
exceeded the 15 per cent goal we set for female staff
officers and military observers in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The ratio of women among Cabinet members has
also reached 27.8 per cent, the highest in our history.
In the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is currently
led by the first-ever female Minister, 60.9 per cent of
all 650 diplomats newly recruited over the past 10 years
have been women, and their retention rate stands at
94.5 per cent. It is indeed a remarkable achievement,
but my Government’s efforts to achieve gender parity
will not stop here. Elevating women’s participation in
all decision-making processes will continue to be a key
element of our second national action plan.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the role and
visibility of civil society in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. In his report on that agenda,
the Secretary-General voiced concerns about shrinking
space and funding for civil-society organizations,
although we can benefit immensely from their expertise
and grass-roots networks.
In the case of the Republic of Korea, civil society’s
active participation in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda has been at the heart of our national
action plan from the very beginning, and we will
monitor its implementation together with civil expert
groups. As part of our new initiative entitled “Action
with Women and Peace,” we will host an international
conference under the tentative title of “Seoul Forum for

S/PV. 8382

Women and Peace” next year. We hope that it will serve
as a valuable forum for shedding light on best practices
and channelling the expertise and experience of civil
society into concrete national policies.
Thirdly, more resources and attention should
be directed towards the empowerment of local
communities. A sustainable and long-term solution to
sexual violence in conflict as well as the promotion
of women’s representation is possible only when
local community leaders become advocates for
women’s rights and support the mainstreaming of
gender perspective into post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding processes.
It is for this reason that my Government has
partnered with UNICEF and the United Nations
Population Fund and launched new development
cooperation projects aimed at increasing awareness
among and the empowerment of local communities,
providing safe spaces and legal support. Our new women
and peace and security project, through the African
Union Peace Fund, will also help local communities
be better prepared to increase women’s participation in
various peace processes.
With the twentieth anniversary of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) around the corner, we should
no longer be satisfied with celebrating exceptions. We
should continue to work to further advance the women
and peace and security agenda until its principles
become norms rather than goals or best practices.
The Republic of Korea will remain firmly committed
to working closely with the international community
to protect and empower women so that the world will
become a better place to live in peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I wish to thank Bolivia for providing us the
opportunity to reflect on this very, very important topic.
Hungary has been working proudly and happily with
UN-Women, and I would like to thank in particular its
Executive Director, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing this morning.
I am dedicating my speech today to the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador Ms. Nadia Murad,
whom we in the United Nations know so well. She

18-3401443/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

25/10/2018

is this year’s Nobel Peace Prize laureate. I wish to
congratulate her for her commitment, courage and
perseverance in her tireless efforts to end conflictrelated sexual violence. Nadia is a shining example of
how women can become powerful agents for peace,
inspiring us all, and of how a woman can work towards
conflict prevention and the protection and participation
of women and girls in the context of conflict resolution,
recovery and peacebuilding.

prerequisite for their participation in all aspects of life.
We should therefore step up our action to, inter alia,
ensure women and girls’ right to safe, high-quality and
affordable education, adequate and affordable health
care, equal recognition before the law, and to eliminate
violence and harmful practices against women. Hungary
provided a financial contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund to End Violence against Women and girls to
achieve those aims.

Hungary is a committed member of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We reaffirm
the importance of the protection and promotion of
gender equality and the human rights and empowerment
of all women and girls, and we strongly support
their full inclusion and their active, meaningful and
institutionalized participation at all stages and levels
of peace processes, in the implementation of peace
agreements and in wider decision-making structures.

The elements of the women and peace and security
agenda are interrelated and interconnected. Therefore,
to promote its effective implementation, we must
ensure a holistic approach at the local, regional and
global levels, using all tools available within the United
Nations system, in close and comprehensive cooperation
among all relevant actors and Governments.

The United Nations should be leading by example,
and here we commend the Secretary-General for
achieving gender parity in senior positions at the
United Nations.
Mainstreaming a gender perspective and protecting
the rights of women and girls in peace and security
initiatives, including the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, is also a key aspect of the women
and peace and security agenda. Empowering women
and girls who are survivors of conflict and violence
is vital. We believe in holistic, survivor-focused
and community-led initiatives, including youth-led
processes, because they are the main contributors
to enhancing access to justice, reconciliation and
lasting peace. We support the peace initiatives of local
women and hope to see the important role of civil
society and women-led organizations in sustainable
peace recognized.
Moreover, women’s increased participation in
peacekeeping missions and gender-sensitive strategies
for the protection of civilians and humanitarian
assistance are key in providing the best assistance
possible for women and girls affected by conflict.
Hungary is seeking to continually increase the number
of deployed female military experts and police officers
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The protection of the rights of women and girls and
their economic empowerment is a powerful means for
the prevention of, and their protection in, conflict and a
44/108

History has shown that women’s participation is
crucial to achieving sustainable peace, and we reaffirm
our commitment and call for reinforced cooperation in
this regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate on women and peace and
security. I also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under-Secretary-General, Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, for her statement. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts to advance
the women and peace and security agenda and women’s
empowerment at all levels.
We stress the importance of the full and genuine
participation of women in peace and security efforts.
We also stress the importance of the provision of
needed financing on a regular basis to ensure the
implementation the agenda and the empowerment of
women at all levels.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan believes
that women’s role in achieving peace and security is
important. In response to resolution 1325 (2000), we
have developed a Jordanian action plan in order to
activate that resolution for the period 2018-2021. The
plan was launched in March by the Jordanian National
Commission for Women, which is officially responsible
for implementing it, with broad participation of civil
society stakeholders. The national plan is in line with
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Jordan’s commitments under relevant regional and
international treaties and conventions, in particular
those concerning the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, as well as in the post-conflict
period, and carrying out relief and humanitarian
work, in addition to ensuring immunization against
extremist thought.
Jordan attaches particular importance to women’s
empowerment at all levels because of our conviction that
women are essential to establishing sustainable peace.
Our national plan also meets the strategic objectives
with regard to armed conflict included in 1995 Beijing
Declaration, including women’s increased participation
in conflict resolution and decision-making. The plan
also takes into consideration our commitment to
achieving the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), in particular SDG 5, on achieving gender
equality and empowering women and girls, and SDG
16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies to
achieve sustainable development, providing access to
justice for all and building effective and accountable
institutions in that regard. The Jordanian national plan
establishes the following four strategic objectives for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
First, women’s active participation must be
strengthened in the security and military sectors and
in peacekeeping so asto maintain gender equality and
promote women’s participation in most field units up
to 5 per cent by 2020. We are also working to involve
women from the general security sector in various
peacekeeping missions. Currently, we are also working
to increase the participation of military women in
military observation missions and among staff officers
in order to reach 15 per cent by the end of this year. That
is consistent with the Secretary-General’s initiative on
peacekeeping action. We have also deployed around
2,573 women police agents and officers to work in
terrorism and extremism prevention programmes.
Secondly, we aim to achieve women’s active
participation in addressing terrorism and violence, as
well as in peacebuilding and peacemaking, through
awareness-raising and training initiatives to renounce
extremism and establish ways to prevent it while
activating resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace
and security.
Thirdly, we intend to provide humanitarian,
psychological, social, legal, medical, educational and
rehabilitating services, as well as to facilitate access

S/PV. 8382

to those services for Jordanian women and girls, in
addition to women refugees and vulnerable segments of
the society that are more exposed to violence and have
a genuine need for protection from sexual and physical
violence. That is consistent with Jordan’s intervention
plan to address the Syrian refugee crisis. The plan
also takes into account the challenges resulting from
that crisis.
Fourthly, we want to promote a social culture that
supports gender equality and highlights the important
role of women and young women in creating a culture
of peace. We want to prepare those women to become
ambassadors of peace in their communities. At the
moment, we are preparing a project to ensure that
Jordanian women can participate in mediation and
peace negotiation. In that connection, we underscore
the importance of transforming the role of the
United Nations from peacekeeping to prevention and
addressing the root causes of conflicts. Women play an
important role in the prevention of conflicts.
As a co-Chair of the Group of Friends on
Countering and Preventing Violent Extremism, Jordan
attaches particular attention to protecting women and
girls from violent extremism. We take into account
the sensitive and pivotal role that women can play in
protecting societies from extremism and promoting
culture of peace.
Arab women have not been spared the conflicts
that have shaken our region for years, or their
consequences. Women and girls have suffered the most
from displacement, killing and sexual violence. It is
important that we pay the necessary attention to this issue
so that women and girls become empowered and able to
resist. We have to provide rehabilitation programmes
so that women refugees and displaced women can
be productive members of society and continue their
education during the period of displacement and after
they return to their countries.
In that regard, Palestinian women are facing
difficulties in the occupied Palestinian territories,
and we commend their resilience and endurance.
Palestinian women are victims of punitive Israeli
policies, including restrictions on their movement and
arbitrary detentions. Even girls under the age of 18 have
been arrested. We must also underscore the violations
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces against the
women of Jerusalem as part of Israel’s policy to change
the identity of the historic holy city.

18-3401445/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I wish to stress the importance of
strongly mobilizing international efforts to counter
the root causes of conflicts, involve women in peace
and security efforts, and promote the participation
of women while strengthening their involvement in
civil society. Experience demonstrates that genuine
participation of women has a positive impact on the
success and sustainability of security and peace plans.
Women play a major and impressive role in
building peace. It is impossible to uphold peace in
societies without the serious and true participation of
women. Nonetheless, it is impossible to achieve the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and sustainable peace without empowering women and
girls, achieving gender equality and eliminating all
forms of discrimination. Jordan will continue to work
at the national, regional and international levels to
support without delay the women, peace and security
agenda in order to ensure a better future for women
and girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I have the honour to
address the security Council on behalf of Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia.
Allow me to start by commending the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October for convening this open debate. We thank the
briefers for their remarks and steadfast commitment to
this important issue.
Our delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
The empowerment of women and their inclusive
engagement, as well as gender equality, are a necessary
foundation for a peaceful and sustainable society. We
commend the Secretary-General for his dedication to
further advancing the women and peace and security
agenda. Bearing in mind the broad scope and crosscutting nature of this agenda, allow me to focus on
priority aspects for the Baltic countries.
The Baltic countries emphasize the need for the
full and effective participation of women at all stages
and all levels of conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as peacebuilding. It is of the utmost importance
to have a strong focus on prevention. We stand fully
behind the recommendation stressed by the SecretaryGeneral that the early warning signs of human rights
46/108

25/10/2018

violations — unfortunately, very often towards women
and girls — must be given due consideration when
monitoring conflict situations. If we fail to act early, the
human political and economic costs can be devastating.
Therefore, more alerts, as well as a coordinated and
comprehensive approach by Member States and the
United Nations system, are essential.
Sexual and gender-based violence is a principal
obstacle to inclusive and durable peace. Moreover,
considering the link between the international arms
trade and gender-based violence, it is crucial to take
meaningful steps, including effective investigation and
prosecution, in order to terminate impunity.
We would like to emphasize the importance of
ensuring women’s full and effective participation
and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
decision-making and in political, economic and public
life, as universally recognized in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and welcomed in Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015).
Sustainable peace is not possible without the
meaningful participation of women in all aspects
of peace and security, not only as beneficiaries of
the process but as leaders, partners and agents of
change. Women’s participation in peace processes
leads to a 35 per cent increase in an agreement’s
likelihood of lasting at least 15 years, and therefore
it is even more important to address the root causes
of women’s low participation in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. We also need to pay particular
attention to the needs of women and girls in postconflict situations, including physical security, health
services and reproductive and mental health, as well
as to ensure their livelihoods and their participation in
decision-making and post-conflict planning.
Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
remain the most visible representatives of the
United Nations, directly working with communities
each day. Our countries — Latvia, Lithuania and
Estonia — support the Secretary-General’s efforts in
the reform process and continuation of the work of
gender advisers and experts, both at Headquarters and,
more important, in the field.
We also commend the work of the Security Council
in mainstreaming gender aspects in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We continue to
contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
while striving to ensure gender parity on peacekeeping
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8382

troops by encouraging female military and police
personnel to apply. Training is crucial to raising
awareness and improving the implementation of gender
aspects in peace operations. Before their deployment,
Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian peacekeepers
undertake high-quality training on human rights and
gender-related issues, including the eradication of
sexual exploitation and abuse and preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence.

The United Arab Emirates also adds its voice to
those congratulating Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis
Mukwege on being awarded the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize.
They have tirelessly dedicated themselves to bringing a
spotlight to the plight of survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence. Their work has tangibly improved
the lives of those affected. It is a strong signal of how
individual voices can — and must — put women and
peace and security at the heart of the global agenda.

While recognizing that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the enjoyment of
all human rights by all persons within their territory,
as provided for by international law, the scale and
complexity of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda requires coherent and
comprehensive efforts. In that respect, the pivotal role of
civil society, including women’s organizations, should
be fully recognized. We are pleased that women civil
society representatives now regularly brief the Security
Council during country-specific meetings. That useful
practice should be continued — the more briefings we
have on potential conflict zones, the more effective we
can be in our actions to prevent the outbreak of conflict.

Ultimately, Member States hold the primary
responsibility for advancing the women and peace
and security agenda; the burden of action is on us.
As the Executive Director’s briefing showed, we are
lagging woefully behind in our targets. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/900), as she stated, should
sound a loud alarm bell on systemic failures to bring
women into peacekeeping. In fact, the implementation
of this agenda on the ground remains a challenge due
to, as we know, a confluence of threats ranging from
the rise in terrorism and extremism to the targeting of
women and girls in conflict zones and the protracted
nature of the crises. However, the disappointingly low
number of women in peacebuilding — where women
make up only 2 per cent of mediators, 5 per cent of
witnesses and signatories and 8 percent of negotiators
in formal peace processes — is not acceptable. We must
all commit to improving those numbers — in fact, our
financial contributions should go hand in hand with a
demand that women’s participation in peace processes
reach the 50 per cent mark.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the time
is right to swiftly advance the women and peace and
security agenda in the remaining months leading up
to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security. We join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his strong
message on the critical importance of realizing the
full implementation of this agenda. We also thank
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her
frank briefing and offer our continued support to UNWomen for its work in advancing this agenda. Our
thanks also go to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for her
important presentation.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirates endorses
the Group’s joint statement to be delivered by the
representative of Canada.

The United Arab Emirates recognizes that
financing is critical for the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda in order to
move words into action. That is why we have recently
launched a “100 per cent women” policy,which aims
to ensure that, by 2021, 100 per cent of bilateral and
multilateral foreign assistance will target or integrate
gender equality and women’s empowerment as key
components of our policy and programming. We hope
that model is replicated and more widely adopted,
because research continues to demonstrate the direct
relationship between gender equality and the prevention
of conflict. We believe that such a policy is a real and
tangible way to achieve that.
The United Arab Emirates, like others, also
considers its partnership with UN-Women as a key
part of the global strategy to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. The 2018 contribution of
the United Arab Emirates to UN-Women of $5 million

18-3401447/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

is unearmarked, but we have urged UN-Women to
use part of those funds to ensure the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda around
the world. We urge others to join us in supporting UNWomen with both words and financial action.
Responding to the Secretary-General’s call to
increase the number of women in peacekeeping, the
United Arab Emirates General Women’s Union, our
Ministry of Defence and UN-Women will organize
a military and peacekeeping training for Arab
women — the first of its kind in our region and certainly
a step in the right direction.
The United Arab Emirates would like to make
three recommendations as we work in partnership with
Member States, the United Nations and the international
community to drive global progress on this agenda.
First, to state the obvious, financing is essential.
The United Arab Emirates endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for all the relevant United
Nations operational entities to track targeted and
mainstreamed budgetary allocations and expenditures
related to women and peace and security. That data
will serve to indicate the progress achieved towards
reaching or exceeding the minimum 15 per cent target
for programmes that further gender equality and
women’s empowerment in peacebuilding contexts. We
understand that financial support is required if we are
to truly promote women’s participation in peace and
security, which is why we are directing our funding
that way.
Secondly, we reiterate the calls of the SecretaryGeneral to improve gender parity in peace operations,
not just for the sake of proclaiming gender parity but as
an operational imperative.
Finally, it is critical that we advance women’s
meaningful participation in peace processes around the
world and that we continue to document our progress.
We must not neglect informal peace processes in that
agenda — we know that, since the end of the Cold
War, more than half of informal peace processes have
involved concerted efforts by women’s groups to
forge peace. Track 1 and track 2 peace processes must
therefore both be supported in that endeavour.
Women’s meaningful participation is at the heart
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. The United Arab Emirates will
48/108

25/10/2018

continue to promote women’s participation as a key
principle of our global peace and security efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Singer (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank the Plurinational State
of Bolivia and you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security. Our thanks also go to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for
their briefings and recommendations. We extend our
continued support to UN-Women in its role to advance
the women and peace and security agenda. We also
thank the civil society representative for enriching this
debate by sharing her experience.
Decisions on issues such as the distribution of
power, electoral systems, the management of natural
resources and the restitution of land and property
have a profound impact on the lives of women as well
as on prospects for lasting peace. They can influence
women’s economic and physical security and their
political participation, as well as how war crimes
against women are prosecuted.
Gender inequality, like poverty, is an injustice that
exacerbates conflict and undermines peace. Gender
equality and the full participation of women, as well
as their political, social and economic empowerment,
play a fundamental role in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, the
prevention of sexual violence and the protection of
women and children.
The women and peace and security agenda has
made significant regulatory gains since its inception in
2000. However, despite the adoption of nine resolutions
and the progress made, we continue to have serious
problems with their implementation. Women and girls
are not only victims of conflicts; they are also actors
and agents of change. The participation of women at
all levels of peace processes is therefore vital. Their
contribution to the prevention and reversal of conflicts,
as well as to the maintenance of sustainable and lasting
peace, is essential. We recall that when we have had
more women in international criminal tribunals, there
was a significant increase in indictments where sexual
violence was considered a war crime.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

As recent evidence of the impact of women’s
participation in mediation and peace processes,
we are proud to cite the signing in 2016 of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo, ending more than 50 years of
conflict and representing the first agreement of its
kind to include gender as a central theme. According
to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/900), in July
45.5 per cent of the commissioners on United Nationssupported truth commissions in Colombia were women.
That achievement is also due to the vast number of
women and women’s organizations that were involved
in the process. The Colombian peace agreement should
be seen as a benchmark and an inspiration for other
peace processes.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is not merely about having
more women at the decision-making table, but about
integrating their perspectives and that of women’s
organizations in mediation processes, thereby ensuring
women’s full and effective participation and the
credibility and sustainability of the peace processes
themselves. We must therefore redouble our efforts
to address existing gaps and structural barriers to
women’s participation and leadership.
We also recognize — and as experience on the
ground indicates — the importance of cooperating with
and supporting civil society and human rights defenders
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
of involving them in the work of the Security Council.
However, the threats, violence and killings to which
women in civil society and human rights defenders are
exposed compel us to urgently establish and strengthen
mechanisms for their protection.
We welcome the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and pledge to participate
actively in its work to facilitate a more systematic
approach to the Council agenda, including through
resolutions, reports and field visits. It is essential to
implement the Security Council’s normative framework
on women and peace and security. The Council should
include that agenda and gender analysis in its responses
to humanitarian crises, and that it ensure that more
female military personnel are deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, where their presence
empowers other women and makes them feel more
identified with the operations.

S/PV. 8382

In that connection, we congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on achieving, for the first time in history,
gender parity among Secretariat leadership positions,
including through the appointment of a woman
as Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the recent appointments of women as
Special Representatives to the assistance missions in
Somalia and Mali.
As a sign of the Dominican Republic’s commitment
to zero tolerance on sexual abuse and exploitation,
President Danilo Medina signed the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse and is part of the Secretary-General’s Circle of
Leadership on that issue.
We celebrate the fact that the fight against sexual
violence has gained recognition through the award of
the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize to activist Nadia Murad
and Congolese physician Denis Mukwege. It is not only
a recognition of their courageous work in defence of
the victims of conflict-related sexual violence, but it is
also a beacon of hope in a world where sexual violence
is used as a weapon of war to silence, humiliate and
terrorize women, girls and their communities.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic will occupy
a position as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council starting in January 2019. As such, we would like
to reaffirm our commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda, and pledge that we will continue
to give due attention and priority to that agenda in order
to ensure its full and effective implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish):At the outset, I wish to congratulate Bolivia
on having organized this open debate and to thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UNWomen and civil society representative Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their briefings.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Today’s debate focuses on a very sound concept.
The empowerment of women and girls and gender
equality are fundamental to conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/900) highlights
that we continue to witness flagrant disrespect for

18-3401449/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

25/10/2018

international human rights law and humanitarian law
in various conflicts, particularly with regard to grave
violations of women’s human rights. Unfortunately,
those grave violations are not spontaneous, but are an
extension of other violence perpetrated more covertly
within societies. That violence is rooted in inequality,
widespread discrimination against women and the
denial of their fundamental rights, which is why States
must take action to address those underlying deeply
rooted structural causes in many societies.

the average deployment, but we continue to make
great efforts to further increase that level of female
participation. The National Peace Operations Training
Institute of Uruguay also provides mandatory training
to the personnel that will be deployed on topics such as
preventing and responding to violence against women.
At the same time, the Uruguayan Government carries
out ongoing work in the implementation of a zerotolerance policy in cases of abuse, exploitation or other
acts that violate the code of conduct.

By protecting their rights, women will be able to
reduce their vulnerability and participate in political
and economic life, thereby fully contributing to the
growth of their communities. That is key not only for
national development, but also for the maintenance of
sustainable peace. In that connection, the Uruguayan
Government approved a national strategy for gender
equality by 2030. It was developed in conjunction with
civil society to address inequality and discrimination
from a human rights perspective. The strategy includes
political and institutional guidelines and establishes a
road map to influence public policies and guide State
action on gender equality.

In parallel to the efforts made at the domestic
level, experience shows that, in order to increase the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, it is essential
to cooperate with other troop-contributing countries,
Member States and the Organization as a whole.
Inspired by that firm conviction, my country was one
of the first to support the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which includes a collective
commitment to implementing the agenda on women
and peace and security, guaranteeing in equal footing
the full participation of women at all stages of the peace
process and increasing the number of uniformed and
civilian women in peacekeeping operations. Likewise,
the President of Uruguay, Mr. Tabaré Vázquez, is a
member of the Circle of Leadership to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse, with a commitment to ending
impunity and restoring the dignity of the victims.

Education plays a fundamental role in the political
and social empowerment of women. All States must
guarantee that right to women and girls. Education
enables them to overcome discrimination, allows them
to better understand their rights, gives them greater
confidence and freedom to make decisions that affect
their lives and empowers them to become actors and
protagonists of peace.
According to UNESCO, more than 60 million
girls around the world do not have access to education,
while two thirds of illiterate people around the world
are women. Without an education, women and girls are
unlikely to escape the cycle of poverty and violence.
Uruguay has adhered to the Safe Schools Declaration,
launched at the initiative of Argentina and Norway,
and expresses its dismay at the increasing number of
attacks on schools and universities, many of which
have deliberately targeted women and girls as victims.
We take this opportunity to encourage other States to
endorse the Declaration.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the main
instruments available to the Organization; it is now
irrefutable that the presence of women in those
contingents increases their effectiveness. Uruguay
provides a proportion of women that is higher than
50/108

Uruguay has also joined the Elsie Initiative on
Women in Peace Operations, launched by Canada, to
ensure an increase in the number of women deployed
in peacekeeping operations. I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the Council that, next December,
my Government will be holding a preparatory meeting
with the United Kingdom for the 2019 United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference. We
will devote attention to the training of Blue Helmets
on issues related to women and peace and security and
specific training for women peacekeepers.
Another mechanism that I want to highlight is
the Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network, established at the behest of Spain, which
Uruguay will have the honour to co-chair with Canada
in the year 2020. The Network has the potential
to generate political momentum and implement
resolutions on women’s aid and protection, and it is
already demonstrating its usefulness with regard to
gender cooperation and the exchange of experiences
and good practices. Finally, I would like to express my
gratitude for the invaluable and constant contribution
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

of civil society in the defence of women’s rights and
call for protection and an end to the growing threats
and persecution suffered by human rights defenders
and the defenders of women’s rights.
Allow me to conclude by recalling that, at the time
that the Charter of the United Nations was being drafted
at the San Francisco Conference, Uruguay, together
with a few other countries of the global South that had
women in their delegations, requested that an explicit
reference to women’s rights be included in the Charter.
Thanks to that effort, and despite the reluctance of the
vast majority of the participating States, we managed
to include the only two provisions on gender in the
Charter. The equality of the rights of men and women
is enshrined in the Preamble and it was established in
Article 8 that,
“The United Nations shall place no restrictions
on the eligibility of men and women to participate
in any capacity and under conditions of equality in
its principal and subsidiary organs.”
Seventy-three years have passed since then. History
has shown that, without the participation of women and
respect for equality and their fundamental rights, it will
not be possible to achieve peace in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Bolivia for convening this important open debate
to review a topic that undoubtedly has a definitive
impact on the peace and security agenda. Eighteen
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is clear that the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and in ensuring sustaining
peace, in line with other efforts carried out by the United
Nations for gender equality and the empowerment of
women, is a sine qua non to fulfil the objectives of the
United Nations.
Mexico has been an active promoter of that
agenda, which marked a milestone in the history of the
international community, in establishing, for the first
time, a comprehensive gender-based approach and the
active role of women at all stages of peace processes.
Although the Security Council gave decisive impetus
to that agenda and vision, which was supported by
Member States, society and the Secretariat, much
remains to be done for its effective, coherent and crosscutting implementation.

S/PV. 8382

In terms of women’s equity and participation, for
instance, women still represent only 4 per cent of the
military personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations
and 9 per cent of the police personnel. Only 2 per cent of
mediators are women, 8 per cent of the participants in
negotiations are women and 5 per cent of the witnesses
or signatories of peace processes have been female.
Those numbers indicate the great challenges facing the
international community in achieving gender equality
in this area.
That is why we commend the actions of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to implement the gender
parity strategy throughout the entire system. We call
on Member States — particularly those that contribute
personnel to peacekeeping operations — to increase
activities to that end. Mexico has made great efforts
since the resumption in 2015 of its participation as a
police- and troop-contributing country to peacekeeping
operations, while taking advantage of its outstanding
female staff in international activities. As of today,
Mexico has deployed a total of eight women belonging
to its armed forces in the peace missions in Colombia,
Western Sahara and Mali. Although we have managed to
comply with the 15 per cent of female personnel required
by the United Nations of contributing countries, Mexico
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to expand the
participation of female personnel. As part of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network, we
recognize the importance of that interregional forum
in sharing experiences and good practices, in order to
advance the implementation of this agenda and identify
opportunities and shortcomings.
The women and peace and security agenda and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are faces of
the same coin. The former cannot be understood without
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, which incorporate fundamental elements to
improve the social situation of women. For example,
to address the root causes of conflicts and sustain
peace is to understand that women must have economic
autonomy and the full enjoyment of their human
rights. That includes receiving sufficient economic
resources and employment opportunities, eradicating
the feminization of poverty and guaranteeing a balance
between work and personal life and the freedom to
participate in decision-making within the communities
in which women live and coexist, as well as other
areas. States must do much more in order for our public
policies to grant those circumstances to women.

18-3401451/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

The effective participation of women in all sectors
of public life is fundamental. In plural, diverse and
democratic societies, such as that of Mexico, the
involvement of civil society organizations in matters of
general interest allows for the defence of human rights
and the improvement of Government policies, as well
as ensuring accountability. Ensuring that organizations
that safeguard women’s rights participate in public
institutions and processes, including in dialogue in
peace processes, not only ensures the rights of women
and girls, but also contributes to the goal of having a
more just and peaceful society.
Without political participation, women will never
achieve their considerable potential. Gender relations
are often marked by an unequal distribution and
exercise of power. For Mexico, reversing decades of
shortcomings in terms of women’s participation has
been a priority objective. The results are clear: during
the current legislative period, in Mexico approximately
48.8 per cent of the Chamber of Deputies will be made
up of women. For its part, 49.22 per cent of the Senate
of the Republic will be made up of women, going from
ninth to fourth place in the world in that area.
We reaffirm our support for the Council continuing
to strengthen the mandates of peace operations with
provisions related to the gender perspective, including
gender advisers, as well as to foster gender awareness
in the analysis and review of conflicts on its agenda.
We also reaffirm the importance of promoting and
integrating the participation of young women and
adolescents in peace processes, whereby we recognize
the increasingly close link of the agenda item that we are
discussing today with its counterpart for young people.
We must recall once and for all that a fair, just,
calm, safe and peaceful world cannot exist without
the inclusion of half of the world’s population in
decision-making processes. It is the responsibility of
the United Nations to ensure that the women and peace
and security agenda is fully implemented with a sense
of urgency.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me begin by
thanking Bolivia for convening this open debate
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
52/108

25/10/2018

Austria aligns itself with the statements to be
made shortly on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. In our
national capacity, I would therefore like to highlight just
a few additional points. In the interests of time, I will
deliver a shortened version of our statement. The full
statement will be uploaded on the PaperSmart portal.
As Austrian Foreign Minister Karin Kneissl stated
in her speech to the General Assembly during its
general debate at its seventy-third session (see A/73/
PV.14), gender equality and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda are about more
than legal provisions. It is about the daily practice in our
countries and societies. And we need to carry our work
further. Eighteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), that is as urgent as ever. In that context, I
would like to highlight three important points:
First, in our view, local grassroots organizations
play a key role in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda. Austria has therefore pledged €1 million
to support the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
The Fund provides an opportunity to build partnerships
among the United Nations, Member States and civil
society to support women’s organizations in building
peace and in providing humanitarian responses. We are
convinced that, through our financial support, we will
be able to assist in boosting the activities of grass-roots
organizations on the ground. We hope that others will
join us in supporting that important instrument.
Secondly, Austria is convinced that the absence
of violence is a prerequisite for peaceful societies. In
the context of fighting gender-based violence, Austria
has scaled up its engagement against female genital
mutilation and in 2018 has earmarked more than
€1 million to help victims of such mutilation.
Thirdly, Austria acknowledges the crucial
interlinkage between human rights and conflict
prevention. We therefore call on the Council to
recognize the importance of the work of Women
Human Rights Defenders for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Within
that context, Austria supported Amnesty International
in organizing a discussion on the theme “Defending
Women — Defending Rights: Women Human Rights
Defenders’ Perspectives and Challenges” on the
margins of the informal European Union Foreign
Ministers’ meeting in Vienna on 28 August.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Finally, let me conclude by stressing that Austria is
deeply committed to the women and peace and security
agenda and its implementation, continues to promote
gender equality and women’s political and economic
empowerment and stands up for the fight against
gender-based violence.
In the light of the upcoming twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), Austria acknowledges that
there is still much to do to ensure the full participation
of women in all phases of conflicts, including in
particular in their prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking Bolivia for having
proposed this year’s open debate on women and peace
and security in the broader context of political and
economic empowerment. The link between the women
and peace and security agenda and sustaining peace
has made both of them stronger and more effective. We
also welcome the fact that parallel discussions continue
at the regional level. That was the case last week in
the context of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, where the discussions focused on the crucial
role women, together with men, can play in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding at the grass-roots level.
Allow me also to underline that enabling women
to participate effectively in peacebuilding efforts
and preventing sexual violence against women, but
also against men, are core objectives of Switzerland’s
engagement and an essential part of our recently
adopted fourth national action plan on women and peace
and security. Both those objectives are closely linked to
the successful political and economic empowerment of
women. Today I would like to focus on three aspects.
First, women, like men, must be involved in the
political process from the beginning and at all levels.
With Benin, we work on a project to promote women’s
participation in decision-making at the local level.
Actions undertaken in that regard include mentoring
potential female candidates for local elections and
promoting the political leadership of women while
raising awareness among men, including in particular
husbands, and advocacy within political parties for a
better positioning of women on electoral lists.
In Bangladesh, Switzerland supported a network
of elected women representatives in the national

S/PV. 8382

Parliament and local Government councils, both by
setting up a network of mentors and advocating among
male elected representatives for structural change.
Secondly, women’s economic empowerment
is a precondition for their participation in political
processes.
The
experiences
of
Switzerland’s
development cooperation show that prioritizing women’s
economic empowerment contributes effectively to
conflict prevention. For example, in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Switzerland supported
communities and women to secure land rights through
a certification system. In addition to promoting the
economic empowerment of the people concerned, that
approach has been decisive in the peaceful mediation
of land disputes. In the Great Lakes region, Switzerland
has also worked to improve the economic prospects of
victims of sexual and gender-based violence. Self-help,
savings and credit groups have been found to play a vital
role in improving the economic situation of victims.
The link between women’s economic empowerment
and their participation in peace processes is a
significant element of Switzerland’s fourth national
action plan on women and peace and security. We
look forward to working closely with civil society
organizations with a strong global network and relevant
experience and hope to build on the best strategies for
economic empowerment as an enabler of participation
in peace processes.
My third, and final, point relates to the engagement
and empowerment of men and boys in the context of
gender parity. By focusing exclusively on women, we
tend to forget the role of men in political and economic
empowerment. Highlighting the privileges and
vulnerabilities of men may be a game-changer. Thanks
to the work of many champions of gender equality and
the commitment of the Secretary-General to the cause,
we are on the right track.
Echoing the appeal launched by the Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom, we wish
to emphasize the need for holistic action to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. We again thank
Bolivia for broadening the approach to that agenda and
we are determined to build on the results of today’s
open debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.

18-3401453/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to congratulate Bolivia on having convened this
important open debate.
Italy aligns itself with the statements to be made
by the observer of the European Union and the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Women, Peace and Security.
Conflict prevention begins in times of peace and
must start with gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls. There is indeed strong evidence that
women’s empowerment and gender equality lead to more
peaceful and stable outcomes. By contrast, the larger
the gender gap and the marginalization, exclusion and
lost opportunities of women, the more likely a country
is to be involved in inter- and intra-State conflict and
to use violence as a first response in a conflict setting.
Here I would like to present some lines of action for an
enhanced commitment of the international community
as a whole.
First, I will address setting the standard. We
commend the fact that since the launch of the gender
parity strategy, many United Nations entities have
made parity commitments and now include gender
parity in their performance evaluation processes. More
countries are also joining the Circle of Leadership on
the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, launched by
the Secretary-General last year, to implement a zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, and
other stakeholders that are working with the United
Nations now feel compelled to follow that path.
In that regard, Italy has made gender equality a
central commitment of its foreign policy. Last year,
we held the first-ever ministerial meeting of the Group
of Seven entirely dedicated to gender. In 2018, within
the framework of our Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) chairmanship, we are
mainstreaming a gender perspective in all initiatives,
and the implementation of the OSCE Action Plan
for the Promotion of Gender Equality is high on our
agenda. Italy is part of the Circle of Leadership of the
Secretary-General, has signed its voluntary compact,
and is honoured to be the top donor to the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse perpetrated by United Nations personnel.
Secondly, we must ensure the meaningful
participation of women across the peace cycle.
Numbers show that we are still very far from reaching
54/108

25/10/2018

that objective. As the Secretary-General said this
morning, between 1990 and 2017 women comprised
only 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators
and 5 per cent of witnesses and signatories of peace
agreements. In order to facilitate the appointment of
women mediators and special envoys at the local and
international levels, Italy launched the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network. The purpose of the
Network is twofold — prevention and mediation on the
one hand, and capacity-building on the other.
In the Mediterranean region, where migration issues
are compounded by human trafficking, transnational
organized crime, rising violent extremism and refugee
and humanitarian emergencies, women have a major
role to play in helping countries to prevent conflicts
and strengthen national reconciliation processes. They
do so by ensuring a gendered and inclusive perspective
on issues of security, justice and governance, which are
often the root causes of violent conflicts. That Network
is also a concrete way for women to acquire and develop
capacity and expertise to work successfully as official
United Nations mediators or mediation experts. I am
proud to see that some of the women mediators of our
Network are here today in the Chamber.
Thirdly, in conflict situations we need effective
peacekeeping operations. That can be achieved, first
of all, by raising the numbers of female peacekeepers.
Female peacekeepers can access populations and
environments that are closed to men, and thereby
improve intelligence with regard to potential security
risks. Women peacekeepers improve dispute resolution,
build trust with communities and are more likely to be
accepted by civilians, and thereby advance stability and
the rule of law.
Effective peacekeeping also requires appropriate
training. That is what we do with the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, Italy, which
provides high-quality training and specialized courses
to peacekeepers on the rule of law, the protection of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and the broader women and peace and security agenda.
Fourthly, I turn to accountability for violations.
Unfortunately, sexual violence is still an effective
weapon of war and it comes at no cost if there are no
consequences to those crimes. Over the past few decades,
the international community has taken progressive
steps to put an end to impunity for sexual and genderbased crimes at the global level. The Rome Statute of
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

the International Criminal Court expressly lists various
forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as underlying
acts of crimes against humanity and war crimes. Also,
as mentioned a few days ago in an interesting Arria
Formula meeting on that topic, the Council should
impose targeted sanctions against individuals who
have committed sexual violence. Together with other
partners, we initiated that in January 2017, when sexual
and gender-based violence was included as a standalone designation criterion in the renewal of sanctions
on the Central African Republic. Now it is up to the
Council to establish sexual violence as an automatic
designation criterion.
As emphasized by the Secretary-General, there
is still a huge gap between commitments and reality.
Women remain underrepresented, marginalized and
vulnerable to the most heinous consequences of
conflicts. The commitments undertaken in this Chamber
and elsewhere must be translated into the financial
and political support needed for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Increasing
the number of women peacekeepers, achieving full
parity in United Nations management positions and
targeting investments in women, especially in conflict
areas, are lines of action, as pointed out earlier by the
Secretary-General and Executive Director MlamboNgcuka, which Italy supports strongly. They pave
the way for a radical change in gender culture and
the meaningful participation of women, especially in
decision-making processes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by sincerely thanking the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their valuable input.
In its various resolutions on women and peace
and security, the Security Council has recognized the
need to address the threats to the security of women
and to protect them in conflict situations. It has also
reaffirmed that women’s empowerment is critical
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and postconflict situations, as well as broader efforts to maintain
international peace and security.
The threats to the security of women and the need
for their empowerment are the most urgent and essential

S/PV. 8382

demands in our volatile region, the Middle East, where
women are among the main victims. The major threats
to the security of women in our neighbourhood are
foreign occupation, military invasion and terrorism,
all of which infringe on and threaten women’s rights
and lives.
Foreign occupation is the most severe threat to
the security of women and girls in Palestine. It is even
more horrifying in the Gaza Strip, where women and
their children are the main victims of a decades-long,
inhumane and illegal blockade. Moreover, the long-term
impacts of foreign occupation on Palestinian women in
neighbouring countries, where they have suffered for
decades and are still waiting to return to their ancestral
land, should not be overlooked or underestimated.
Foreign invasion has had the same impact on women
in Syria and certain other countries of the region, where
their situation is exacerbated by the effects of terrorist
activities. In such situations, air strikes, in particular
on residential areas, hospitals, schools and even
wedding ceremonies, mostly affect the lives of women.
We share the view that women must be at the forefront
of development, peace and security. However, in such
an unstable region as the Middle East, there is little
room for women’s empowerment and development. In
some societies, what women and girls look for first and
foremost is to remain alive; empowerment remains a
secondary priority to them.
Stopping the suffering of women, preventing
their marginalization and protecting their lives can
create conditions conducive to the empowerment of
women and enhance their role in promoting a lasting
peace in the Middle East. As a victim of aggression,
foreign military invasion and terrorism, we attach great
importance to the role that women can play in building
a secure, stable and prosperous society.
The outstanding role of women in Iran is
incontestable; for instance, they are active participants
in political life and elections as both candidates
and voters. Similarly, the number of women who study
medicine and science in Iran now surpasses that of men.
Such achievements are being made despite extremely
hostile United States policies and illegal sanctions,
which make no distinction between men and women,
and violate the basic human rights of both, ultimately
undermining the constructive role that Iranian women
can play.

18-3401455/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I stress that promoting the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
post-conflict situations is not an option, but a necessity.
The realization of this noble objective is a collective
responsibility, and we stand ready to contribute to any
genuine international effort to achieve that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Schlein (Israel): Gender equality and women’s
empowerment comprise a core tenet of Israel’s values.
Israel was the first country in the world to incorporate
parts of resolution 1325 (2000) into its national
legislation. The fourth amendment to the women’s equal
rights law requires the Government to include women
from all parts of society in all national policymaking
teams and committees.
As part of Israel’s international activities aimed
at achieving women’s empowerment, Israel serves
as a member of the Commission on the Status of
Women. Beginning next year, Israel will also serve
as a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women,
with which we signed an agreement in 2016 that allows
for the advancement of joint projects. In addition,
Israel is a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, headed by Canada. The group
promotes, inter alia, the integration of women into
decision-making forums.
Israeli efforts in the area of development and
the advancement of the Sustainable Development
Goals is expressed by means of a variety of
programmes and projects that are being promoted
by MASHAV — Israel’s Agency for International
Development Cooperation — which works with United
Nations bodies to train women leaders. Already in
2003, the Golda Meir Mount Carmel International
Training Centre hosted an international conference
for women leaders entitled “Women’s role in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding”, which developed into a
series of training courses. Over the past 14 years, 36
seminars on women’s role in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, which promote dialogue between Israeli
and Palestinian women, have taken place, in which
1,075 women — Israeli and Palestinian — participated.
Some of the core elements of any successful policydevelopment process, particularly in the areas of peace
and security, are cooperation, building partnerships,
sharing experiences and creating opportunities, all
of which are among the many negotiating strengths
56/108

25/10/2018

associated with women. Last year, I was honoured to
be invited to join the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network, a new framework initiated and supported by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Italy. This week,
I am privileged to participate in the regional women
mediator networks meeting here in New York, which
will bring together representatives of women mediator
networks from various parts of the world, United
Nations officers and representatives of civil society
and academia. My fellow participants bring to the table
the wealth of hundreds of years of combined experience
as mediators, diplomats, researchers and officers, but
also as community members, mothers and sisters.
This combined human wealth is incredible, creating
indispensable knowledge, insights and inner strength.
Inclusiveness serves goals far beyond that of
creating equal opportunities. It creates a significant
new value. We need to amplify women’s voices and
incorporate their added value. It is not just a question
of women and gender issues; it is a question of peace
and security.
Scientific research has demonstrated a strong
correlation between inclusiveness and the sustainability
of peace agreements. In an article published in August,
Jana Krause of the University of Amsterdam and her
colleagues show that women’s active participation
in peace negotiations leads to better accord content,
higher agreement-implementation rates and longerlasting peace. Their statistical results show a robust
relationship between peace agreements with women
signatories and peace durability. They further found
that peace agreements signed by women show a
significantly higher number of agreement provisions
and a higher implementation rate of such provisions
than those not signed by women. Women’s direct
participation in negotiations therefore improves both
accord quality and provision-implementation rates. As
an illustration, they found a higher rate of provision
implementation 10 years after agreements were signed,
as compared to agreements not signed by women. Those
findings were substantiated with qualitative case-study
evidence derived from looking into decades of peace
processes and agreements.
Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for greater
representation of women in national decision-making,
especially in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution. Yet, unfortunately, the voices of women are
still excluded from most peace-negotiation tables. It is
our collective duty to take concrete steps to get women
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

seats at the table. We can no longer afford to exclude the
talents and insights of half the population in the pursuit
of peace.
We need a more inclusive approach to peace and
security and a broader gender perspective — a shift
in paradigms and perceptions of and attitudes towards
women’s participation. If we want a better future, we
need to adopt a new value-based approach and lobby for
inclusive peace processes. We need to open the doors
and provide women with access to decision-making,
negotiations and the actual table. That is the only way
forward. Let us all work together towards access and
seats at the table for women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union welcomes Bolivia’s initiative
to focus today’s discussion on the political and economic
aspects of the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on Member States to build the necessary gender
advisory capacity in order to systematically integrate
a gender perspective in all analyses, planning, conduct
and evaluation of United Nations activities, including
in peacekeeping missions. The European Union focuses
on four main priorities within the women and peace and
security agenda.
First, we put emphasis on our efforts aimed
at increasing women’s political participation and
leadership. The following are just a few examples. In
Afghanistan, the European Union has been providing
training and coaching to female members of the
Afghan High Peace Council, thereby enabling them
to play an active role in the peace agreement between
the Government of Afghanistan and Hizb-e-Islami. In
Syria, the European Union and its member States have
been supporting the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
established by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. In Mali,
the Follow-up and Evaluation Committee overseeing the
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement, including

S/PV. 8382

the relevant gender-equality and women and peace and
security commitments, has also been supported by
the European Union. Furthermore, in March 2018, in
Turkey, the European Union launched the Gaziantep
Women’s Platform — a network of women involved
in the Geneva peace process consisting of activists
and non-governmental organization representatives
active in Syria — to address issues related to women’s
empowerment, women’s rights and sexual and genderbased violence.
Secondly, we have prioritized action against sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict. We continue
to support United Nations efforts to combat conflictrelated sexual violence. In that context, the European
Union has taken concrete action in committing to
working together with the United Nations to eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls
worldwide, through the Spotlight Initiative. We would
like to ask other stakeholders to join us in helping to
promote the women and peace and security agenda by
aligning our efforts to ensure the security and safety
of all women and girls. Since June 2017 the European
Union has been chairing a worldwide initiative, the Call
to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies. We have also systematically followed
up on our commitments to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, whom we
fully support in her excellent work.
Thirdly, we have prioritized the promotion
of proactive policies for women’s economic
empowerment, which will also generate sizeable
returns for our economies and societies. In January
2018, the European Union, together with UN-Women
and the International Labour Organization, launched
WE EMPOWER, a programme promoting women’s
economic empowerment at work through responsible
business in the countries of the Group of Seven,
designed to advance women’s economic empowerment
by creating an enabling environment where the active
engagement of the corporate sector combines with
public-policy efforts.
Fourthly, we have prioritized strengthening the
national frameworks for implementing the women and
peace and security agenda in European Union member
States, such as national action plans and similar strategic
documents. While the European Union can point to a
number of success stories through the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions,

18-3401457/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

and while 20 of the 28 European Union member States
have their own national action plans, there is still much
to be done. We are happy to report that we are in the
final stages of adopting our new European Union
policy — the European Union strategic approach on
women and peace and security — before the end of
the year. The European Union is working constantly to
improve its procedures and practices in its civilian and
military missions and operations. We have enhanced
the role of our European Union gender focal points
network in order to increase exchanges of best practices
in real time. We have also been investing a great deal
of effort in further reinforcing our partnerships with
civil society.
We recognize the crucial role of UN-Women,
together with that of other relevant stakeholders, in
helping our common efforts. Together with other
regional organizations such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
African Union, we will continue our joint commitment
to integrating a stronger gender dimension into all
peace and security efforts. We welcome and engage in
all initiatives that help strengthen those efforts, such
as the Global Network of Gender Focal Points, the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network and the
Women Mediators Networks.
Finally, in view of the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the
European Union reiterates its commitment to helping
all United Nations efforts for an even faster and more
ambitious implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. The United Nations can rely on our
unwavering support, not just in New York but across
the globe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium of course fully aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the the
European Union, and I would like to add the following
observations in my national capacity.
First, we would like to begin by congratulating Dr.
Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, who
were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of
their fight against sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Belgium has been fortunate enough to work closely
with both Dr. Mukwege and Ms. Murad and remains
firmly committed to supporting their cause.
58/108

25/10/2018

The women and peace and security agenda has
been one of the pillars of our foreign policy for almost
20 years and will therefore also be an important priority
during our forthcoming term on the Security Council
for the next two years. It is essential that we continue to
translate the Council’s resolutions into concrete action.
Belgium shares the view of the Secretary-General
on the importance of women’s active participation in
conflict prevention and resolution. That is why we
advocate for more women at the negotiating table,
in peace processes and mediation efforts — in Syria
and Yemen, for example — as well as in elections.
Peace agreements and processes that take into account
women’s voices and examine the impact of conflict on
women are more sustainable in the long term, as many
speakers before me have said. Women must be more
involved so that they can become agents for peace in
their communities and countries. In that regard, we
would like to recommend some concrete actions.
First, the Council itself should listen more
carefully to the voices of women, for example by
increasing the number of statements by representatives
of women’s organizations during Council discussions
on peacekeeping operations, and by meeting with
women’s organizations during the Council’s country
visits. Secondly, we need more women in peacekeeping
operations and in security-sector reform. We must
also continue to support gender advisers under current
mandates. Thirdly, we must encourage women’s
participation in peace processes and agreements and
consider how to involve them at an earlier stage of the
process. Belgium hosted a seminar in April devoted to
the issue in collaboration with the African Union.
Finally, we can all act at the national level. Belgium
is currently implementing its third national action plan
on women and peace and security. An example of
concrete action within its framework is our support for
a five-year civil-society programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on women’s participation in
conflict-resolution mechanisms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Chatardová (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union and that to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

It is clear that there is a well-established link
between peace and women’s political and economic
empowerment. The women and peace and security
agenda has broadened since its launch nearly 20 years
ago, and it is no longer solely concerned with women’s
physical security. Increasingly, the necessity for
women’s participation in public and economic affairs
has become a frequent topic of discussion at both
the national and international level. Despite all the
progress, however, increasing the number of women
who participate meaningfully in this area requires
human resources, sufficient funds, a recognition of the
value that women’s involvement brings and the political
will to push against stereotypes and negative social
norms. We, the Member States, must take the initiative
and incorporate the effective, swift and thorough
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda into all our endeavours, along with holding
the United Nations accountable for including it in all
its activities.
We are proud to say that the Czech Republic has
made some concrete steps towards those goals. We are
currently implementing our first national action plan on
women and peace and security for the period from 2017
to 2020. The plan contains specific measurable tasks
and sets out concrete steps. These include increasing
the number of women in decision-making positions
in politics and in the security forces, achieving
work-balance and ending all forms of discrimination
against women, girls, men and boys as a violation of
human rights.
We believe in a participative approach to our
national action plan. Therefore, we are cooperating
closely with academics on reviewing our current plan
to provide for the creation of an even more effective
document for the upcoming period. In that context,
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
countries that have not yet done so to adopt a national
action plan, a uniquely effective tool in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda at the national
and international levels.
The right to participate in public affairs is a key
human right that enables the enjoyment of a number of
other rights. Its effective implementation is also crucial
for the achievement by all countries of the Sustainable
Development Goals. The Czech Republic therefore
selected Goal 16, which includes the target “to ensure
responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative
decision-making at all levels”, as the priority theme of

S/PV. 8382

our presidency of the Economic and Social Council in
2017 and 2018.
My country also backs up its words with practical
action. The Czech Republic actively addresses the root
causes of inequality by implementing projects aimed
at the economic empowerment and equal participation
of women. Such projects are being implemented in
Georgia, Zambia, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka. We are also a lead nation of the Jordan III Trust
Fund, a capacity-building project aimed at supporting
servicewomen in the Jordanian armed forces.
At the outset of our recent successful campaign
for membership in the Human Rights Council, we
pledged to continue challenging stereotypes in society
and creating equal opportunities for women and men.
Let me assure you, Mr. President, that the Czech
Republic remains committed to those pledges in all its
activities and will support the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda across United
Nations initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
extends to the presidency of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia its appreciation for convening this open
debate on the important theme of women and peace and
security. Women, as Pope Francis has said, “have the
great gift of being able to give life, being able to give
tenderness, being able to give peace and joy”. When
women have the opportunity to pass on their gifts to
the entire community, society is inevitably transformed
to better reflect the human family. Women are at the
forefront of what Pope Francis called the “revolution of
tenderness”, which the world urgently needs.Women offer an important contribution to dialogue
with their capacity to listen, to welcome and to open
themselves generously to others. Women are often the
first ones to assist others, especially the weakest in the
family and in society, yet they also pay the very high
cost of enduring the consequences of conflicts.
Resolution 1325 (2000) remains a significant
instrument that stresses the equal participation and
full involvement of women in all efforts for the
promotion of peace and security. Dialogue and political
engagement are in fact a journey that men and women
must undertake together. The Holy See, which often

18-3401459/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

participates in mediation efforts among the parties
involved in various violent conflicts throughout the
world, has been pleased to see the leadership of women
during those processes.
Women and girls in conflict situations suffer the
trauma of war. They can be all-too-easy targets to
humiliate and inflict pain on the enemy. The Holy
See strongly condemns in particular the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war and calls on Member States
and non-State actors always to defend women and girls,
and all innocent civilians caught in the crossfire.
The Catholic Church, especially through the
activities of its many courageous religious sisters and
volunteers, has always defended the dignity and human
rights of those enduring conflicts and humanitarian
emergencies by providing physical protection as well
as moral and spiritual support; working with police and
border-control agents; facilitating access to justice and
humanitarian aid; helping to fight arbitrary detention;
assisting with access to housing, emergency health care
and education in many cases when there is no one else
to provide such basic services; and mediating tensions
with host communities.
The Holy See supports the efforts being made
to ensure that each woman benefits from assistance
when it is needed. However, while acknowledging the
particular risks that women and children face in the
context of humanitarian emergencies and their specific
and integral needs regarding access to basic health
care, essential obstetric services, sanitary services
and food security, the Holy See cannot accept as a
fitting solution those services that promote and provide
abortion, such as those included in the minimum initial
service package for reproductive health.
Humanitarian law and related programmes are
established as measures to support life and to save the
lives of those who find themselves in critical situations.
Thus humanitarian aid should never be envisaged as
operating, or actually operate, against the right to life;
abortion is never a safe solution. The youngest members
of the human family cannot be discriminated against
based on emergency situations of migration, conflict or
disaster. As Pope Francis has emphasized,
“Human beings are ends in themselves and never
a means of resolving other problems. Once this
conviction disappears, so do solid and lasting
foundations for the defence of human rights”.
60/108

25/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 61 members of the Group
of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to
the United Nations.
The Group of Friends expresses its appreciation
to the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
for convening this debate on the important agenda on
women and peace and security. The Group also thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/900)
on this issue, which captures the challenges as well
as the opportunities presented to Member States
and stakeholders in the global effort to prevent
conflict and sustain peace from an enhanced gendersensitive perspective.
The briefings provided by the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and
Randa Siniora Atallah are also deeply appreciated.
The African Women Leaders Network was launched
in New York in June 2017 with a view to bolstering
women’s leadership for transformative change in
Africa. The vision of the Network is inspired by the
women and peace and security agenda, and seeks to
increase women’s access to decision-making processes
and leadership positions in view of their exceptional
contributions to sustaining peace and development
in Africa.
The Network counts more than 300 women leaders,
operationalizing key strategic instruments for the
implementation of the peace, security and development
agenda. In a bid to support this ground-breaking
effort, a cross-regional Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network was established last February
under the leadership of the Permanent Missions of
Ghana and Germany to serve as a strategic platform
and provide political support for the Network at United
Nations Headquarters and beyond. We are committed to
making the message of women’s political and economic
empowerment a central theme in the maintenance of
international peace and security, conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.
We wish to focus our statement on three main areas.
First, we support the renewed efforts made in the
past year to include practical actions for improved
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, and we welcome in that regard the convening
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8382

of meetings of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security to explore gender dimensions
in major conflict areas around the world, particularly
in Mali and the Sahel, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Lake Chad basin and the Central
African Republic.

mechanisms to boost efforts to achieve durable peace
and development. Consequently, they must be fully
supported in assuming their rightful place as co-drivers
of the peace, security, development, governance
and economic structures established during and
after conflicts.

The Group commends in that regard the pioneering
leadership of Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed; the Executive Director of UN-Women;
and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security,
who took the practical step of embarking on joint
African Union-United Nations fact-finding missions to
the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria in 2017,
and subsequently to Chad, the Niger and South Sudan
this year. The invaluable exchanges with women in
communities during the course of those joint missions
represent an innovation that will intensify efforts
towards the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda and significantly bring to the fore the
voices of women and girls silenced by the consequences
of conflicts and war. We also commend the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallström,
who joined the Chad and Niger legs of the mission.

The African Women Leaders Network is working
towards women’s participation in decision-making
processes at the local level through the establishment
of national chapters. I am pleased to inform the Council
that national chapters in the Central African Republic,
Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been established with the support and collaboration
of the African Union and UN-Women. We recognize
that women are already engaged and are ready to play
their role in building and sustaining peace. We need
more of them at the decision-making table. We need
more women participating in prevention and mediation
and on negotiating teams. It is our responsibility to
make that happen in the shortest possible time through
our continued engagement and support.

Secondly, the Group of Friends reiterates its full
support for efforts by the Secretary-General to increase
women’s participation in peacekeeping and United
Nations peace operations, including political missions
in Africa. Member States must support and complement
those efforts to prevent stagnation and a possible
decrease in the level of representation of women in
those missions. The Group adopted a strategic plan of
action last September to support women’s leadership
and participation in peace processes on the ground.
The plan includes training and support for women as
mediators and chiefs of operations in order to ensure
a qualitative increase in the number of women in
police and military contingents of United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, we believe that it is essential to develop
closer partnerships in support of the women and peace
and security agenda at the local, national and regional
levels. The Group of Friends firmly believes that the
African Women Leaders Network provides an excellent
framework for developing such viable relationships,
which will bolster the implementation of peace efforts,
especially at the local level. The women belonging
to the Network have already demonstrated their
ability and potential to create and to foster innovative

I now have the honour to make the following brief
remarks in my national capacity.
Ghana continues to take the necessary measures
to address structural barriers that impede women’s
political participation, economic empowerment and role
in decision-making. Recent achievements in that regard
include the appointment of women to key positions in
Cabinet, the military and law enforcement agencies
and justice institutions, as well as peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention institutions.
We are also one of the 23 African countries that have
developed national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The Government is currently
in the process of formulating our national action
plan in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders.
In so doing, it is addressing the challenges and gaps
experienced in the first action plan, such as the lack
of adequate funding, effective localization, monitoring
and evaluation.
Within the framework of the Economic Community
of West African States regional action plan, Ghana
continues to contribute to subregional efforts in favour
of the women and peace and security agenda. The
Women, Peace and Security Institute at the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Centre is very
instrumental in those efforts. Prior to the elections in
Liberia, the Institute conducted election observation

18-3401461/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

training for 25 female staff of the Liberia Peacebuilding
Office, as well as capacity-building for selected eminent
women in conflict analysis, mediation and negotiation.
We share the view that the low levels of political
participation of women prior to conflict, coupled with
poverty, food insecurity, disparity and deprivation,
remain critical factors that impede women’s political
participation and role in conflict prevention and postconflict peacebuilding. We must therefore address
the various dimensions of women’s empowerment,
which include economic, social, psychological and
political empowerment.
In conclusion, we wish to state that much has been
achieved but much more remains to be done. It is our
hope that Member States will continue to demonstrate
their commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda in concrete terms, especially in conflict-prone
regions of the world, including Africa, where significant
challenges persist.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Bolivian delegation for convening this
debate, which highlights the importance of the role
that women play in conflict prevention and resolution
through their political and economic empowerment and
greater representation in decision-making levels related
to international peace and security.
Chile aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and reiterates its
commitment to the promotion and rights of women in
situations of armed conflict, as well as to the initiatives
of the Secretary-General to promote gender equality in
the United Nations system.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is a symbolic resolution
of the Security Council, since it deals with one of the
most tragic consequences of modern conflicts, namely,
violence against women and girls during conflicts. We
therefore welcome the fact that, to date, 76 members of
the international community, including Chile, have put
in place national plans of action for the implementation
of the resolution. We express our hope that more
countries will proceed to adopt their own national plans.
The issue of women and peace and security is one of
the priority areas of Chile’s multilateral foreign policy.
For that reason, we have promoted the strengthening of
62/108

25/10/2018

regional and global cooperation in that area by working
on the implementation of public policies that ensure
women’s participation in all processes to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level. Chile was
the first country in the region to develop a national action
plan in 2009 for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). That action plan was the result of coordinated
work by an interministerial committee made up of
the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Women and
Gender Equity and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
also highlighting the participation of civil society in
its preparation. The second national action plan was
launched in 2015, reflecting the recommendations of
the Security Council and relevant international good
practices and emphasizing education, staff training and
the inclusion of quantitative indicators.
Currently, our country is focused on the
development of a third-generation plan for 20192022, with a view to strengthening the role of
women in negotiation, mediation, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. The areas of monitoring, evaluation and
accountability will also be included in its objectives
and budgetary allocations so as to ensure adequate
implementation. The interministerial committee is
working on expanding the scope of action to natural
disasters, humanitarian assistance and the displacement
of people, with the active collaboration of civil society
and other institutions.
In the context of the process of developing our
third action plan, our country is facing the challenge of
increasing the percentage of women in peace operations
and in leadership and decision-making positions
and of ensuring the presence of gender advisors in
those operations.
The promotion and protection of resolution 1325
(2000) continues to be part of our national and collective
responsibilities. The same is true of achieving the
effective inclusion of women in all political, economic,
social and cultural processes that our societies face.
It is our hope that the award of this year’s Nobel
Peace Prize to Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege
for their efforts to end sexual violence as a weapon of
war in armed conflict will inspire the Security Council
and the international community to redouble their
efforts to comply with the resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Mr. Blanchard (Canada): First, I would like to
say how happy, delightful and inspiring it was for us
to learn of the appointment of the new President of
Ethiopia this morning. We want to congratulate our
friends from Ethiopia on the appointment of President
Sahle-Work Zewde by the Parliament. It is not only an
exceptional appointment, but also an inspiration for the
entire world. We continue to salute what is being done in
Ethiopia and throughout the world, and specifically in
Africa, for the leadership and empowerment of women.
As I said, it is an inspiration for the entire world.
I am pleased to speak today on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an informal
network of 54 interested Member States, chaired by
Canada, representing all five regional groups at the
United Nations.
The Group warmly congratulates Nadia Murad and
Denis Mukwege on being awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for their efforts to end the use sexual violence
as a tactic of war and armed conflict. Let that be an
inspiration to the United Nations and all Member
States that prompts them to redouble their efforts to
end sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict
by ending impunity, strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law, bringing perpetrators
to justice, reinforcing preventive measures, including
through Security Council sanctions, and providing
comprehensive assistance to survivors. We must
ensure that the stigma of sexual violence falls upon the
perpetrators of such acts and not on the survivors.
The Group applauds the focus on women’s political
and economic empowerment at this year’s open debate.
The linkage between women’s empowerment and peace
and security is at the core of the women and peace and
security agenda. When societies achieve higher levels
of gender equality, they are less susceptible to armed
conflict. When women are included in peace processes,
peace agreements are more likely to be reached and are
more likely to endure. Women play an indispensable role
in peacekeeping. Their full and meaningful participation
at all levels is key to the operational effectiveness of
missions. Women’s economic empowerment is an
integral and often overlooked conflict-prevention and
conflict-recovery strategy. Gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls are central to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
to sustaining peace. The Group strongly believes that
efforts to achieve gender equality are not a detraction

S/PV. 8382

from peace and security efforts; they are a foundation
of peace.
In the light of such facts, the persistent absence
of women’s meaningful participation in peace and
security efforts should remain a matter of heightened
concern for the Security Council. As was thoroughly
documented in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/900), despite women playing instrumental roles
in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict, they remain
consistently underrepresented in efforts to negotiate
peaceful political resolutions and peace agreements. In
the past quarter century, women constituted only 2 per
cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators and 5 per
cent of witnesses and signatories in all major peace
processes. The consequences of the continued absence
of women are compounded over time, as gender-blind
peace agreements can exacerbate gender inequalities in
post-conflict societies.
Women’s meaningful economic and political
participation demands the early involvement of
women in key decision-making roles at all levels, the
addressing of the full scope of women’s and girls’
human rights and gender equality and the inclusion
of gender expertise and analysis in all stages of the
conflict cycle. As the Independent Progress Study
on Youth, Peace and Security emphasized, we must
also invest in young women’s capacities, agency and
leadership and address the structural barriers limiting
youth participation — and particularly the participation
of young women — in peace efforts. We must work
together to recognize and actively address obstacles
to meaningful women’s participation, whether they be
cultural, structural or institutional in nature. We must
also strengthen the capacity of women to participate in
peace and security efforts, including through political,
logistical and financial support. Finally, we must
confront the systems of violence and intimidation that
prevent women of all ages from attaining full equality
in their societies.
The Group welcomes recent efforts undertaken by
the Secretary-General to enhance women’s participation
at the United Nations. That includes the implementation
of a system-wide gender-parity strategy and, notably,
the realization of gender parity, both in the Senior
Management Group and among resident coordinators.
The Group also welcomes the continued exchange of
best practices through the Women, Peace, and Security
Focal Points Network and the creation of women

18-3401463/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

mediator networks to enhance women’s influence in
peace processes.
While the Security Council itself has yet to
achieve gender balance, the Group welcomes efforts
undertaken by members of the Council to more
systematically include women in its work. That
includes the establishment of the Informal Experts
Group, the encouragement to all briefers to mainstream
gender analysis in their interventions, the integration
and strengthening of women and peace and security
provisions in resolutions, presidential statements and
press statements, meeting with women’s groups during
Council field visits and increasing the number of women
civil-society briefers outside the debate on women and
peace and security. We encourage Council members
to continue to build upon such best practices. At the
same time, more needs to be done to fully implement
the existing resolutions, reinforce the follow-up and
monitor the progress made.
Finally, as we approach the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the Group calls
on all stakeholders to expand their efforts to realize
all four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda, including prevention, participation, protection
and post-conflict recovery. While much has been
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we are far from realizing the transformational potential
of women’s equality and meaningful economic and
political participation for peace and development.
I would like to make a few additional remarks in a
national capacity.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted when Canada
was last on the Security Council. Since then, important
progress has been made in implementing the women
and peace and security agenda, including through
the adoption and renewal of an increasing number of
national action plans. However, too many gaps remain.
It is up to the Security Council and individual Member
States to take concrete actions.
There is no quick fix. It will not be enough to
add a woman mediator here or a gender adviser there.
Structural, political, economic and social genderdiscrimination exists in all of our countries. Conflict
only exacerbates those inequalities. Long-term
measures and sustained investments of our time and
resources are required to achieve transformative results.
64/108

25/10/2018

Canada is taking such measures. We are examining
how our national action plan on women and peace
and security can better address the violence and
discrimination faced by indigenous women and girls
in Canada. Internationally, Canada’s feminist foreign
policy demands that our approach to diplomacy, trade,
security and development fully take into account the
needs of women and girls in all their diversity. We are
doing so because we know the impact is greater, the
results more sustained and the benefits more widespread.
It is a conscious decision to be more effective.
We also recognize that being more effective means
working together with others in the pursuit of peace.
Following the launch of our second national action
plan last year, we increased our efforts to advance
the women and peace and security agenda in all
forums — including those where women and peace
and security has not traditionally been at the forefront.
Throughout our Group of Seven (G-7) presidency,
Canada has promoted gender equality. We launched
the G-7 Women, Peace and Security Partnerships
Initiative, which aims to increase women and peace and
security implementation in partnership countries. We
are so pleased to be partnering with Côte d’Ivoire on
that important initiative.
As a long-standing promoter and defender of the
multilateral system, Canada stands ready to improve it.
Recognizing that progress to date has been too slow,
Canada launched the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations to increase the meaningful participation of
uniformed women in United Nations peace operations.
To that end, Canada is establishing partnerships with
the Ghana armed forces and the Zambia police service.
Canada believes that we have a lot to learn from
others and from one another. Just last month, Canada,
together with the European Union, hosted a meeting of
women Foreign Ministers in Montreal for a discussion
on current challenges to global peace and security. At
that meeting, Canada’s Foreign Minister announced
that our Government will be appointing a women
and peace and security ambassador to strengthen the
implementation of our action plan. The Minister also
announced that Canada will be co-hosting the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network with Uruguay
in 2020 — the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000).
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

(spoke in French)
We salute women around the world who bravely
share their personal experiences of conflict and who
take action at the local, regional and international levels.
They remind us that the women and peace and security
agenda is not just a normative issue to be discussed in
New York, it has a genuine impact on a global scale.
I would like to recognize the important work being
carried out by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia
Murad in raising awareness about sexual violence in
conflict. When she visited Canada in October 2016, she
challenged Canadian legislators, Government officials
and civil society to do more to advance the women and
peace and security agenda. It is one of the reasons that
her photo is on the cover of our national action plan on
women and peace and security.
In order to do their important work, local women
peacebuilders need resources. Last year, Canada
doubled its support to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund. We encourage other countries to
support that fund, which seeks to strengthen women’s
meaningful participation in peace and security efforts.
Canada supports efforts in the Council to
mainstream the women and peace and security agenda
in all of the Council’s work. If elected to the Security
Council for the period 2021-2022, members can rest
assured that Canada will continue to champion the
women and peace and security agenda. We will seek
opportunities to create and support transformative
solutions to gender-based issues in conflict situations.
We will defend women’s voices and human rights. We
will challenge narratives that undermine women’s
ability to contribute, lead and shape solutions. We will
continue to work together with civil society, Member
States and the United Nations to help reinvigorate the
implementation of this important agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.
We express our sincere thanks to the Bolivian
presidency for convening this important debate. We

S/PV. 8382

also extend our appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women Executive and
the other briefers for their insightful statements.
ASEAN member States share the view that
women’s equal, full and effective participation is of
great importance at all stages of peace processes, given
their necessary role in the prevention and resolution of
conflict, peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as embodied
in resolution 1325 (2000) and many subsequent
resolutions. In that regard, we are pleased to inform the
Council that, in November 2017, ASEAN leaders adopted
a joint statement on promoting women and peace and
security in ASEAN. In that statement we encouraged
the integration of a gender perspective in all conflict
prevention initiatives and strategies, which must ensure
the full participation of women in peace processes as
well as encourage the inclusion of the women and peace
and security agenda in policies and programmes for the
protection of women and girls from sexual and genderbased violence before, during and after armed conflict.
That also includes the creation of greater and wider
spaces for participation in peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction processes.
While welcoming the positive progress achieved
in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, we all see that challenges
persist. Women continue to be excluded from, and
underrepresented in, peacebuilding and negotiation
processes. Violence, intimidation, discrimination
and gender stereotypes, inter alia, impede women’s
engagement and contributions. In the face of that
reality, Member States, United Nations entities, the
relevant international and regional organizations and
other stakeholders need to redouble their efforts to
promote women’s empowerment and increase women’s
involvement in economic and political spheres,
particularly in decision-making processes. Such efforts
may include, but are not limited to, awareness-raising,
capacity-building, education, training and the exchange
of best practices.
Within the United Nations system, ASEAN looks
forward to greater recruitment and promotion of women
from developing countries, so that gender parity and
equitable geographical representation can advance
hand in hand. At the regional level, ASEAN is fully
committed to the promotion of gender equality and
women’s empowerment as a means of contributing to
long-lasting peace and prosperity. We have continued
to adopt a wide range of frameworks in that regard. In

18-3401465/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

2017, ASEAN leaders adopted the Action Agenda on
Mainstreaming Women’s Economic Empowerment.
Among other things, the Agenda will address the
barriers that impede efforts to maximize women’s full
economic potential, increase women’s representation
and leadership roles in the workforce and encourage
public and private-sector collaboration to create more
opportunities for women in business.
ASEAN attaches high importance to gendermainstreaming across all three pillars, namely, the
political-security, economic and socio-cultural pillars.
The ASEAN Declaration on the Gender-Responsive
Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision
2025 and the Sustainable Development Goals reflect
our high-level political commitment to ensuring the
realization of a people-oriented and people-centred
ASEAN, where all women and girls are able to reach
their fullest potential. To that end, ASEAN member
States will intensify efforts to promote women’s
leadership and economic empowerment; eliminate
gender-stereotyping and violence against women and
protect and empower women in vulnerable situations.
At the national level, ASEAN member States have
made great efforts to increase public spending and
investment in social services, notably on education and
health, which serve to address the gender inequality
gap and contribute to sustainable and inclusive growth
in the region.
ASEAN also gives high priority to strengthening
collaboration and collective efforts with international
and regional partners on promoting the role of women in
building and sustaining peace. On that note, we welcome
the fourth annual ASEAN-United Nations Regional
Dialogue on Political-Security Cooperation, held under
the theme “Women, Peace and Security — The Role
of Women in the Prevention of Violent Extremism”.
In addition, ASEAN, in partnership with UNWomen, launched the ASEAN HeForShe campaign
in conjunction with the 16 Days of Activism against
Gender-Based Violence campaign. The campaign seeks
to raise awareness about gender equality in the ASEAN
region, promote a culture of respect for women and
girls and mobilize the participation of men and boys as
advocates for gender equality.
We face increasing and unprecedented threats in
today’s world. Peace and security are essential to the
achievement of sustainable development. As partners
in development, peace and security, women play an
indispensable role at all stages of peace processes,
66/108

25/10/2018

from conflict prevention and resolution to post-conflict
recovery and sustaining peace. In that regard, ASEAN
renews its commitments and will work closely with
other Member States, the United Nations and regional
organizations to further advance the women and
peace and security agenda at the global, regional and
national levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Siniora
Atallah for their very important messages to us today.
I am speaking before the Security Council today
because this issue matters deeply to my country,
Ireland. In fact, I am speaking because we owe a great
deal to women in Ireland, particularly northern Ireland,
where women helped make peace possible on our island
after decades of violent conflict. This year marks the
twentieth anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement,
the result of a peace process in which women played a
critical role on the streets, in community groups and
at the negotiation table in bringing about sustainable
peace. I am very proud that one of those negotiators
is here with me today and that she has been so willing
to share her experience and expertise with women
peacebuilders across the globe.
Ireland welcomes the focus of the SecretaryGeneral’s report this year (S/2018/900) on women’s
meaningful participation in negotiating peace.
Meaningful is the operative word. We have long moved
beyond gestures and symbols. We know that we need
hands-on, influential roles for women in which they
can make the critical life-and-death differences in
ending conflict and building peace.
It is now almost a cliche to say that women’s
participation significantly increases the probability
of sustainable peace. What is shocking, however, is
that this reality is so little respected globally. Ireland
believes that we have a duty to change that — we have
an obligation to work to support women’s leadership
and empowerment across the development and
peacebuilding nexus. We take that duty seriously.
Ireland’s
international
development
policy
seeks to strengthen the voices of women and girls in
decision-making at all levels. We are proud to actively
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

support and, indeed, advocate for greater roles for civilsociety organizations. We know that women’s voices are
louder at the civil-society and local grass-roots levels.
We want to see the volume turned up. Women are gifted
in mediation and peacebuilding. We want to see that
capacity leveraged. With that in mind, my country is a
founding member and core donor to the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund.
Ireland welcomes the increase in the number
of female and civil-society briefers at the Security
Council. We believe other voices should be heard here.
In that regard, today is a good day. We also support
calls for stronger gender analysis across the Council’s
entire agenda of work, including in its reporting from
mission visits.
To echo the Secretary-General’s welcome report,
peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
remain the most visible representatives of the United
Nations worldwide, working directly with communities.
Ireland’s Defence Forces have an unbroken record of 60
years of participation in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Peacekeeping is a part of the DNA of the Irish
nation; we often say that we are as proud of the blue
beret as we are of the shamrock. In the Irish Defence
Forces, we have a dedicated and ambitious action plan
on women and peace and security. It has started to
show results.
Preparations for Ireland’s third national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) are now in full swing. We
are engaging Government, civil society and academia
across the country. At the top of our agenda are issues
such as preventing violent extremism, listening to the
experiences of migrants and refugees and considering
the important question of masculinity. Ireland was
very pleased to host the second regional acceleration
of resolution 1325 (2000) in Dublin earlier this year,
collaborating with our European partners on the women
and peace and security agenda.
I am currently the proud Chair of the Commission
on the Status of Women. In addition to the work I have
mentioned, Ireland fully supports today’s focus on
women’s political and economic empowerment. We
believe that our calls for women’s equal participation
in politics must be matched by our calls for women’s
equal participation in society and the economy. We also
want to see an end to the structural barriers that limit
women’s political and economic empowerment. In the
Commission on the Status of Women, we are acutely

S/PV. 8382

aware of how many insidious barriers there are to that
empowerment and how deep-rooted they are. Ireland is
working with the Commission on the Status of Women
to overcome them.
As Ireland looks to celebrate 100 years of women’s
suffrage in December, we also look ahead to the
brilliant young women waiting in the wings. Ireland
is a strong advocate of the youth, peace and security
agenda. We must not perpetuate the cycle of violence
by leaving young women out of the debate. We also
need to engage young men, as they are just as important
as young women in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda, one that we care deeply about in
Ireland. If Ireland is elected to the Security Council
for the period 2021-2022, I think the Council will find
a courageous and, if I may say so, feisty advocate for
women and peace and security in the Irish delegation.
In conclusion, as Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women, I am professionally and personally
deeply committed to realizing the true transformative
potential of women and girls. As Mary Robinson, the
first-elected female President of Ireland recognized,
the hand that rocks the cradle can also rock the system.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We live in a world
where violence, inequality and injustice are obstacles
to peace. Global military spending amounts to
$1.6 trillion, and therefore greatly exceeds global health
spending — $37.6 billion — let alone global education
spending, at $6.8 billion. Gender equality helps prevent
conflict, and women’s voices are particularly relevant
in the field of peace and security. Ironically, the budget
of the global women’s rights movement is less than
the cost of two F-35 fighter planes. Past decades have
brought some progress in reducing gender inequality.
Yet women’s economic and political empowerment
remains one of the major challenges of our time. We
welcome that today’s open debate is dedicated to that
important topic.
Women human rights defenders, political leaders,
justice and security-sector actors, peacekeepers and
mediators, journalists, activists and civil-society
leaders all significantly contribute to a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous world. Yet, in order to
enable women to be agents of change, we need to
create an environment that is enabling and free of
discrimination, unfair social norms and attitudes, and

18-3401467/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

does not deprive them of their rights and opportunities.
We welcome progress in integrating gender perspectives
and promoting women’s meaningful participation and
representation in the Organization’s work on conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace,
including in mediation teams and leadership positions.
There is evidence linking gender inequality and
gender-based violence to the greater vulnerability of
societies to civil and inter-State war. Sexual and genderbased violence is highly prevalent in conflict situations
and continues to be used as a weapon of war. Harmful
gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics form
the basis on which systemic and widespread sexual
violence can thrive. We are particularly concerned about
the devastating trend of conflict-related sexual violence,
with 800 cases documented by the United Nations last
year, amounting to a 56 per cent increase from 2016. In
the past year and up until July 2018, the Human Rights
Council received reports from independent human
rights investigations in Burundi, the Kasai region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen that document grave endemic
sexual and gender-based violence, including sexualized
torture, rape and mutilation of sexual organs.
Women and girls have been disproportionately
affected. However, there are also numerous men and
boys among the victims. A recently published report
by the All Survivors Project documents the use of
rape and other forms of sexual violence and torture
by Syrian authorities and associated militias against
male detainees. Sexual violence against men and boys
continues to be underreported, owing to cultural taboos
and the fear of being stigmatized. Only if we understand
the underlying factors of those crimes — irrespective
of the victim’s gender — can we find comprehensive
and sustainable solutions for all.
Accountability is an essential part of the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. International
criminal-justice mechanisms — including the
International Criminal Court, which reflects the
very progressive stance on sexual and gender-based
violence enshrined in the Rome Statute, adopted 20
years ago — have done ground-breaking work. The
accountability mechanism for Syria has supported
investigations into sexual violence and gender-based
crimes. We have high hopes for the accountability
mechanism newly established for Myanmar by the
Human Rights Council to investigate sexual and
gender-based violence committed against the Rohingya
68/108

25/10/2018

and other minorities, and we value the work of Justice
Rapid Response aimed at strengthening accountability.
However, justice, peace and equality remain utopian
concepts for many women and girls around the world.
There are still discriminatory laws and practices that
prevent them from enjoying full and equal protection
under the law and from achieving just outcomes for
violations of their human rights. Structural inequalities,
poverty and discrimination in both conflict and
non-conflict contexts reduce the opportunities for
women and girls to be informed of their rights and to
access justice before, during and after conflict. Women
remain unevenly represented in transitional justice
and rule-of-law institutions. Only if we address those
disparities can we achieve Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 5, on gender equality, SDG 10, on reduced
inequalities, and SDG 16,, on peace, justice and strong
institutions, all of which are not merely end goals in
themselves but also preconditions for the successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay
is grateful for the briefings delivered on the topic under
discussion and commends the Bolivian presidency of
the Security Council for promoting the relevance of
the agenda on women and peace and security. I will
present the Paraguayan delegation’s contribution to the
debate from three perspectives, that is, the principles
that inspire our country, the actions that we carry out
at the national level for the political and economic
empowerment of women, and our vision regarding the
role of the United Nations and the Security Council
with regard to women and peace and security.
First of all, on the seventieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we recall that
the shared ideal of peoples and nations is full respect
for those rights and freedoms and their universal and
effective recognition and implementation, without
distinction. In that regard, our 1992 Constitution
guarantees equality between men and women with
respect to civil, political, social, economic and cultural
rights, and the Government of Paraguay works to promote
women as a factor for change in the country, generating
conditions of equity, equality and empowerment. The
responsibility to protect the population, especially
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

women and girls and the most vulnerable population
groups, rests principally with States. Initiatives for
the political and economic empowerment of women in
situations of conflict must be framed within the efforts
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Regarding our actions that we consider relevant
to this debate, in Paraguay the Ministry of Women
promotes and implements public policies with a gender
perspective and promotes the full exercise of women’s
human rights, mainly through the 2018-2023 national
plan for equal opportunities for women and men.
Ciudad Mujer, an exclusive centre for women and their
children, offers an array of 80 interconnected and
coordinated services providing comprehensive care,
including economic empowerment, education on equity
and sexual and reproductive health, child care and the
prevention and awareness of violence against women.
More recently, Ciudad Mujer deployed mobile units to
reach women and their children in the most remote and
inaccessible areas of our territory.
Paraguay encourages women’s access to formal
credit through conditioned money-transfer programmes,
where the transfers are granted by microcredit committees
that are administered by women and prioritize women
heads of household, as well as through the Agricultural
Credit for Empowerment facility — Crédito Agrícola
de Habilitación — the portfolio of which has seen
an increase in the proportion of women clients from
10 to 38 per cent since 2013. Through its law on the
comprehensive protection of women against all types
of violence, Paraguay incorporated the criminalization
of femicide into its criminal legislation, and through
the law on public policies for rural women and the
inter-institutional commission for the implementation
of the law, which is composed of 12 institutions, we
encourage the participation of rural women in spaces
for policymaking and access to the public services
offered by the State.
Finally, with regard to the role of the United Nations
and the Security Council in the agenda on women and
peace and security, the delegation of Paraguay favours,
first, the participation of women in decision-making
in peace processes and in training for their effective
participation in those processes; secondly, the Security
Council’s clear inclusion of the protection of women
in armed conflicts in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations; thirdly, advice from gender experts in the
planning of political and peacekeeping missions and

S/PV. 8382

in sanctions committees; and, fourthly, specialized
training for contingents involved in peacekeeping
missions, both prior to and after their deployment,
on civilian-military coordination, violence and
gender inequality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate.
My statement is fully aligned with the one already
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the gap between
commitment and implementation remains particularly
significant in matters related to the economic, political
and social empowerment of women. Despite the
accountability tool created by the resolution, the latest
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security leaves no room for doubt:
“We continue to witness devastating failures
to respect international human rights and
humanitarian law across conflicts, particularly
with regard to grave violations of women’s human
rights.” (S/2018/900, para. 1)
Portugal therefore calls on all Member States to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in a more effective
and efficient way. Like many others, we believe that
there is a connection between gender equality and the
prevention of conflict. Empowering women should be
regarded as a fundamental part of any peacebuilding
process. Allow me to briefly mention a couple of
examples of what we are doing.
We are organizing exchanges and sharing of
experiences of officials deployed to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. We are providing training on
gender equality and violence against women and girls
to officials in the justice sector, the armed forces and
the security forces. A total of 81 Portuguese women
are taking part in United Nations and European Union
bilateral and regional missions.
The
2030
Agenda
for
Sustainable
Development — in particular Sustainable Development
Goals 4, 5 and 16 — is extremely relevant in the
consolidation of the role of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. Better articulation between
the 2030 Agenda and the resolutions on women and

18-3401469/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

25/10/2018

peace and security would allow for greater investment
in education in conflict situations.

of women, attaining the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) will remain a distant dream.

Portugal has continuously promoted respect for
the right of education, including higher education in
humanitarian emergencies. A global and coordinated
approach for the promotion of higher education will
better equip a new generation of leaders that will be
able to rebuild the countries and societies shattered by
war and break the cycle of violence. In that context, let
me mention the Global Platform for Syrian Students.

Against that background, I am delighted to share
with you, Madam President, Nepal’s successful
experience of women’s engagement in sustaining peace.
After signing the comprehensive peace agreement
in 2006, the Government of Nepal established the
Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction with a mandate
to play a catalytic role in Nepal’s endeavour to
achieve sustained peace. The Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction created around 2,800 peace committees
at the local level.

Allow me also to call on all Member States to endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration. Eighty-one countries,
including my own, have joined the Declaration, which
was promoted by Norway and Argentina in 2015. The
Declaration highlights the importance of protecting
access to safe education for women and girls living
in conflict.
I conclude with a special reference to Nadia Murad
and Denis Mukwege as symbols in the denunciation
of sexual violence against women and its use as
warfare. The 2018 Nobel Peace Prize acknowledges
the unequal consequences that armed conflicts impose
upon women, who are particularly vulnerable to sexual
crimes, trafficking and other forms of exploitation.
Countering such violence is a priority for Portugal in
our internal policies and in our external action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Thapa (Nepal): At the outset, I begin by
commending the presidency of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia for convening today’s annual debate on the
women and peace and security agenda. I thank the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their updates
and insights.
The Security Council resolutions on women and
peace and security have aptly underscored the crucial
link between gender equality and international peace
and security. They have succeeded in ensuring women’s
engagement as providers of peace and security in
conflict-affected societies. Women can be crucial
agents of change by offering valuable and innovative
perspectives on sustaining peace. Their leadership role
in conflict prevention, active engagement in peace
negotiations and compassionate protection of civilians
as peacekeepers, inter alia, cannot be overemphasized.
Moreover, in the absence of the meaningful participation
70/108

In 2011, Nepal adopted its first national action
plan, for the period of 2011 to 2016, to implement
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). It was the
first country in South Asia and the second in Asia
to do so. The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction
coordinated the implementation of the national action
plan, while its oversight was ensured by a high-level
steering committee co-chaired by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and of Peace and Reconstruction, with
members drawn from the relevant ministries and civil
society organizations.
Nepal has made explicit efforts to localize
its national action plan, with the introduction of
localization guidelines in 2013. With the mandatory
provision of 33 per cent women’s representation in
local peace committees, Nepal’s national action plan
has been an example of a transparent, inclusive and
participatory process, with the close involvement of
conflict victims and civil society organizations. This
paradigm has been extensively shared with countries in
the region and beyond. The success of the first national
action plan, which, along with the peace agreement,
catalysed an enhanced the participation of women in
peace negotiations and peacebuilding processes, both
at the community and national levels, has led us to the
soon-to-be-adopted second national action plan, which
focuses on sexual violence, particularly during conflict.
Through its own experiences of its successful
home-grown peace process and its partnership with
United Nations peacekeeping, Nepal has come to
believe that women’s increased role in the national
context greatly complements the United Nations
aspiration of a greater role of women at the global level.
In Nepal’s case, women’s increased representation
in legislative and Government bodies and State
institutions since 2007 has directly contributed to
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

fostering good governance and inclusive societies. The
mandatory level of 33 per cent representation of women,
guaranteed under the new Constitution for both federal
and provincial legislatures, has qualitatively enhanced
the empowerment and ownership of women in all walks
of national life. At the same time, Nepal has already
seen women assuming the positions of Head of State,
Speaker of the Parliament and Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court. The National Women’s Commission
is now an independent and powerful constitutional
body with an comprehensive mandate to monitor and
safeguard the rights and interests of women.
Last year’s local elections, in which women secured
nearly half of the leadership positions — beyond the
constitutional guarantee of 40 per cent — are expected
to generate further multiplier effects to ensure the
maximum inclusion and participation of women in
leadership positions, legislation and governance.
Moreover, a 33 per cent quota for certain positions
in Government services, including in security forces,
has been reserved for women. The gender-responsive
budget, introduced in 2006, has now reached over
35 per cent of the total budget. We have done all that in
earnest and will continue to do so.
Our Constitution requires that the President and
Vice-President of the country should represent different
genders or communities and that either the Speaker or
the Deputy Speaker of the Lower House and the Chair
or the Vice-Chair of the Upper House must be women.
That provision made it possible for Nepal to have
women as President and Speaker of the country for
the first time. Women’s fair representation in political
appointments, as well as in various constitutional
bodies, has also been constitutionally guaranteed. All
laws of the country are fully aligned with the letter and
spirit of the human rights-based Constitution that we
adopted in 2015.
In conclusion, I want to state that no peace process
will ever succeed without the full, equal and effective
participation of women. As a country emerging from
a successful endogenous peace process, Nepal stands
ready to share its experience and lessons learned
through the constructive engagement of women in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
restructuring and rebuilding, all geared towards the
timely achievement of the SDGs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.

S/PV. 8382

Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I congratulate the
Plurinational State of Bolivia on its presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for organizing today’s
open debate. I thank the Secretary-General and
other briefers for their remarks and acknowledge the
contributions made by the Executive Director of UNWomen and other representatives.
Sri Lanka firmly believes that it is the meaningful
participation of women in the international peace and
security agenda that will bring about change in the world.
It does not suffice that women are present at the peace
table merely to satisfy a superficial gender-balance
requirement or to check a box on a management-reform
achievements sheet. Women must be given the space to
truly engage both at the peace table and beyond, and at
all levels — as leaders, researchers, workers, penholders
and agents of change. Sri Lanka has identified gender
equality and women’s empowerment as a priority
area and is party to numerous relevant international
conventions and declarations, including the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. My Government is currently working
to achieve gender equality by enacting gender-sensitive
laws and formulating related policies and action plans.
Gender equality has been addressed through our
Constitution’s chapter on fundamental rights and by
meeting treaty obligations, as well as by achieving the
gender indicators in the Sustainable Development Goals.
Sri Lanka was one of the first countries in Asia
to grant a universal adult franchise in 1931. Following
that, we enacted laws in 1939 and 1945 to ensure free
education for all at the primary, secondary and tertiary
levels. Those positive policies, implemented over the
years, have resulted in gender parity in education.
The right to a free education is enshrined in the Sri
Lankan Constitution, which also mandates compulsory
schooling between the ages of five and 14. More than
60 per cent of university undergraduates are women.
At the primary level, female school attendance is
essentially universal, while it stands at 99 per cent for
boys. Free health care was introduced very early after
Sri Lanka gained its independence in 1948. Sri Lanka
adopted a women’s charter two years before the Beijing
Platform for Action, and we already have in place a
national plan of action for women.
For Sri Lanka, sustaining peace through women’s
political and economic empowerment — a subject
that the Bolivian presidency has so carefully chosen
for our debate today — is very close to our hearts. Sri

18-3401471/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Lanka is now in a post-conflict era, traversing a path
of reconciliation and justice. Never has the political
and economic empowerment of women been more
vital to our peace and prosperity than it is today. The
protracted and brutal armed conflict in Sri Lanka
left 24 per cent of our female population widowed.
Sri Lanka is aware that the protection and economic,
social and infrastructural needs of women affected by
war continue to require our attention. To that end, we
have found it crucial to incorporate gender into our
transitional justice process, as stipulated in resolution
1325 (2000). Our Government is focused on three
priority areas of women’s empowerment — economic
enhancement and financial identity, the elimination of
violence against women and engagement in public and
political life.
The mechanisms and processes for achieving
national unity and reconciliation are being conducted
under the overall guidance of our office of national
unity and reconciliation. Sri Lanka is also in the
process of implementing peacebuilding projects, which
involve joint programming with the United Nations
Development Programme — along with agencies such as
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund, the World
Health Organization and UN-Women — to implement
the joint United Nations programme on preventing and
responding to gender-based violence in Sri Lanka,
funded by UN-Women. One of the key target groups
in our empowerment programmes is female-headed
households, including war widows. A national
secretariat for widows and households headed by
women has been established in former conflict areas in
order to serve target groups better.
Sri Lanka has addressed the issue of violence
against women using three approaches — prevention,
intervention and advocacy for the formulation of policies
and laws. A toll-free help line has been established in
the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs to receive
complaints and provide redress to victims through
referral services. Sri Lanka also launched a national
action plan for human rights for the period from 2017 to
2021, which reiterates the need to achieve substantive
equality, particularly in the economic, political and
cultural spheres. In that regard, the Government has
allocated a quota of 25 per cent of posts for women in
local Government bodies. The Ministry of Women and
Child Affairs has also set aside at least 25 per cent of
budgetary allocations for projects for rural economic
development for women’s economic enhancement.
72/108

25/10/2018

Sri Lanka is also working to reserve a minimum
of 25 per cent of the representation in Parliament for
women in the near future. In that regard, however,
we are ever mindful of the challenges that women
face when entering politics and the toxic atmosphere
they encounter. Compared to men, they experience
disproportionate personal scrutiny, discrimination,
character assassination, violence and defamatory
statements. Unfortunately, politics has become
an inhospitable environment for women, and my
Government is committed to fighting the root causes
and institutional biases that prevent women from
becoming fully empowered in their chosen fields.
Sri Lanka has demonstrated its wholehearted
commitment to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse. It was one of the first countries to sign the
Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on eliminating
sexual exploitation and abuse. The President of Sri
Lanka has joined the Secretary-General’s circle of
leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations,
and we have made contributions to the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
Finally, for more than five decades, Sri Lanka has
been making modest contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. We are equally committed to the
inclusion of our highly trained and disciplined female
forces in peacekeeping efforts. As Sri Lanka proceeds
with its reconciliation and peacebuilding process, with
the active participation of women at all levels, we
will continue to share our experiences and practices,
especially in relation to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and his work for gender parity. I also thank the Bolivian
presidency for convening today’s open debate on an
agenda that is ever more relevant since the adoption of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) 18 years ago. I thank
the briefers for their statements and their outstanding
commitment. I also congratulate Ethiopia for voting its
first-ever woman President into office, and I wish her
the best of luck.
Throughout my life, I have sadly witnessed many
wars in my country, Lebanon, at first hand. That has
enabled me to understand what an important factor
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

women are in achieving peace, maintaining security,
rebuilding countries, healing nations’ deepest wounds
and reinventing hope when it seems impossible ever to
dream of it again. It also helped me understand that in
situations of conflict and war, women and girls suffer
disproportionately and in the ugliest and most abhorrent
ways. In war, their gender becomes their misfortune,
and when the guns go silent, they are the forgotten ones.
There can be no peace, at least no durable peace,
when half of society is excluded from its processes.
There can be no security, at least no sustainable
security, when it is achieved by discounting women’s
vital participation and inclusive engagement. There can
be no future, in fact no present, when women’s voices
go unheard or unheeded. Ignoring those voices and
overlooking their aspirations impairs the possibility
of lasting peace everywhere in the world. Progress has
been made, but it has been terribly slow. Nowhere is
that more true than in peace negotiations and processes.
I am sure that everyone here has heard only too many
times today the stunning statistic that only 2 per cent of
the mediators in formal peace processes between 1990
and 2017 were women. Even here at the United Nations,
it was not until 2013 that the first appointment of a
woman as a Special Envoy — Ms. Mary Robinson — was
made. Women in conflict-ridden countries consider
Security Council resolutions on peace processes to be
gender-insensitive. A few resolutions have begun to
incorporate a gender perspective and to demand the
real participation and inclusion of women at every level
of negotiations. We need more of them. We also need
to see more women peace envoys in this Chamber and
around the world, especially as that is in line with the
Secretary-General’s vision.
Lebanon remains firmly committed to an inclusive
approach to the women and peace and security agenda.
During Lebanon’s parliamentary elections in May, a
record number of women registered as candidates on
the ballot. Although the results brought only six hardwon victories, they nonetheless showed that women
are as invested as men in political dynamics and the
future of the country. The leadership in Lebanon is
responsive and is working to empower women. Prime
Minister-designate Saad Hariri, who was the first to
appoint women Ministers in his previous Cabinets, is
committed to appointing them for his next Cabinet. He
promised that women would play a significant role in
the new Government and said that if the country had

S/PV. 8382

been handed over to women, we would be in a much
better and more pleasant place today.
The National Commission for Lebanese Women
was mandated by the Council of Ministers to hold
six consultations between April and July 2018, which
translated into the country’s first national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) and is expected to be endorsed
by the upcoming Cabinet upon its formation. We are
also seeing more active participation by women at all
levels of governance and in key positions. There has
been a qualitative leap in that direction in the security
sector, and the Lebanese army is drawing up a strategic
plan aimed at ensuring gender parity.
However, in Lebanon as in other parts of the
world, implementation gaps continue to hinder the
full achievement of the women and peace and security
agenda. Gender barriers, the result of social gender
stereotypes and patriarchal attitudes, still exist. We
need to address such gaps through a comprehensive
legal approach in order to close them. Tangible efforts
should be made to prevent and eliminate all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls
from both public and private life. That should and must
include peace and security processes at all levels.
Eighteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, the time is
ripe for the real and irrevocable materialization of its
agenda. Women see gender equality as their last battle.
That battle requires that we all fight together, shoulder
to shoulder, as women try to remake a world where
peace is possible and where security is within reach.
That battle is inevitable, not only because morally it is
the right thing to do, but because factually it is the only
way out and because we will not give up. As SecretaryGeneral Guterres said, women will not give up.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
thank the Bolivian presidency for the opportunity to
once again address the very relevant issue of women’s
role and place in resolving the problems of our era.
The situation in the world today is characterized
by increasingly non-trivial forms of conflict and
confrontation and it requires similarly non-trivial
approaches to resolving them. Clearly the existing
international toolkit is inadequate to an effective
response to our emerging challenges. Once again, that
forces us to consider the role that women can play in

18-3401473/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We believe that
women, as one of the groups that are most vulnerable to
the consequences of armed conflict and confrontations,
are uniquely aware of the full force of conflicts and the
harm they inflict on future generations and therefore
attach particular importance to preserving the values
of peace, goodwill and well-being. That is why we
should not underestimate initiatives that are aimed
at promoting gender equality in issues related to the
maintenance of international peace, ensuring the safety
and security of women and girls in armed conflict and
preventing violence and abuse.
Belarus has always advocated for advancing the
role of women in resolving a broad range of issues
on the international agenda, and for equality and
non-discrimination. We support the ideas outlined in
the relevant Council resolutions, including its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). We have traditionally supported
the efforts of the Secretary-General, UN-Women, other
specialized entities of the United Nations and States
themselves in combating violence and protecting
women, especially in the context of the role that Belarus
plays in international initiatives to combat trafficking
in human beings. It is clear that in conflict and postconflict periods, owing to the collapse of political,
economic and social structures, high levels of violence
and militarism can worsen the problem of trafficking
and enslaving women and children, in regard to which
the example of Nadia Murad, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Goodwill Ambassador and Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate for 2018, is a shining one. In that
regard, Belarus has unprecedented practical experience
and a high level of expertise in the field of assisting in
global efforts to combat trafficking.
The gender aspect of the work of United Nations
peacekeeping missions plays a significant role in the
process of improving approaches to current challenges
and threats. Belarus is seriously involved in the
response to the Secretary-General’s call for enhancing
the role of women in peacekeeping. Belarusian women
are serving successfully as military specialists in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Belarus
is also a member of the Circle of Leadership in the
fight against sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations established on the
initiative of the Secretary-General. We believe that the
voluntary compact on countering sexual exploitation
that was signed by members of the Circle of Leadership
will continue to serve as the basis for further efforts
74/108

25/10/2018

to combat the problem. Lastly, we should also note
the critical importance of the preventive mediating
role that women play in preventing armed conflict.
Implementing mediation practices at the early stages of
confrontations is an unquestionably effective factor in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me first thank
the Plurinational State of Bolivia for convening this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and all
the briefers for their remarks.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the MIKTA countries — Mexico, Indonesia, the
Republic of Korea, Turkey and Australia.
Women are half of the world and therefore can
make up half of every solution. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has put a spotlight on the role of
women in peace and security. There are some pertinent
points to consider in that regard. First, preventing
conflict is far better than settling it. It is the most
effective resolution, one that enables everyone — men,
women and children — to thrive and coexist in peace.
Member States are responsible for preventing conflict
and should pursue that goal through various avenues
relevant to their national circumstances.
In that context, Indonesia considers women to be
drivers of sustaining peace and development through
their political and economic empowerment, with the
support of their communities. In that connection, the
Government has a solid commitment to advancing
women’s participation in politics and development. In
President Jokowi’s Administration, women ministers
account for one third of the Cabinet and are all tasked
with strategic issues. Additionally, 73 women have
been elected as regional heads or deputy heads since
the last election. Since the last general election, we
have formulated a grand design to enhance women’s
representation in Parliament for the forthcoming
election in 2019. Successful women politicians are
going into their communities, recruiting other women
aspiring to be politicians and giving them first-hand
practical experience through mentorship programmes.
As a result, in 2018 the number of women running for
office has increased. Nearly 10 per cent of the candidates
in parliamentary and regional elections were women.
We are also empowering women economically, as
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

women who are economically empowered will become
agents of peace, and when they bring prosperity to their
communities there will be a stronger inclination to
pursue peace.
Secondly, we need to share best practices and
optimize what we know about women and peace and
security. Research conducted by Indonesia’s Wahid
Institute found that women possess remarkable
potential for promoting peace. Women are more
tolerant of differences and less inclined to use violence
against disliked groups; 80.7 per cent of women support
the right to freedom of religion and belief; and 80.8 per
cent of women, as compared to 76.7 per cent of men,
do not support radicalism. Women’s empowerment
therefore becomes a determining factor in efforts to
stamp out possible starting points for conflict. Women’s
empowerment must start at the community level. One
example is the Peace Village initiative conducted by
the Wahid Foundation in Indonesia in collaboration
with UN-Women and Japan. Its main purpose is to
empower women at the village level to build resilient
communities by combining community empowerment
and training in peacebuilding and women’s economic
empowerment. Respect for religious differences,
guarantees of religious freedom and mechanisms for
conflict prevention are some of the key indicators
that qualify villages for seed capital to develop
specific products for their village, with training and
financial resources. Indonesia is ready to share the
initiative and develop partnerships with other countries
as well as the United Nations.
Thirdly, we are aware that women peacekeepers
account for only about 3 per cent of the total number
of troops on the ground. We need more female
peacekeepers on the ground because they have a better
capacity for situational awareness; they can provide
appropriate protection of civilians against sexual and
gender-based violence; they can more easily win the
hearts and minds of the local community; and they are
prerequisites for sustaining the peace agenda.
Indonesia is committed to continuing to increase
the number of female peacekeepers. Indonesian
peacekeeping contingents are among the largest,
totalling more than 3,500 personnel, of which 72 are
female peacekeepers. We are currently training 40
additional female peacekeepers, who will be deployed
in the next few months, bringing the total to 112
female peacekeepers.

S/PV. 8382

Indonesia continues to encourage the participation
of and to prepare more female peacekeepers, including
by integrating the gender perspective into the work of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations in which
it takes part and as part of the regular curriculum
of the Indonesian Peacekeeping Mission Centre in
Sentul. Lastly, as a true partner for world peace, we
are committed to ensuring strong institutions, linking
peace and development and strengthening cooperation,
as they are crucial to achieving peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Let me begin
by thanking the Bolivian presidency for organizing
this debate and for producing an excellent concept
note (S/2018/904, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretary-General Phumzile MlamboNgcuka and General Director Randa Siniora Atallah
for their presentations.
As neighbours in a region where we have long lived
peacefully, Brazil and Bolivia share the urgency in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
in South America as a means to empower women and
girls, thereby ensuring that our region continues to
enjoy lasting peace. Moreover, Brazil joins with Bolivia
in commending the inspiring example of the significant
and successful inclusion of women in the peace process
in Colombia.
In 1919, the Brazilian biologist, lawyer, feminist,
politician and one of the four women delegates to the
San Francisco Conference Bertha Lutz wrote that the
greatest victory of our age would be the emancipation
of the woman: she awoke during the period of calm,
and when the time for conflict came, she was no longer
a pale shadow but had placed herself resolutely beside
man in order to fight and to win alongside him.
This year, Brazil celebrates the hundredth
anniversary of the admission of the first female
diplomat to our Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In 1918,
Maria José de Castro Rebello Mendes was not only the
first Brazilian female diplomat but also the first woman
to join the civil service in Brazilian history through a
public examination process.
Looking back on that century of the presence of
Brazilian women in our diplomacy, there is much to
celebrate but there are also challenges to overcome. In
that context, the women and peace and security agenda

18-3401475/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

is both a priority in our foreign policy and a means
to move forward towards gender equality through
domestic policies. Besides being a champion of gender
equality since the foundation of the United Nations
through Lutz’s participation, Brazil has been a long-time
sponsor of the women and peace and security agenda in
the Security Council. We are particularly proud to have
integrated such an agenda into Brazil’s South-South
cooperation policies by supporting projects aimed at
assisting victims of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict-ridden regions in Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Last year, Brazil launched its first two-year national
action plan on women and peace and security. We are
now in the process of reviewing the implementation of
the plan. The Brazilian national action plan is based
on two main strategic objectives: mainstreaming and
empowerment. Those goals are key to the promotion
of women as agents of peace and to their protection
from gender-based violence. Also, Brazil’s national
plan follows the four main pillars set out in resolution
1325 (2000): participation, protection, peacebuilding
and humanitarian cooperation, and awareness-raising
and engagement.
Our national action plan takes into consideration
Brazil’s reality as a developing country that has been
at peace with its neighbours for 150 years and that
has demonstrated its willingness and capacity to
take on greater responsibilities in international peace
and security, whether in multilateral negotiations, in
support of peace processes, in peacekeeping operations
or in peacebuilding efforts.
So far, one of the main contributions of the national
plan has been to increase the visibility of the women
and peace and security agenda among multiple actors
in the Brazilian Government. Since the adoption of our
national action plan, Brazil has achieved other important
milestones. In 2017, the first women joined the army’s
combat roles for the first time. They will now be able to
reach the highest posts in the army’s hierarchy as they
progress in their careers. In addition, the Brazilian Peace
Operations Joint Training Centre has incorporated a
gender perspective based on the national action plan
into the preparation of military and police personnel,
as well as civilians, for peacekeeping operations.
The women and peace and security agenda is also
about diplomacy. We have sought, and continue to seek,
further dialogue and partnerships with countries in
76/108

25/10/2018

order to exchange experiences related to that agenda.
Bilateral contacts with many countries on that issue
have added depth to the understandings achieved in
celebrated multilateral initiatives such as the National
Focal Points Network and the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, as well as demonstrating
that the women and peace and security agenda is a
shared priority among many of us.
Besides launching a national plan on women and
peace and security, the Brazilian Government has taken
other important steps towards a greater presence of
women in political life. As of May, political parties must
allot at least 30 per cent of radio and television time, as
well as of their dedicated campaign financing fund, to
female candidates. Following the most recent federal
elections, earlier this month, women’s participation
rose from 10 to 15 per cent of elected representatives
in the lower house of Congress, which is still very low.
One of the new representatives is Joênia Wapixana,
the first indigenous woman elected to the National
Congress. Today, she was also announced as one of the
three winners of the 2018 United Nations Prize in the
Field of Human Rights.
However, there are challenges ahead. Increasing the
number of women in the Brazilian military contingents
in peacekeeping operations is a major task. In pursuit of
that, we will take into consideration the very concrete
goals set last year by the Secretary-General to increase
the ratio of women military to 15 per cent and women
police officers to 20 per cent of the total personnel in
all peacekeeping operations.
As we celebrate 18 years since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), we must also regret the
fact that there is an increasing number of conflicts
around the globe. In that regard, Brazil reiterates its
unwavering commitment, as noted by Bertha Lutz, to
having men and women work side by side in order to
achieve lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Diamonds (Namibia): Namibia welcomes
the Security Council’s decision to discuss the issue of
women and peace and security as a standing agenda
item. We are encouraged by the overwhelming support
for today’s open debate.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
We would also like to thank the briefers for their
helpful input in our debate.
Progress on the issue of women and peace and
security is encouraging, with the Security Council
having adopted eight related resolutions. However, the
global study carried out in 2015 to mark the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) revealed that
global implementation of the resolution was occurring
at a snail’s pace.
Reports by the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization have acknowledged the women
and peace and security agenda and reported on its
implementation. Regional organizations are doing
their part, with the African Union having appointed
Ms. Bineta Diop as the Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security. We commend her work in raising
the profile of the issue of women and peace and security
globally. By August 2018, 76 countries had adopted and
were implementing national action plans on women
and peace and security. Those plans provide a valuable
tool for States to implement their commitments to the
women and peace and security agenda and to detail
their actions and obligations under the eight relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We recognize that many Member States are
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) without national
action plans. We encourage them to set up such plans
so as to ensure structured implementation, follow-up
and evaluation of resolution 1325 (2000), including the
recruitment of women into security forces, educating
women on how to conduct negotiations and training
them to assist women affected by violence in either
conflict or non-conflict situations.
Progress can be seen in the general inclusion of the
women and peace and security agenda in multilateral
forums. As Chair of the Group of Seven (G-7), Canada
included a gender-related theme in the proceedings of
the G-7 Summit held in June. When Germany recently
requested Namibia to partner with it on these issues, it
was the first time that Namibia had been approached by
a G-7 country to do so within the G-7 framework. We
encourage further partnerships of that nature.
Resolution 1325 (2000) sets out to achieve the
inclusion of women at the negotiation table. Accordingly,

S/PV. 8382

access to quality conflict-sensitive education for women
and girls, especially in conflict settings, is essential if
women’s participation in peacebuilding processes is to
be ensured.
Earlier this year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted a landmark resolution on protecting children
in armed conflict (resolution 2427 (2018)). We call
on parties to armed conflicts to immediately cease
unlawful attacks and threats of attack against schools,
students and teachers and to refrain from actions that
impede girls’ and women’s access to education.
In line with resolution 1325 (2000), the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations requested troopcontributing countries to deploy greater numbers of
female officers so as to reach the 15 per cent target of
women participation in peacekeeping missions by the
end of December. As of July, Namibia was at 13.3 per
cent in its deployment of female officers, with only two
females remaining to be deployed for 2018 to meet the
15 per cent target.
Namibia is a founding member of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network. The Focal
Points Network enables closer coordination among
Member States and facilitates annual sharing and
exchanges of best practices and lessons learned. The
Network welcomes the participation of Member States,
UN-Women and civil society organizations. We believe
that the Network is critical to the operationalization of
the women and peace and security agenda.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
announce that, on 10 and 11 April 2019, Namibia
will host, in Windhoek , the third capital-based Focal
Points Network Meeting. The theme for the event
will be “Women, Peace and Security: Towards Full
Participation”. All Member States and members of civil
society are invited to participate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
Ms. Saidane (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
the Bolivian presidency for organizing today’s open
debate on the fundamental issue of implementing the
women and peace and security agenda and the goal of
sustaining peace through the political and economic
empowerment of women. I also thank the Ministers
of Sweden and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the

18-3401477/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah for their insightful statements this morning.
This debate gives me an opportunity to present in
this forum — which remains the heart of the international
peace and security architecture — several aspects
relating to the recent steps taken by the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) with regard to
the agenda item under discussion today. The Heads
of State and Government of States members of la
Francophonie met in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October for
their seventeenth summit and adopted a new strategy
for the promotion of equality between women and men,
and support for the rights and empowerment of women
and girls. The seventeenth summit of la Francophonie
also made it possible to reinforce the cooperation
developed with the United Nations, with the signing
of a framework agreement for cooperation between the
OIF and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten.
That cooperation will favour political dialogue
between parties to conflict for the protection and
effective access of victims and survivors to justice,
as well as the fight against impunity for perpetrators
of violence. Such cooperation will also strengthen
national legal frameworks and the adoption of concrete,
multisectoral and coordinated measures to prevent such
violence by addressing the root causes, in particular
discrimination against women and girls.
In operational terms, la Francophonie supports
the strengthening of women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations. In May, the OIF teamed
up with the Police Division of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to train female senior
officers for the United Nations Police Command.
The objective of increasing the still-low number of
female uniformed military and police personnel in
peacekeeping operations is also on the agenda of the
seminar organized today by the OIF in collaboration
with the United Nations in a neighbouring room, with
the aim of contributing to the effective implementation
of the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations to which the OIF has
subscribed, as have the African Union, the European
Union and NATO, as part of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Today we collectively reiterate consensus on two
essential points. The first is that the women and peace
78/108

25/10/2018

and security agenda, while based on fundamental
rights, remains central to the prevention agenda, as well
as to the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda.
Secondly, we have the satisfaction of already having a
range of political, legal and even operational tools at
the national, regional and international levels that could
enable us to make progress on these issues. And yet it
is clear to all of us that despite the progress that has
been made, today we still have to say that we are a long
way from our goal, considering that in 2017 the number
of documented cases of conflict-related sexual violence
actually went up by 56 per cent.
The Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
who spoke here in October 2017, during the last debate
on this topic (see S/PV.8234), asked a question that I
would like to reiterate. “What are we afraid of?” Because
what is actually at stake here is our ability to make
profound changes to the foundations of our political and
economic systems and to deconstruct the stereotypes
that underlie the question that brings us together today.
As we know, on the ground women show unparalleled
resilience, strength and creativity in overcoming the
physical, socioeconomic and political constraints that
limit their lives. They are empowered and have proven
their intrinsic ability to use their power for the common
good every day. They undoubtedly contribute smiles
and gentleness, as some speakers have already said
this morning. As a woman, I take this reference to the
feminine nature, while perhaps somewhat stereotypical,
as a compliment. But if we are to make serious progress
today or, as some have said, if we want to finally hasten
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, we must move resolutely beyond the perception
that women still have to be trained and empowered to
play a role. It is interesting, by the way, that no one,
in the Council or elsewhere, ever wonders whether the
men who participate in these peace processes have been
adequately trained, which, given the state of the world
and with all due respect to men, would seem not always
to be the case.
Some speakers have mentioned the inherent biases
in the economic and social system that still determine
women’s ability not to be vulnerable but rather to be
in a position when they no longer fear attacks and can
control their own lives, like their male counterparts.
Initiating the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda must therefore be part of all sectoral
policies as a whole and at the heart of the decisions that
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8382

determine them. It is only by dismantling the social
norms that are the foundation of the devaluation of
the role of women — the devaluation that enables men
to legitimize the worst kinds of violence committed
against women and girls during conflicts — that we
can hasten the implementation of this agenda on every
front: protection, education, economic participation
and political power. That is also where we will make
progress in striking a better balance so that we can
perhaps begin to address the overrepresentation of
men rather than the underrepresentation of women
in some of these processes. There has been too little
funding until now to enable that change to happen and
it is time to speed that up both in terms of financing
and partnerships.

world, we believe that it is important to link them under
one coordinating mechanism that can enable them to
exchange their experiences and lessons learned. The
day before yesterday, in collaboration with UN-Women
and the African Union, Egypt organized a meeting on
this topic attended by women mediation networks from
Africa, the Mediterranean, the Nordic countries and the
Commonwealth States, focusing on ways to coordinate
their networks and provide them with support while
ensuring their sustainability and creating a coordination
mechanism for all of them.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Saidane for her statement.

Thirdly, we reiterate our concern about the
increasing suffering of women and girls as a result
of terrorism in areas of armed conflict, as well as the
fact that the suffering of Palestinian women under
occupation has been persistently ignored in the women
and peace and security agenda.

I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her valuable
briefing, along with the other briefers and all my
colleagues on the Security Council and other relevant
bodies. Over the past two decades, the experience of
the Security Council has demonstrated that women’s
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding
produces better results in achieving and sustaining
peace while avoiding conflict. Women can participate
actively in such efforts only if they are economically
and politically empowered. In the context of following
up on implementing the recommendations in the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
we would like to stress the following points.
First, Egypt supports resolution 1325 (2000), on
the importance of creating institutional frameworks
for women’s participation in peacemaking, and in
that context, we welcome the creation of women’s
mediation networks, which we believe should be based
on diverse models, since there is no single model that
is implementable in every conflict, and which should
therefore be created based on the requirements and
specifics of each conflict. We should not interfere in
the establishment of such networks or impose particular
forms on them. They should evolve spontaneously from
each individual conflict, starting locally and going
up to the national level. The international community
should limit its role to capacity-building. Given the fact
that there are so many of these networks all over the

Secondly, we appreciate and support the United
Nations strategy for gender parity, which we consider an
integral part of the reform of the United Nations system.

Fourthly, women’s economic empowerment is a
high priority for Egypt in the context of our chairship of
the Group of 77 and China this year, and is something
that must continue to happen in times of peace, conflict
or post-conflict, as it too enables women to play a
greater part in decision-making, peacebuilding and
lasting peace.
Egypt is making every effort to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. With regard
to combating sexual exploitation and aggression, we
have worked to raise awareness among our forces
participating in peacekeeping missions by introducing
a full, thorough model into their predeployment
training programme as a response to the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. Egypt also organizes advanced training
sessions for military commanders in that regard. The
Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding, which is responsible
for training peacekeeping troops, has published a
guidance manual on preventing sexual exploitation
and aggression in peacekeeping operations that is
distributed to Egyptian peacekeeping troops. It is
available to all other troop-contributing countries and
has been translated into English and French.
At the regional level, the Cairo Centre organizes
training sessions for African and Arab military

18-3401479/108

S/PV.8382

personnel and police officers
peacekeeping operations.

Women and peace and security
participating

in

Egypt also joined the African Women Leaders
Network because we believe in the importance of such
networks and in strengthening them. We call upon
the international community to make greater efforts
to provide financial support for the sustainability of
such forums.
At the international level, Egypt was among the
first States to join the Circle of Leadership on the
prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and
abuse, as well as the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network. We have undertaken this year
a voluntary commitment to prevent sexual exploitation
and aggression.
In conclusion, we call for a renewed political
and ethical commitment to empowering women
economically and politically in regions and States that
have recently emerged from conflict. Women are the
primary drivers of transformation from conflict to
development and from societies shattered by armed
conflict to healthy societies that are capable of moving
forward towards achieving sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): At the outset, my delegation
welcomes the briefings by the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres; Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN-Women Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; and the representative of civil society.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and
by the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to
the United Nations.
Let me also at this stage take this opportunity to
join colleagues in congratulating our neighbour to
the north, Ethiopia, on having elected Her Excellency
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde as the first female President of
the Federal Republic.
Kenya also wishes to join other speakers in
extending its compliments to the Plurinational State
of Bolivia for convening this important meeting today,
focusing on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in the area of women’s political
80/108

25/10/2018

and economic empowerment. We would also like to
welcome the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
enhance women’s participation and gender parity in the
United Nations system. We recognize that addressing
the groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000) is a
prerequisite for the achievement of sustainable peace.
This open debate has come at an opportune
time for us. In marking the eighteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), we in Kenya have just
concluded a high-level peer review meeting on women
and peace and security, where experiences were shared
on accountability in the implementation of resolutions
focused on women and peace and security.
Although at the global level some progress has been
made towards the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we note that such implementation still faces
challenges in terms of bringing about the meaningful
integration of women into the peace-conflict continuum
as agents of change in political and development
forums, including as active players in the fight against
radicalization and the international threat of terror. We
therefore believe that it is critical — despite our diverse
cultural and social norms — to take a whole-of-society
approach where young boys and men can also see their
role in championing and implementing the women and
peace and security agenda.
At the regional level, our dedication to the women
and peace and security agenda is underlined by our
full support for the African Union Solemn Declaration
on Gender Equality in Africa and the Continental
Results Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on
the Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. We are pleased to be among the
member States that validated the Continental Results
Framework earlier this year, in March. Since then, recent
efforts have been focused on ensuring that Kenya’s
national action plan, entitled “To involve women is to
sustain peace”, aligns its monitoring and evaluation
tools with the Continental Results Framework.
Beyond regional efforts, the Government has made
significant strides towards strengthening women’s
equal and full participation in peace and security
processes. Kenya’s national action plan has served as
a key policy framework for both State and non-State
actors in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Within this framework, we have
increased efforts to integrate gender into the national
peace architecture, as well as gender-mainstreaming
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

peace and security issues. Key examples of this include
the appointment of women in key decision-making
dockets such as the Ministry of Defence, which is
central to the management of armed conflict, and the
establishment of a task force on women and peace
and security within the gender sector working group,
a platform that brings together State and non-State
actors to advance national priorities on gender. Equally
important is the appointment of focal officers in all
Government ministries to champion and to monitor and
report on the implementation of the national action plan
within their sectors. Last but not least, I would note
the deployment of Kenyan women in peace-support
operations, which, as of 2017, stood at 19 per cent. This
surpasses the United Nations-recommended percentage
of 15 per cent.
Finally, we wish to reiterate Kenya’s continued
engagement in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We believe that much more needs to be done at
the national and global levels to educate all segments
of society on the centrality of the empowerment of
women and girls in sustaining peace. Therefore, as we
approach the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), in 2020, we urge Member States to move beyond
rhetoric and create an enabling environment for women
to actively engage in peace and security processes at
all levels.

S/PV. 8382

of participation in politics and continue to suffer from
poverty and, in many cases, sexual and gender-based
violence. Misogynistic prejudices and institutionalized
discrimination continue to hinder sustainable peace. It
is incumbent upon us all to support the rights of women
and girls and promote gender equality as a matter of
priority in order to enable the effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. In that
respect, my country fully endorses the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and will
contribute to the implementation of the commitments
that it laid out.
This year, my Government adopted its first
women and peace and security action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a
five-year plan that sets national and international
objectives in four areas — the equal participation of
women and men at all levels of peace and security
processes, prevention, protection against sexual and
gender-based violence along with relief and recovery,
and the promotion of the women and peace and security
agenda at the international level.

Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers, who have
enriched this debate. Our thanks also go to Bolivia
for organizing this debate under its presidency of the
Security Council.

The national plan concerns all areas of Government
action relating to our foreign policy, in particular
diplomacy, defence and development, justice, refugee
reception and health, as well as internal security. My
country will support the participation of women in
decision-making on peace and security issues, including
in international organizations, and the increased
participation of women in peacekeeping operations and
electoral observation missions. The Government also
aims to strengthen predeployment training for military
and civilian personnel, including the training of gender
advisers and experts.

The upcoming twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) offers an opportunity to highlight and assess
the progress made since its adoption in 2000. However,
we deem regrettable the delays in its implementation
as well as the continued existence of a wide range of
structural and systemic barriers to the full realization
of women’s rights and their political, economic and
social empowerment.

The women and peace and security action plan
complements our national gender-equality plan,
which promotes gender parity in decision-making and
employment and advocates the systematic integration
of the gender dimension into the strategies we pursue,
particularly with regard to our official development
assistance, which, as representatives perhaps know,
amounts to 1 per cent of our gross national income.

This year, the Security Council’s Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security highlighted
a series of obstacles to women’s effective participation
in peace and security processes. These include the fact
that women’s economic, social and cultural rights are
not sufficiently guaranteed and that they have a low rate

My country of course supports United Nations
action to implement resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to recall our support for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and our partnership with
Justice Rapid Response, UN-Women and the Institute
for International Criminal Investigations. We are also

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.

18-3401481/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

one of the top 20 contributors, in absolute terms, to UNWomen. I would also like to highlight our support for
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten,
and our contributions to the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
Finally, I would like to note that, at the end of
March 2019, Her Royal Highness the Grand Duchess of
Luxembourg will organize an international conference
in Luxembourg to strengthen support for survivors of
sexual violence, which will, we hope, contribute to the
objective of ending sexual violence in high-risk areas.
We know that gender equality is a prerequisite for
peace and sustainable development. Each State and
each regional and international organization has a role
to play in advancing the role of women in the interest
of peace and security. Only by redoubling our efforts
to end discrimination against women in times of war
and peace will we succeed in advancing the peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Bolivia for convening this important
debate on the women and peace and security agenda.
No society can sustain peace or realize peace
dividends unless women are involved in the making
of decisions on peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. There is sufficient
empirical evidence, including the examples cited in the
concept note for this debate (S/2018/904, annex), that
confirms that, when we invest in cultivating the values
of respect for the rights of women and gender equality
and the rejection of discrimination against women, the
chances are always higher that we will be able to sustain
peace and achieve social and economic progress.
The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
over the past 16 years on the women and peace and
security agenda. We are pleased to note that significant
progress has been achieved in a number of countries, as
highlighted in the concept note. Furthermore, we would
like to acknowledge that resolution 1325 (2000) places
strong emphasis on achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women.
It is therefore time that the Council prioritize
a gender perspective in diagnosing security-risk
situations and in formulating solutions for reducing
82/108

25/10/2018

such risks. The Council must consider the meaningful
participation and empowerment of women across all
agenda items, including in all mandate renewals. It
must provide the necessary leadership and follow-up
to the implementation of its resolutions on the topic,
and it must produce analytical evidence-based progress
reports. Most important, the women and peace and
security agenda must become part of the Council’s
regular toolbox, in addition to debates such as the one
we are holding today.
Maldives is fortunate to have a tradition where
household decisions are taken jointly by women and
men in most situations. Maldives has always had
universal adult suffrage, and we have always had
maternal and paternal leave, which are now guaranteed
by law. There has never been discrimination in school
enrolment or employment, and now girls outperform
boys in secondary school graduation rates.
Beyond those achievements, Maldives is continuing
its efforts to overcome existing challenges to ensuring
respect for the rights of women. It is taking steps to
increase the number of women in executive positions
and decision-making roles in both the Government and
the private sectors, while continuously challenging
the traditional paradigm that women occupying senior
positions in companies or the Government have to make
a binary choice between career and family.
Through our employment act, Maldives has already
taken steps to ensure that women are ensured equal
access to employment and equal pay for equal work.
The act also makes it illegal to use gender or marital
status as a basis for terminating employment. In 2016,
Maldives enacted a gender equality act, which outlines
the steps that the Government, business entities,
non-governmental organizations and other employers
should take to ensure equality and non-discrimination
with regard to women and girls. It also requires the
Government and political parties to ensure that equal
opportunities exist for women and girls to participate
at all levels of political life.
Women are the custodians of the cultural and
spiritual values of a community. We must accept that
the role of women has changed at a rapid pace and that
women now profoundly affect all aspects of society.
We must ensure that women’s progress is sustained and
accelerated, if we are to realize the promises set forth
in the Council’s resolutions.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me join my colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to the Bolivian
presidency for convening today’s meeting. I also want
to acknowledge all of the briefers.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following comments.
Women are indeed at the centre of the conflictprevention platform of the United Nations. While gender
parity in the Organization’s peace and security sector
has yet to be achieved, we welcome the significant and
continuous efforts by the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to increase women’s participation in
areas pertaining to international peace and security.
Based on key findings, recommendations and
consultations with civil society, the Government of
Georgia has already adopted its third national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
covering the period of 2018-2020. Its first plan was
adopted in 2011. Apart from delivering on the global
women and peace and security agenda, the plan is
also aimed at protecting the rights of conflict-affected
women by ensuring their physical, social, economic
and political security, as well as eliminating all forms
of discrimination against women and supporting their
participation in decision-making.
Particular emphasis is given to ensuring a gender
perspective in peace negotiations and to the promotion
of the meaningful participation of women and girls in
conflict prevention. The 2018-2020 national action plan
has been harmonized with the Government’s action
plan on the protection of human rights and aligned with
the relevant objectives, targets and indicators set for
the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals at
the national level. The plan has also been incorporated
into the agency-specific internal action plans of lead
Government agencies and local municipalities, with
civil society and development partners playing an
important support role.
Within the framework of our commitments under
resolution 1325 (2000), we continue to promote
conflict-affected women in Georgia as a driving force
of public diplomacy. As a result, today more than 65 per
cent of those involved in peace processes in Georgia
are women. Furthermore, the Government of Georgia

S/PV. 8382

facilitates an increased role for women in reconciliation
and confidence-building projects, carried out with the
support of local and international organizations.
Yet despite those efforts to empower conflictaffected women, the Russian Federation’s ongoing
occupation of Georgia’s regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali hinders the peace process and imposes severe
conditions on one of the most vulnerable parts of our
society. Women living in Georgia’s occupied regions,
as well as in areas adjacent to the occupation line, are
systematically subjected to human rights violations,
including the denial of the right to the freedom of
movement, illegal detentions by the occupying forces
and threats to physical security for so-called illegal
border crossings.
In the light of that, let me brief the Council about
a Georgian woman, Maia Otinashvili, who is the most
recent victim of the occupation. While harvesting a
plot of agricultural land in her own orchard, Maia
Otinashvili was seized and kidnapped from the village
of Khurvaleti by the occupation forces. Ms. Otinashvili,
who is a mother to three minors, was physically abused,
blindfolded and rushed to Russia’s illegal military base,
where she was accused of the so-called facilitation of
illegal border crossing. It took 10 days of persistent
efforts by the Georgian Government and international
organizations to have Maia Otinashvili released and
returned to her family, who is suffering from severe
emotional and psychological trauma.
Sadly, Ms. Otinashvili’s story is not an unusual
case, but an everyday part of life for those living in
the vicinity of the occupation line. Overall, from 2015
to 2018, 160 women have been illegally detained by
Russian occupation forces and the authorities in control.
Despite numerous Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 876 (1993), 993 (1995) and
1187 (1998), as well as numerous General Assembly
resolutions stressing the necessity to address the need
for the dignified return of all internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees, hundreds of thousands of
IDPs and refugees — including women, children and
other vulnerable strata of society — remain prevented
from the right to return to their places of origin in
safety and with dignity.
Against that background, my country’s commitment
to the peaceful resolution of the conflict remains
unwavering. We will continue to spare no effort to
facilitate the reconciliation process among the war-

18-3401483/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

torn population by integrating gender perspectives in
decision-making, protecting the rights of women and
promoting their meaningful participation in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, while we reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, both nationally
and globally, we call for increased attention from the
members of the Security Council to the protection of
women’s rights in the occupied regions of Georgia and
other conflict-affected areas around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mrs. Pejanović Đurišić (Montenegro): As we are
approaching the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), I would like to thank the
Bolivian presidency for organizing today’s open debate
on promoting the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda through women’s political
and economic empowerment and for preparing an
informative concept note (S/2018/904, annex).
My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security. I would, however, like to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Women around the world are systematically
underrepresented in decision-making, not only in the
political arena but also in economic and wider social
spheres. In many places they have fewer resources and
are even deprived of fundamental rights in a number
of sectors, such as education, health, the economy and
the media. Women are often marginalized, made to feel
vulnerable and victims of violence and exploitation in
different contexts and environments. That is a fact,
in spite of the common knowledge and available data
showing that societies are stronger when the rights of
women and girls are respected, when women are valued
and empowered and when they have leading roles in
ensuring security and peace, as well as in political and
economic activities.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900) shows that the current level of
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda still falls short of the mark. Today’s debate is
an opportunity to learn more about the successful cases
of the inclusion of women and the various positive and
84/108

25/10/2018

negative experiences related thereto. In that manner, we
will be able to consider which practical measures should
be taken to further promote gender equality, the role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and the construction of stable, more economically
developed and fairer societies, and, on that basis, to
commit ourselves to do more.
Women’s voices are not heard on a number of issues
that concern their lives and the lives of their families
and communities. We must support their ability to
influence policies that promote the peacebuilding
and development agenda and reduce inequality.
Montenegro has a comprehensive approach to gender
equality at the national level, with a focus on three
priorities: first, increasing the political participation of
women; secondly, combating violence against women;
and, thirdly, supporting the economic empowerment
of women. We are striving to create an efficient
framework for the systematic improvement of the
position of women and girls in Montenegro. However,
work in individual countries is not enough to address
and overcome these shared challenges. That is why we
are trying to contribute to efforts at the international
level aimed at delivering on this important agenda.
Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. In cooperation with UN-Women and
other international stakeholders, we have implemented
mechanisms for following-up and monitoring the
implementation of the resolution. At the moment, we
are preparing the next national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for the
period 2019-2023, building on the progress made and
lessons learned. We actively participate in the work of
the agenda of the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network, as well as that of the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network.
In line with our NATO commitments, we have
contributed to the NATO Trust Fund for Jordan,
which aims at increasing female representation and
supporting the recruitment of female officers and
gender training. We have also sent an experienced
gender adviser, responsible for advice and operational
support on the implementation of the resolution 1325
(2000), to NATO headquarters. A number of female
officers in our armed forces were trained and certified
as regional instructors for the implementation of the
gender agenda in international peacekeeping missions
and operations. We support the United Nations actions
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

against conflict-related sexual violence, and we
highly value the importance of training peacekeeping
personnel on preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse. We also joined the European Union’s Spotlight
Initiative to end violence against women and girls,
which is to be implemented worldwide together with
the United Nations.
The women and peace and security agenda is
having an effect on global policymaking. We should
spare no effort to open up real opportunities for women
and girls in schools, businesses, military ranks and
peace processes. Montenegro is fully committed to
this agenda. Increasing the participation of women
in politics and the security sector is a process that is
showing certain positive results, but we should be more
committed to women’s empowerment in economic
spheres. Enabling half of the world’s population to
contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development by serving their communities
is the way to make real achievements when it comes to
sustainable development and peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Security Council under
the presidency of Bolivia for convening today’s open
debate on women and peace and security. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) for their
briefings, leadership and efforts aimed at enhancing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. I also welcome the participation of Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah, General Director of the Women’s
Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling. I would like to
touch on four main points in my statement.
First, with regard to the enhancement of transitional
justice for women, there is increasing evidence that,
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts is
considered a prerequisite to sustainable peace. The State
of Qatar has therefore supported efforts to facilitate
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The State of
Qatar has been committed to providing it with financial

S/PV. 8382

support. Given the obstacles to finding alternative ways
to establish accountability for crimes, the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism plays an
important role in supporting investigations on sexual and
gender-based violence impartially and independently.
It supports the prosecution of perpetrators by taking
into consideration the importance of this step towards
achieving transitional justice for women in Syria. The
State of Qatar is helping in every possible way to ensure
its success.
Secondly, I would like to express how pleased we
are that the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad, the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking, in acknowledgement
of their efforts to put an end to the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war in armed conflicts. That recognition
stresses the importance of continuing to condemn
impunity for sexual crimes committed in conflict. It is
an appeal to States and the international community to
redouble their efforts to end the use of sexual violence
against women as a strategy and weapon of war, as well
as to achieve justice.
The State of Qatar, as one of the main donors to
the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims
of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, takes pride in supporting the work and
programmes that ensure the provision of support for
women who have been subjected to trafficking, as well
as the necessary assistance and protection to ensure
their physical, psychological, social and economic
recovery and their reintegration.
Thirdly, with regard to young women’s participation
in peace processes, we are all aware of the vital role of
young people in efforts leading to peacebuilding and
sustainable peace. However, young women frequently
continue to be excluded from peacebuilding efforts.
In that respect, we would like to highlight the timely
initiative taken by the State of Qatar, Finland and
Colombia, in collaboration with the United Nations
Special Envoy on Youth and a number of United
Nations relevant agencies, which will include the
holding in Helsinki, from 5 to 7 March 2019, of the
first international conference on youth participation in
peace, in which some 80 key stakeholders in the area of
youth engagement in peace will take part. It will be an
opportunity to engage in an open discussion on youth
participation in peace, bridge gaps for women activists

18-3401485/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

in peacebuilding and enhance our tools for sharing best
practices in that area.
Fourthly, while in recent years women have
taken on many different roles — as negotiators,
mediators, soldiers and police officers — their stories,
accomplishments and lessons learned have not been
shared or documented. The State of Qatar, together
with Colombia, has therefore recently published a book
entitled HERstory: Celebrating Women Leaders in the
United Nations, which highlights the accomplishments
of women leaders in the area of peace and security
throughout the history of the United Nations. In his
foreword to the book, the Secretary-General writes,
“Their accomplishments remind us of what we miss
when the role of women is absent”. We must emphasize
that many of those women are still here with us today.
However, what we need to do is not just celebrate them
but make them part of our daily life. As the book says,
women come with a perspective, an approach and a
collection of essential skills and expertise for enhancing
international peace and security and the women and
peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Bolivia for convening this important open debate, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/900). We
would like to highlight two themes from the report. The
first is women’s participation in peacekeeping and the
second is the barriers to women’s access to essential
services in conflict and humanitarian situations.
Earlier this month, New Zealand hosted the
annual conference of the International Association
of Peacekeeping Training Centres (IAPTC), which
included workshops on the women and peace and
security agenda. We were gratified to see a continued
commitment to the greater participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and to see ideas shared openly
and constructively. New Zealand, which currently holds
the presidency of the IAPTC, is pleased to share that
New Zealand’s Colonel Helen Cooper is its first female
President in its 24-year history. Over the coming year,
we will be working with some of the peacekeeping
training centres on initiatives to further commitments
on women and peace and security commitments.
Besides
participation
in
peacekeeping,
the Secretary-General’s report highlights the
discriminatory barriers that women and girls face in
86/108

25/10/2018

conflict and humanitarian situations. We know that
women and girls are disproportionately exposed to a
high risk of violations of their human rights in such
situations. Empirical evidence shows that reduced
access to sexual and reproductive health services
results in the needless loss of lives, owing to increased
rates of unsafe abortions and preventable maternal
mortality and morbidity. Removing discriminatory
barriers to access is critical to ensuring the health
and safety of women and girls. Women and girls must
have power over their own lives, including the right to
fully control and freely decide matters relating to their
sexual and reproductive health and rights. We welcome
the adoption of Human Rights Council resolution 39/10,
on preventable maternal mortality and morbidity and
human rights in humanitarian settings.
We all benefit when the women and peace and
security agenda is fully realized. We build safer and
more prosperous societies, our peacekeeping efforts are
more likely to take hold and we improve the chances
of achieving sustainable peace. I want to affirm that
New Zealand, as the first country to recognize women’s
suffrage, remains committed to realizing that agenda.
As we near the end of the time frame for our first
national action plan, we look forward to working with
civil society to identify ambitious targets and actions
for our second.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mrs. Sudmalis (Australia): There is no one-size-fitsall solution to ensuring women’s meaningful
participation in peace processes. We need research and
to share knowledge to translate the theoretical concepts
of the women and peace and security agenda into action
and good practice. We need to identify solutions and
approaches that are context-specific, inclusive and
informed by experience, especially that of local actors.
Australia welcomes the report of the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security and its
recommendations, and commends the work of the experts
who contributed to it. Towards an Inclusive Peace, an
Australian-funded research project in partnership with
Australia’s universities, focuses on women and peace
and security in the Indo-Pacific region. That research,
which also informed the Expert Group’s report, shows
that one of the most crucial factors in securing lasting
peace agreements is the active presence of women’s
civil-society organizations. Women’s organizations
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

are on the ground before, during and after conflicts.
They help mediate and resolve conflicts and rebuild
community relations and trust in institutions. Yet
women’s organizations in our region tell us that it is only
when women enter the post-conflict security sector or
Government that their governance skills, capacities and
qualities are fully appreciated.
Australia is proud to be the founding and largest
donor to the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund
in support of women’s grass-roots organizations.
We are also proud to support UN-Women’s Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action. The research also
shows that women’s meaningful participation is rarely
adequately supported or funded. Too often institutional
arrangements exclude women from key processes, and
stand-alone measures such as quotas are not enough
in isolation. Women from our region are seeking
practical responses. Access to childcare, safe transport
and toilets, consulting with women on the timing of
meetings and funding travel for companions or carers
are among their suggestions. They also seek protection
from and an end to the violence that they face from
those who oppose their activism and leadership.
Australia is also researching the gendered
dimensions of violent extremism in the region and
the various roles that women play and could play in
countering extremism and promoting stability and
inclusion. All of those research findings will inform
Australia’s second national action plan, expected in
mid-2019.
Australia has greatly progressed its military gender
adviser capability. We have trained 101 Australian
military gender advisers to deploy on operations and
exercises. We have established 10 full-time genderadviser positions dedicated to mainstreaming and
integrating a military gender perspective in Australia.
We have also established four permanent deployed
gender-adviser positions, including the first Gender
Adviser to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
A commitment to peace demands a commitment to
women’s meaningful participation in peace efforts. We
stand ready to learn more and to share our knowledge
of the meaningful actions that we can take to secure
and ensure genuinely inclusive peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

S/PV. 8382

Ms. García Gutiérrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for having convened
this open debate and the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/900). We also express our thanks for the
briefings provided earlier.
We are pleased that today we are focusing our
discussions on the importance of women’s economic
and political empowerment. We have seen that, when
women occupy decision-making positions and are
significantly involved in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding processes, results are more positive, as
this creates increased trust and social cohesion. We
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform
the Organization, in particular the reform of the peace
and security architecture, which is a reflection of his
work to rectify factors that have prevented gender
parity from being achieved in peacekeeping operations’
missions. In order to help meet the goal of increasing
women’s representation, 80 per cent of my country’s
personnel contribution are women. We believe that the
presence of gender and human rights perspectives in
the various areas of work involving peace and security
processes, for example, in commissions of inquiry and
mediation processes, as well as transitional justice
mechanisms, is key.
In that regard, it is important that peace agreements
include gender-related provisions and that women’s
meaningful participation in negotiating, drawing up,
following up and implementing them be ensured. Another
key dimension of that work involves addressing the
effects of armed violence on women and the important
role that they can play in disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control so as to curtail the cycle of violence
created in such situations. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral highlights the underrepresentation of women
in disarmament efforts, which must be rectified. In
that regard, we welcome his agenda for disarmament,
outlined in the document Securing our Common
Future: an Agenda for Disarmament, and his focus on
the participation of women in that area in line with the
purposes of the women and peace and security agenda.
Peace and stability cannot be achieved without
concrete policies that ensure inclusivity and respond to
gender concerns. Women’s meaningful participation in
the political life of their communities and in conflict
resolution and peacekeeping processes will be achieved
only if institutionalized discrimination, gender-based
prejudices, unequal power dynamics and the failure to

18-3401487/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

fully recognize women’s human rights are challenged
and eradicated. Costa Rica recognizes the importance
of institutionalizing those efforts. Consequently, we
have established the 2018-2030 policy for effective
equality between women and men — a multidimensional
and comprehensive instrument whose main goal is
to overcome the structural obstacles that lead to,
recreate and reinforce inequalities between women
and men and impede meaningful progress towards
achieving equality. Similarly, we are implementing
legislation and regulatory changes and making the
relevant budget allocations to strengthen women’s
political participation and achieve gender parity in
State institutions at the national and local levels, as
well as in social organizations and political parties. We
have translated those efforts into reality by forming
the current Cabinet, which enjoys gender parity. We
are working consistently in the areas of job training,
gender education and training, leadership development,
political participation and empowerment to increase
women’s potential influence in decision-making,
thereby enabling them to actively exercise their rights
as citizens.
Abuse and violence are silent obstacles preventing
women’s advancement and their development in all
areas of their lives. In order to combat that serious
and widespread problem, my country has established a
national policy to focus on, prevent and protect women
from violence. In August, our Executive Power declared
that addressing and preventing violence against women
was in the national interest. Accordingly, we reiterate
that the widespread use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and a weapon of war is heartrending and
unacceptable, as it is also responsible for the political
and economic marginalization of women and girls.
We welcome the recognition of the importance of that
subject as reflected in the awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad.
Women’s economic empowerment has a positive
effect on post-conflict recovery and on communities’
economic growth in general. Discriminatory practices
must be eliminated; women’s access to economic and
financial resources and health-care services, including
sexual and reproductive health, must be ensured; and
legal frameworks that include discriminatory provisions
perpetuating gender inequality and an imbalance in the
enjoyment of rights must be rectified. Our priority must
be to involve women in leadership positions, enabling
them to play a role in decision-making and provide a
88/108

25/10/2018

gender perspective at all levels of participation, as well
as in all activities involving the peace and security
agenda. Such work must share a common denominator
with all efforts aimed at the safeguarding of human
rights. We call for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda to be prioritized in drawing
up our countries’ public policies so as to move forward
decisively in conflict prevention, thereby achieving
sustained peace and sustainable development for every
man and woman.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Kemayah (Liberia):I thank the Security
Council for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security, with a keen focus on the sustenance
of peace through women’s political and economic
empowerment. We consider this to be a matter of great
importance. Accordingly, I am greatly honoured to
deliver a statement on that premise and, in the same
vein, express our appreciation to the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her insightful
briefing and to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for speaking
on behalf of civil society.
Studies have shown that including women in
conflict prevention and resolution generally leads to
a more secure peace, and it has become increasingly
evident that no society has successfully transitioned
out of conflict except when women were a part of the
mainstream of that society. Furthermore, it has been
eight years since we celebrated the tenth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, with many activities, including
a similar open debate in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.6453), and other open debates in subsequent
years. Yet women’s participation in peace and security
processes remains beset by obstacles, including, but not
limited to, commitments that lack sufficient financial
and political support. Despite the gains made in
gender equality in the women’s empowerment agenda,
challenges involving inequities still abound.
To that end, it is the resolve of His Excellency
Mr. George Manneh Weah, President of the Republic
of Liberia, its Government and its people that we must
collectively endeavour to invest in the meaningful
contributions that women make in the prevention and
resolution of conflict in order to realize a more peaceful
and secure environment around the world. Let us all pay
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

heed to the call of the Secretary-General for Member
States to initiate national and regional review processes
in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary, in 2020,
of resolution 1325 (2000). Before Liberia adopted its
national action plan on that resolution in 2009, Liberian
women had already been involved in peacebuilding.
Therefore, the resolution gave only added impetus
to the efforts that were already being exerted by the
women of Liberia. Liberia remains unwavering in its
unflinching practical commitment to achieving gender
parity and upholding women’s rights. What is even more
captivating is that the commitments to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) have received a renewed boost
from the dynamic leadership of President Weah. Those
commitments are given priority in their respective
institutional frameworks, including, but not limited
to, the Government of Liberia’s pro-poor agenda for
prosperity and development, which will be launched on
Saturday, 27 October in Ganta, Nimba county, Liberia
by President Weah, including its revised national
agenda policy and its peacebuilding plan.
The pro-poor agenda sets ambitious targets to
enhance the inclusion of women and girls to reduce
political, social and economic inequalities. President
Weah is Liberia’s feminist-in-chief, a HeForShe
champion who has emphasized his advocacy for
advancing women in political leadership through his
appointment and support of women to occupy political
positions. President Weah selected the honorable
Vice-President of Liberia, Jewel Howard Taylor, as
his running mate on the ticket of the Coalition for
Democratic Change. He appointed the first woman
in our history to occupy the position of Deputy Chief
of Staff of the Armed Forces of Liberia, Colonel
Geraldine Janet George. And he appointed a woman
as Deputy Inspector General of the Liberian National
Police, Colonel Sadatu Teage Reeves, just to mention
a few. While we endeavor as a country to address the
challenges besetting women’s participation in peace
and security processes, we want to commend nations
that are leading by example, including those that have
formulated strategies to increase women’s participation
in peace and security processes and improve their
protection from violence.
In conclusion, on behalf President Weah, the
Government and the people of Liberia, we commend
the United Nations country team, in particular UNWomen in its leadership role, the Peacebuilding Fund,
our international partners and all other stakeholders for

S/PV. 8382

their consistent support to the efforts of the Government
and the people of Liberia to lift and empower women
in all sectors of society. As a country, Liberia looks
forward to strengthening support and encouragement
through its alignment as a member of the Group of
Friends of the African Women Leaders Network, the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Point Network and
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
here at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (Spoke in French):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on an
issue of the utmost importance, that of women and
peace and security. I would also like to thank all the
briefers for their statements.
Conflicts have devastating consequences for all
societies. They have a particular impact on women and
girls, who are most often the target of gender-based
violence and the most excluded from political processes
related to peacebuilding and strengthening security.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
placed strong emphasis on peace, including conflict
prevention and the elimination of root causes through
Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development for all, provide access to justice for
all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels for everyone. That universal
Agenda enshrines another goal — Sustainable
Development Goal 5 — that is dedicated to gender
equality through the empowerment of women and
girls and which promotes the mainstreaming of gender
in all the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In
that sense, the SDGs demonstrate that gender, peace,
security and development are linked, interconnected
and inseparable.
In addition, we are pleased that Secretary-General
António Guterres has made the issues of women’s
empowerment and gender equality a priority for his
mandate. Similarly, the Security Council is ensuring
that it incorporates the dimension of women and
peace and security in all international peace issues.
The historic adoption, 18 years ago, of resolution
1325 (2000) represented an acknowledgement of
the role of women in peace and security, not just as
victims but also as agents of change and key players

18-3401489/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

in the restoration and maintenance of peace, as well
as peacebuilding. The adoption of tat resolution, as
well as those that followed it, sends a strong message
of the international community’s firm and ongoing
commitment to help empower women and protect
their rights. Conflict prevention is a central pillar of
the women and peace and security agenda. Resolution
2122 (2013) reaffirmed the role of women at all stages
of conflict, including conflict prevention and resolution
and post-conflict recovery. The resolution filled a gap
in the interpretation of previous relevant resolutions
that addressed only the prevention of gender-based
violence during conflict, rather than the role of women
themselves in the prevention of conflict.
There is therefore a need to take a more
comprehensive and holistic approach that addresses
the root causes of conflict and bolsters the inclusion
of women in decision-making processes. In that
context, achieving true social peace requires sound and
inclusive political, economic and social structures. My
delegation endorses the recommendations contained in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/900)
that promote equal and timely access to basic services,
the elimination of discriminatory laws and practices,
the strengthening of women’s political representation,
the consolidation of the rule of law and support for
sustainable economic development. In our recognition
of the contribution of women, their ability to provide
key early warnings, their perspectives on tensions
in social relations, their awareness of threats to
personal, family and community security in the fight
against extremism in local discourses and their role in
mediation, Morocco has undertaken several initiatives
and is actively participating in others.
Those include the Spanish-Moroccan Initiative on
Mediation in the Mediterranean Region, launched in
2012; Morocco’s involvement in the network of focal
points on the theme of women and peace and security,
established by Spain in 2016; and Morocco’s involvement
in the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
launched by Italy in 2017. In addition, on 7 September
2016 in Rabat, Morocco hosted an international
conference on the theme of women and peace and
security, which followed up on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The conference examined the
issues of the role of women in mediation and conflict
prevention in terms of de-radicalization, as well as
best practices for preventing sexual violence in times
of conflict. Another initiative in Morocco is that of
90/108

25/10/2018

the employment of hundreds of women as preachers
known as morchidates, in mosques and religious
institutions across the country. Those women highlight
the true teachings of religion, which are based on
tolerance and the acceptance of others and far from
any misinterpretation or radical orientation. They also
provide advice on various issues, including women’s
legal rights and family planning.
Another aspect is the regular deployment of
female personnel in contingents of the Royal Moroccan
Armed Forces in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). Moreover, the rapidly deployable
battalion that Morocco has deployed in MONUSCO,
which is currently in its final phase of deployment, has
a specifically women-based unit. Similarly, by the end
of 2018, Morocco intends to meet the target of women
making up 15 per cent of its experts on mission and
military observers.
Allow me to conclude by highlighting the following
points. Women are the most vulnerable and targeted
members of populations in situations of conflict. Their
contribution to peace negotiations is undeniable and
invaluable. Their participation in peace processes
increases the prospects of conflict resolution, facilitates
the sustainability of peace agreements and promotes
national reconciliation and socioeconomic reintegration.
Empowering women in peacebuilding processes
requires collective and coordinated action by all actors of
society. Civil society and women’s rights organizations
play a valuable role. They can more quickly identify
threats and tensions, provide an independent analysis of
any given situation and create peacebuilding networks.
In two years, we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
That will be an opportunity for us all to take stock
of two decades of significant progress towards the
emancipation of women and their participation in
conflict resolution. It will also be an opportunity to
look beyond 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Thailand welcomes the focus of this year’s Security
Council open debate — women’s political and economic
empowerment as one of the means to effectively
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and sustaining peace through conflict prevention, as
well as broader efforts to maintain international peace
and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000), together with the other
seven resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on women and peace and security, have formed a
strong foundation and normative framework for the
operationalization of that important agenda. Since
2000, a number of innovations have been put in
place — including the establishment, in recent years,
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, and the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Point Networks, in which Thailand has been
actively involved.
There has also been significant progress in the
Council recently with increased attention to the women
and peace and security agenda in response to crises,
such as new provisions in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations that call for women’s participation in
security processes. Thailand welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s new agenda that aims to fully align with the
core purpose of the women and peace and security
agenda, including through the meaningful participation
of women in disarmament.
Thailand firmly supports the women and peace and
security agenda and believes that we are all responsible
for translating it into action, which includes closing
implementation gaps at national and international
levels. Thailand views that agenda in a holistic manner,
with an emphasis on achieving gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls. In the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we
reaffirmed that the empowerment of women and girls
and gender equality are key elements for conflict
prevention and international peace and security.
Thailand has therefore aligned the implementation of
that agenda with its national gender equality strategy
in areas ranging from development and prevention to
sustaining peace.
Our implementation of women and peace and
security agenda has also been part of our country’s
report to the Committee on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Moreover, we submitted a voluntary report on

S/PV. 8382

the status of the iplementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, including data and analysis to
assist in the preparation of the 2018 Secretary-General
report on women and peace and security (S/2018/900).
One of the notable cross-cutting action plans in the
report was the integration of the Women Empowerment
Fund, established in 2012, to provide grants and
loans to women for development-related projects that
increase economic opportunities for women, in line
with Thailand’s national measures and guidelines on
women and peace and security for the period 20172020. Projects are now being launched in areas such as
capacity-building, effective negotiation and mediation,
engagement with community leaders and fund
allocation to promote women-led entrepreneurship.
On the international front, Thailand has been
an ardent supporter of women’s participation in
peacekeeping missions. Seven of 27 Thai peacekeepers
serving at our three peacekeeping missions are women,
accounting for 20 per cent of the total. Thai women
peacekeepers are also at the forefront of community
engagement efforts to promote sustainable development
throughout their services in peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, Thailand is committed to continuing
to do its part at home and abroad to genuinely advance
gender equality and empower women, both politically
and economically, and to maintain international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and Bolivia on your presidency of the
Security Council this month, and I thank you for
organizing today’s debate. It is not a surprise that Bolivia
has chosen the theme “Promoting the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and
sustaining peace through women’s political and
economic empowerment”, given Bolivia’s achievements
and commitment to inclusiveness and gender equality.
It is a pleasure to note that Bolivia has the third-highest
percentage of women in Parliament, after Cuba and
Rwanda. I also thank the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General and the Executive Director of UNWomen, as well Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, for their
statements and informative briefings this morning.
The Security Council has adopted several resolutions
on women’s political and economic empowerment, and

18-3401491/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

women’s increased participation in efforts aimed at
ending conflict. Indeed, since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we now have a comprehensive framework
consisting of four pillars — prevention, participation,
protection and recovery. This debate gives us an
opportunity to take stock of the progress made, but
also to discuss concrete measures we need to take
collectively to ensure more meaningful participation
by women in peace and security — not because it
looks good or because it will make us look good, but
because the meaningful participation of women in the
prevention, mediation and resolution of conflicts, as
well as in the negotiation of peace agreements, is the
only way to resolve conflicts durably and to accelerate
post-conflict recovery. We know that women shoulder
the the heaviest human burden of conflicts. They
therefore have the highest incentive for peace. In that
regard, Rwanda believes that women not only should
but must absolutely be part of all peace processes.
In the immediate aftermath of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, and as the entire Great
Lakes region was mired in instability, my country faced
an insurgency that threatened to spoil the reconstruction
and national cohesion efforts that were under way.
To deal with that threat at the time, the Rwandan
Government turned to women whose relatives had
joined the insurgents, in an innovative programme that
we called “Come and see, go and tell”. Those women
would act as emissaries to reach out to their brothers,
their husbands and their relatives who had joined the
insurgency and would make a case for them to return
home. They took ownership of the programme and
their actions were vital to the successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.
Another measure that substantively contributed
to conflict prevention in Rwanda is the revision of all
land reform laws, including inheritance laws. That has
ensured equal rights to access and ownership of land
for women and men. As a result, today in Rwanda
more women than men own land titles and land-related
conflicts have drastically dropped. Impact assessments
of our land reforms have shown that land ownership by
women has contributed significantly to the economic
empowerment of families and local communities.
It is important to recognize the importance of
home-grown solutions and traditional mechanisms for
conflict resolution. Wherever armed conflict breaks
out, the social fabric breaks down. With that breakdown,
we find ourselves more often reverting to traditional
92/108

25/10/2018

mechanisms of conflict resolution. However, that
works only when we have a social fabric that is still in
place and that we can still mobilize. I am emphasizing
that point because I believe that, as we work towards
the implementation of the agenda under discussion,
we really should put in efforts to involve the guardians
of peace, who are usually the women and elders in
society, to revive the traditional mechanisms of conflict
resolution and mediation. Locally owned mechanisms
would ensure ownership in the community and increase
the chances of successful conflict resolution. External
support and partnerships are more effective and more
sustainable when they complement and build on local
and home-grown solutions.
Women’s meaningful participation in the social
and political life in Rwanda has reaped benefits and
dividends of peace and social and economic gains. We
see the clear link between the pillars of prevention,
participation, protection and recovery. It follows
that women’s participation in conflict prevention
necessitates their participation at the decision-making
table where agendas are set and agreements crafted.
That requires the full involvement of women at all
levels of governance. Just last week, the President of the
Republic appointed a fully gender-balanced Cabinet,
and we were happy for once to be able to compete with
our brothers and sisters from Ethiopia. That builds on
Rwanda’s already exemplary track record of women’s
empowerment in other sectors. Women occupy 61 per
cent of seats in the Rwandan Parliament. Fifty per
cent of our judges are women, and 50 per cent of our
provincial governors are women. Those numbers are
well beyond the constitutional quota requirement,
which is over 30 per cent. The quota requirement was
used as an entry point concerning the rights of women,
but women have been able to deliver to the citizens and
the constituencies, earning women the trust and support
of the population that allows them to go far beyond the
constitutional requirement.
I would like to say that key to the turnaround that
is often spoken about regarding Rwanda is women’s
participation. It is the backbone of Rwanda’s ongoing
social and economic transformation. On that we
can speak from experience. Without women’s full
participation, we would never have been able to
achieve what we have achieved in the areas of peace
and security and on the political and economic fronts.
Women’s participation has now become ingrained in
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

our way of life. I would like to conclude with three
simple recommendations.
First, we really need to make more effective use of
existing platforms. We have a number of very useful
platforms. We cannot mention them all here, but they
include FemWise-Africa, the African Women Leaders
Network, as well as existing networks at the national,
regional and global levels. We need to encourage
women to make use of such networks and increase
their meaningful participation in the area of peace
and security.
Secondly, as was also underlined by the SecretaryGeneral this morning, in Rwanda we fully believe that
what is not measured never gets done. We therefore
really need an assessment and a strong accountability
mechanism, both for ourselves as members and as to
how this agenda is implemented here at Headquarters
and in peacekeeping and political missions in the field.
Last, but not least, we fully concur with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, and we
will spare no effort on our part to implement them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its gratitude to the delegation of
Bolivia for taking the leadership during its presidency
to organize this important annual Security Council
debate on the issue of women and peace and security.
We furthermore wish to express our gratitude for
the concept note (see S/2018/904, annex) drafted in
preparation for this meeting, as well as for the useful
briefings provided to us this morning in the Chamber.
Djibouti aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Group of
friends of the African Women Leaders Network.
(spoke in French)
With today’s growing number of complex conflicts,
it is more important than ever to find the path to
peacebuilding, which is an economic imperative for all.
With resolution 1325 (2000) and the seven resolutions
that build upon it, we have the necessary commitments
and instruments. Now we must give life to those
instruments and commitments while encouraging
greater harmonization between them and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063
of the African Union and, more important, national

S/PV. 8382

programmes. Prevention is essential, especially in
substantial investments in education, the management
of natural resources such as water, job creation, the
protection of women and girls and the promotion of their
role and leadership in the search for peace. The full and
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda remains a priority for Djibouti. I will
focus on three points in that regard.
First, as affirmed in the Beijing Platform for Action,
adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women,
equal participation in decision-making is not only a
demand for simple justice or democracy but can also be
seen as a necessary condition for women’s interests to
be taken into account. Without the active participation
of women and the incorporation of women’s perspective
at all levels of decision-making, the goals of equality,
development and peace cannot be achieved. Much effort
has been expended on this agenda, but much remains to
be done.
Turning to my second point, we can note only with
regret that the impact of climate change on security
affects women disproportionately. Climate change
limits women’s access to essential resources such as
water, thereby reinforcing the negative consequences
of conflict for women. According to the report of the
Secretary-General presented this morning:
(spoke in English)
“For the fifth year in a row, wars, violence and
persecution drove forced displacement worldwide
to a new high: 68.5 million people displaced at the
end of 2017.” (S/2018/900, para. 4)
(spoke in French)
As a result, our responses to peace and security
issues need to address both climate issues and
gender inequality. In that context, we underscore the
importance of adopting appropriate risk-assessment
and management strategies. Those tools pursue both
the immediate objective of mitigating the triggers
and effects of violent conflict, while seeking to build
peace and move towards the long-term objectives of
prevention and sustainable peace.
With regard to my third and final point, my
country has worked to promote women’s participation
in processes of women’s economic empowerment,
in governance and in justice. Many sectoral public
policies in that regard have been put in place and have
been the subject of a national gender programme.

18-3401493/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Article 1 of Djibouti’s Constitution established gender
equality in civil and political rights. On 11 January, the
Government of Djibouti was able to get a law passed
by Parliament that established a quota of 25 per cent
for eligible positions reserved for women on different
lists. Currently, in the public administration, thanks
to a legal framework and political will for equal
participation, women represent approximately 25 per
cent of the workforce.
My delegation fully shares the goal of fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020. The
Council can count on Djibouti to work with it to achieve
that goal. As other speakers have alluded to, the issue
of women’s economic empowerment, the enjoyment
of their fundamental rights and their role within their
families and communities is something that must be
cultivated and encouraged. It is not only a moral issue,
but one of economics and prosperity.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that this
theme concerns not only all those sitting around this
table, but also all the Members of the Organization.
Therefore, what can, and should, we do? In two years’
time, resolution 1325 (2000) will be 20 years old.
Djibouti believes that by 2020 we must to everything
we can to ensure that women’s voices are heard at
the peace-negotiating table, but also in this Chamber.
Today women can be the drivers of a new approach, a
new concept and a new paradigm.
Finally, Djibouti associates itself with all those who
have warmly congratulated the Ethiopian Government
following the appointment of its first woman President,
Ms. Zewde.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express appreciation to the Bolivian presidency of
the Security Council for the choice of the theme for
the present debate. The women and peace and security
agenda provides an important normative framework
for strengthening our collective efforts towards
conflict prevention, recovery, rehabilitation and
sustaining peace.
We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
about the persisting challenges facing the protection
of international human rights and humanitarian law
across conflicts, particularly with regard to the rights
of women and girls, who are still at an increased risk
94/108

25/10/2018

of violence, injustice and inequality, including in
terms of access to essential services, resilience and
livelihood opportunities. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/900) points out to disturbing prevalence
of gender-based violence in situations of conflict.
Armenia is a strong advocate for the protection of the
rights of women living in conflict areas. A failure to
promote these efforts can threaten peace and security
processes and undermine our collaborative efforts to
protect at-risk populations. The United Nations system
should do more to engage affected populations and
support those who raise their voices.
Armenia welcomes the special focus of the
Secretary-General’s report on the central role of women’s
meaningful participation and representation to prevent
conflict and sustain peace. We also acknowledge the
important efforts for advancing women’s representation
and leadership across the entire United Nations system.
This spring was a momentous time in Armenian
history, during which the citizens of Armenia, with
youth and women at the forefront, fully exercised their
fundamental freedoms of expression, belief and opinion.
The Government of Armenia has since promoted
the sense of confidence in women’s meaningful
participation in public affairs and political processes.
Armenia is placing high priority on fundamental
reforms aiming to accelerate gender equality and
women’s empowerment outcomes. They include
enhancing women’s participation in decision-making
positions and increasing women’s representation
in politics. We are currently in the final stage of the
elaboration of the national action plan for resolution
1325 (2000), following an inclusive process of
extensive public consultations involving civil society.
The adoption of the action plan, upon the completion
of the finalization procedure, will mark an important
milestone in translating the objectives of resolution
1325 (2000) into specific commitments and action.
Armenia is fully committed to the promotion
of gender-sensitive policies, having embraced the
women and peace and security agenda as a priority in
our national and foreign policies. This year, Armenia
was elected to the United Nations Commission on
the Status of Women. We take this opportunity to
renew our commitment to global efforts for women’s
empowerment and the enhancement of opportunities,
as well as gender equality in all facets of economic,
political and social life.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

(spoke in French)
Earlier this month, Armenia hosted the Summit of
la Francophonie in Yerevan. One of the main documents
adopted at the Yerevan Summit was the Francophonie
strategy for the promotion of equality between
women and men, and the rights and empowerment
of women and girls. The strategy recognizes that
women and women’s organizations and networks play
an important role in promoting peace, mobilizing
peace movements and preserving communities, in
particular in conflict situations, when their economic
and social responsibilities increase. The strategy also
recognizes that the participation of women from diverse
socioeconomic backgrounds in peace processes creates
the conditions for an inclusive approach conducive to
genuine national reconciliation, which is necessary for
the effective implementation of peace agreements.
In conclusion, Armenia stands ready to support
commitments to increase women’s participation in
peace processes and to increase their representation
at all levels of decision-making. We are convinced
that the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, with their promise of leaving no one behind,
will be possible only through resolute commitment and
concerted efforts to empower women in an inclusive
and equitable way at all levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Darisuren.
Ms. Darisuren: I am honoured to be here today
representing the Secretary-General of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The women and peace and security agenda’s
integrated approach resonates strongly with the
OSCE’s concept of comprehensive security. The OSCE
recognizes that the politico-military, the economic and
environmental, and the human dimensions of security
are tightly intertwined. We particularly welcome that
this year’s open debate puts strong emphasis on women’s
political and economic empowerment and on women’s
meaningful participation in all aspects of preventing
and resolving conflicts and building peaceful societies.
By now the evidence is indisputable that the
meaningful engagement of women in peace processes
leads to more effective and sustainable outcomes.
A failure to include them is a missed opportunity to
use every possible factor to achieve peace. However,
in the OSCE area, women’s meaningful participation

S/PV. 8382

in peace processes remains a problem. There is
underrepresentation of women within negotiating
parties, as well as in OSCE mediation teams.
To overcome that challenge, the OSCE Mediation
Support Team and the Gender Section are developing a
toolkit on the inclusion of women in peace processes.
The toolkit will identify how women are engaged in
peace work in the contexts where the Organization
supports formal negotiation or dialogue-facilitation
processes. It will outline practical steps and measures
to increase women’s inclusion and to bridge the gap
between women’s peacebuilding efforts and the official
negotiation formats.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
is present on the ground in eastern Ukraine with a
particular mandate to facilitate dialogue in order to
reduce tensions on the ground. That includes facilitating
so-called windows of silence for critical infrastructure
repairs to enable the flow of water and electricity to the
civilian population.
In the communities in eastern Ukraine that are
heavily impacted by violence, the OSCE monitors
observe the resilience and community spirit of the
many women active in village councils, in civil society,
as teachers, and in the distribution of humanitarian aid
on a daily basis. Women’s involvement is crucial when
it comes to preventing further escalation of tensions,
bringing peace and keeping it. OSCE reports about
those activities support women’s voices to be heard at
the higher levels of decision-making, where women
remain underrepresented.
The prevention of violent conflicts is far cheaper
than responding to conflicts after they have broken
out. Women’s inclusion in political, economic and
social life is a key factor influencing society’s
propensity for conflict. Yet women continue to
be underrepresented in governing structures, and
particularly in decision-making positions. At the
moment, approximately 28 per cent of members of the
national parliaments in the OSCE region are women. The
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights facilitates and supports institutional change,
knowledge-sharing and capacity-building to advance
women’s representation and influence in political and
public life. For example, the Office supported the Equal
Opportunities Caucus of the Ukrainian Parliament in
organizing the first-ever Ukrainian Women’s Congress,
in 2017.

18-3401495/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

There are numerous examples of OSCE field
operations in supporting women’s political participation
at the local and national levels in electoral and security
sector reforms. In the area of economic empowerment,
the OSCE is particularly engaged in the enhancement
of women’s entrepreneurship and in creating equal
economic opportunities.
We in the OSCE have supported Governments
and civil society in 25 participating States to develop
results-oriented national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Currently, almost 60 per
cent of the 57 States participating in the OSCE have
adopted a national action plan. The most recent country
to adopt such a plan was Albania, where the OSCE
was able to closely support its preparation process.
However, national action plans must also be effectively
implemented. In our future activities we will be paying
particular attention to the gaps in, and challenges
for, the implementation of the action plans. We will
continue our efforts to empower women to fully
participate in political and economic fields, as well as
in the security sector.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank Bolivia for convening this
open debate and to congratulate its Permanent Mission
on the work it has conducted throughout its Council
presidency this month. We welcome the introduction of
new issues for discussion, drawing attention to ways
in which we might reinvigorate the Security Council’s
working methods.

25/10/2018

recognizes the equal participation of men and women
in both public and private life in order to consolidate
socioeconomic growth in harmony with nature.
Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and their meaningful and
active participation in the quest for peace. In that
regard, we are striving to make women and men
equal at all educational levels nationwide and we have
implemented our comprehensive health-care model
that includes the incorporation of a gender focus when
developing public policies.
Ecuador is also firmly committed to facilitating
decent work for women and their access to
decision-making
processes.
The
Government’s
programmes to reduce underemployment and
unemployment encourage both the participation of
women in the labour market and reduction of the wage
gap. Moreover, the country’s organic law on electoral
and political organizations demands equal participation
in the decision-making processes and at all levels
of power.
With regard to conflict prevention and resolution, the
Constitution establishes that Ecuador is a constitutional
State of rights that will adopt affirmative measures of
action promoting genuine equality in favour of rights
holders who find themselves in a situation of inequality,
as well as establishing priority protection in the public
and private arenas for victims of sexual violence. The
Constitution recognizes the right of people to live free
from all forms of violence.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of Ecuador
on the political and economic empowerment of women
and their meaningful and active participation in the
quest for peace — from the prevention and resolution
of conflicts to the implementation of initiatives aimed
at the economic recovery of women in post-conflict
situations and their greater representation at all levels
of decision-making.

Ecuador undertook a major national crusade to
eradicate discrimination and violence against women.
In that context, we highlight our integral organic law to
prevent and eradicate violence against women, which
entered into force in February. That constituted an
important milestone at the national level and ensures
the involvement of women in working towards its
implementation. Ecuador also has a national plan for the
eradication of gender violence, which was established
as a public policy in 2007.

The Ecuadorian State has in place a solid legal
framework that guarantees the validity, exercise
and enforceability of women’s rights, based on two
fundamental pillars: the Constitution, which explicitly
addresses gender equality, and the internationally
binding instruments ratified by the State. Moreover,
we have integrated the gender perspective in a crosscutting manner throughout our development plan, which

Furthermore, the Constitution determines that
the armed forces of Ecuador are an institution for
the protection of the rights, liberties and guarantees
of citizens and that its members are judged solely on
judicial function. As of 2008, trials before military
courts ceased to exist, which reflects the determination
of the State to have impartial judges and thereby avoid
impunity. The incorporation of women into the armed

96/108

18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

forces has increased since 2009, when military women
made up 1.1 per cent of the total number of troops,
and then again by 2012, where it more than doubled to
2.11 per cent. This year, the number of women troops
stands at 3.5 per cent. Ecuador currently contributes
women officers as observers in the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
The Ministry of National Defence incorporates the
concept of defence as a public asset and, in that context,
the gender approach is included in its defence policy
agenda. Human rights are also considered as an area
of action for the political management of defence and
include the promotion of policies for gender equality
and practices for peaceful coexistence and respect
for the cultural identity of its members, as well as the
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009).
In conclusion, we welcome these spaces where we
can express ourselves about the political and economic
empowerment of women and their meaningful and
active participation in the search for peace. Likewise,
we express our sincere desire to join efforts for a
productive and successful dialogue that promotes
gender equality and the advancement of women in all
areas and in all fields. These are essential elements to
honour the commitment to leave no one behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to uphold its tradition of participating
in this annual open debate on the important topic of
promoting the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and sustaining peace through
women’s political and economic empowerment.
Trinidad and Tobago recognizes the competence
of the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations in matters related to
the maintenance of international peace and security
and wishes to express its satisfaction that the issue of
women and peace and security remains prominent on the
Council’s agenda. My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his important
remarks on the subject. We also welcome the very
informative briefings by the Executive Director of UNWomen, as well as the representatives of civil society.
For Trinidad and Tobago, the achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of women

S/PV. 8382

remain pivotal to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Against that backdrop,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s disarmament
agenda, entitled “Securing Our Common Future”,
which has a strong foundation in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We furthermore commend
the Secretary-General for his recognition and advocacy
with respect to the meaningful inclusion of the equal,
full and effective participation of women in all
decision-making processes related to disarmament.
My delegation remains appreciative that the SecretaryGeneral has prioritized gender parity as a moral duty
and an operational necessity.
Eighteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted by the Security Council. Trinidad and Tobago
remains steadfast in its view that the seminal character
of that resolution cannot be overemphasized, as it was
the first to recognize the need for the involvement of both
women and men in efforts to attain sustainable peace
and security. Similarly, we recognize the distinctive
nature of subsequent resolutions on sustaining peace,
as well as the importance of women’s leadership
and meaningful participation in the prevention and
resolution of conflict and peacebuilding, as embodied
in the relevant resolutions on sustaining peace. Our
support for those resolutions is not based only on our
legal obligations under the Charter, but also on our own
national laws, which have entrenched the inalienable
rights of women into our domestic legal framework.
Trinidad and Tobago subscribes to the rule of law
as a fundamental safeguard in the advancement and
protection of the rights of women. We therefore view
as essential our continued adherence to obligations
under a number of international instruments that seek
to protect the rights of women and girls, including
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict, and, in my country’s specific
circumstances, armed violence, continues to engage
our attention. Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong
proponent of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). We submit
that the ATT represents a significant achievement in the
global fight to eliminate the diversion of conventional
arms to the illicit market, which could reduce, if not
end, untold suffering, particularly for women and girls.
The Caribbean Community played an important role in
securing a particular provision of the Treaty that was

18-3401497/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

cause for much celebration — the inclusion of language
that protects women and girls from armed genderbased violence.
In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, in 2010 Trinidad and Tobago
introduced the first General Assembly resolution on
women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms
control — resolution 65/69. It is our view that the
resolution complements resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on the matter by focusing on
the participation of women in processes geared towards
the advancement of disarmament, international peace
and security. The present iteration of the resolution is
currently being addressed within the context of the First
Committee of the General Assembly and continues to
enjoy the support of a large number of States.
As a current member of the Executive Board
of UN-Women, Trinidad and Tobago pledges to
continue to work with Member States for the universal
achievement of gender equality. We recognize UNWomen’s strategic plan for the period 2018-2021 as
an important instrument that could contribute to the
attainment of that objective. Additionally, for the first
time, a national of Trinidad and Tobago was elected
to the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women for the period 20192021. We are grateful to the international community
for the confidence entrusted to Trinidad and Tobago in
that regard.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to the
advancement and empowerment of women. We remain
committed to working with other Member States and
our partners at the regional, hemispheric and global
levels to promote the involvement of women as equal
partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of decision-making processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Bolivia for its
initiative to organize this open debate on women and
peace and security.
Romania aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union. I would now like to make
some remarks in my national capacity.
98/108

25/10/2018

This year, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to
two people for their efforts to stop the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war. The tireless efforts of
Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege to raise awareness
and counter the abominable practices carried out
against women and girls affected by conflict must be a
source of inspiration for all of us — first in identifying
and holding accountable the perpetrators of those acts;
then in seeking justice, retribution and psychosocial
support for victims; and, finally, in allowing survivors
to testify against the harmful practices of which they
were victims.
In that context, we are deeply concerned about the
intimidation of, and reprisals against, women peace
activists and humanitarian activists. Their experience
and fears should not be silenced, but rather expressed
and considered in decision-making processes. In that
regard, integration, non-discrimination and gender
parity play a vital role in peace and security strategies.
Greater visibility in the public arena for those women
is long overdue. Listening to them and enabling them
to engage in efforts to build and maintain peace and to
prevent or minimize conflict is the right approach to
achieve lasting solutions.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by armed conflict and its long-term consequences.
Safeguarding their human rights, ensuring that they
are protected from sexual violence, exploitation and
trafficking is a common refrain. But to turn those words
into an everyday reality around the world, we need to
increase the participation, leadership and presence of
women and girls in decision-making processes.
The participation of women officers in peacekeeping
operations is critical to their operational effectiveness
and has a direct impact on the sustainability of peace.
In 2018 more than 11,000 police officers were deployed
in 15 United Nations missions, of whom only 11 per
cent are women. Reaching the 20 per cent goal by
2020 is a major challenge for the United Nations.
Those numbers reflect the magnitude of the challenge.
Currently, female Romanian officers account for 13 per
cent of its staff in the police contingents deployed in
peacekeeping operations.
As a candidate country for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2020-2021,
Romania renews its strong commitment to enhancing
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
under the banner of the United Nations.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

For many reasons, women are at the heart of
peacebuilding processes. The rebuilding of societies and
economies affected by armed conflict relies heavily on
women’s contributions. That translates into their need
to have better access to education and information,
employment, financial services and markets, and the
need for them to participate in the political debate.
Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to provide them
with better institutional, financial and legal support,
as well as access to resources and technology, in order
to leverage their tenacity, energy and adaptability. The
time has come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mr. Inguanez (Malta): First and foremost, I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s open debate on women
and peace and security, and for giving due importance
to this dimension of peace and security. We are pleased
to participate at this important debate today and look
forward to continue engaging with the international
community on this issue. I would also like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for sharing their insights and experience
with us today.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to present a few additional remarks in my
national capacity.
We are pleased that women’s empowerment, gender
equality and women’s participation in public and
political life is increasingly taking centre stage in the
work of the Security Council. We consider resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions
central to the Council’s work in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Clearly, in achieving
peace and security, we cannot ignore half of our
population. Women should be central participants in
society. They should be able to participate freely in
local and international debates about their futures. They
should be able to hold public office. And they should be
able to become decision-makers in Governments and
society. Women should also be allowed unhindered
participation in discussions and debates outside of their
home countries. As the Secretary-General states in his
report, women have an equal right to participate in all
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict (S/2018/900).

S/PV. 8382

In an overwhelming number of cases, women suffer
direct and deliberate violence in conflict zones. The
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) recognized sexual
violence as a weapon of war. The March 2018 report
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2018/250) presents all of us with a sobering
read. The report also makes it clear that much more is
required to combat the gender-based violence that is
ravaging generations of women and girls.
We take careful note of the Secretary-General’s
concern as outlined in October’s report about the lack
of progress across the most fundamental commitments
to peace and security, human rights and gender
equality. We agree that sustainable approaches to the
challenges highlighted throughout the present report
will require our creativity and long-term commitment
to move beyond one-off project-based approaches to
women and peace and security to achieve system-level
and structural changes.
Gender equality is a priority. Sustainable
Development Goal 5, as outlined in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, should be one of the
main overarching principles for all States Members
of the United Nations in the field of gender equality
and women’s empowerment. Over the past years, Malta
has taken renewed steps to enhance gender equality. A
new law against gender-based violence and domestic
violence was enacted this year that incorporates the
provisions of the Istanbul Convention. Furthermore,
a focal point on women and peace and security was
appointed within our Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
Trade Promotion.
Malta welcomes the Secretary-General’s plan
to enhance women’s participation at all levels. It
is important for the United Nations to be seen as an
example of an international organization actively
recruiting and promoting women to high-level posts.
Women and girls need examples to emulate and on
which to chart their future career paths. Demonstrating
actively that women in decision-making roles are the
norm and not the exception will be an important legacy
of the United Nations for generations to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Ms. Rodríguez Martínez (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is grateful to the Plurinational

18-3401499/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

State of Bolivia for convening this important open
debate and for drafting the concept note to guide
our deliberations today (S/2018/904, annex). We are
also grateful for the Secretary-General’s briefing, as
well as that of the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka — whose work has been defining
in the promotion of this agenda — and Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/900)
on the crucial issue before us today concludes that
significant obstacles remain for women to participate
effectively in the maintenance and consolidation
of peace. Humankind continues to witness the
devastating consequences of violations of international
humanitarian law in the armed conflicts that plague the
world today, particularly for women and girls, who are
the first victims of the dramatic consequences of war
and who are also subjected to recurrent and systematic
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as brutal
gender violence.
Our country is convinced that the participation and
contributions of women at all levels, phases and areas
linked to the prevention and settlement of conflicts
are essential to achieve lasting and sustained peace.
There will be no international peace and security if
women and girls — who constitute more than half of
the population affected by armed conflicts — are not
effectively included and integrated.
Faced with those critical scenarios, it is vital to
have the highest political commitment when the various
national and international bodies come to allocate
resources that are fair, sufficient and predictable, aimed
at eradicating social exclusion and inequality and the
feminization of poverty, and to promote structural
processes of resilience, institutional capacity and access
to essential benefits for women, addressing not only
their technical training and skills to exercise advocacy
but also the coverage of their basic and security needs.
We reiterate that the full realization of all those
commitments and ideals in favour of women will not
be possible while some States and entities continue to
implement unilateral coercive measures against other
sovereign States for political motives in economic,
commercial and financial terms. We once again
condemn those measures as illegal and in violation of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and
because they violate peace and stability and generate
suffering in more than a third of humankind, only
100/108

25/10/2018

succeeding in pursuing the interventionist agenda and
the war of its promoters.
The United Nations must continue its work
to improve the training of all personnel deployed
in the field and to have a greater presence of
experts — especially women — on gender issues and
advisers on the protection of women in peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we categorically condemn
all incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed in the framework of any peacekeeping
operation, as well as by the military, police or civilian
personnel of the Organization deployed on the ground.
Zero tolerance for those crimes must continue to be a
substantive commitment by the United Nations and the
entire international community in order to continue
working resolutely towards their prevention and to
bring to justice all those responsible for those heinous
and immoral crimes.
We also reiterate our call to all States, entities
and individuals to fully respect the provisions of
international law and the resolutions adopted by this
organ regarding the prohibition of supplying weapons
and providing financial and logistical support to
extremist and terrorist groups, so that there may be an
effective neutralization of their operational capacity and
abhorrent practices of exploitation and sexual violence
against women as an instrument of war and terror.
In conclusion, Venezuela takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its firm belief that women are protagonists and
essential drivers in the struggle for the emancipation of
our peoples. It is therefore incumbent upon us to make
the establishment of the conditions necessary to their
equality and access to equal opportunities a top priority
at the vanguard of inclusive, equitable and transformative
processes of development and peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the observer of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.
Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General’s Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security. I am pleased to be able to
contribute to this ongoing dialogue, which is a priority
for the Alliance.
The adoption of the women and peace and security
resolutions and the work of the Council have helped us
reflect on the broader aspects of security, which address
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

the essential yet often missing influence that women
exert in reshaping the agenda for peace. We understand
the strong correlation between gender equality and a
country’s stability. Women’s empowerment leads to
more peaceful and inclusive communities and is vital
for conflict prevention. The treatment of women in
any society is a barometer by which we can detect
other forms of oppression, and a rise in violence can
be measured through the decrease of human rights and
shrinking spaces for women’s voices.
As a military and political alliance, NATO
recognizes that the security needs of women and men
are different. However, we have sometimes missed the
opportunity to integrate their diverse perspectives. We
are now making sure that all our work adequately reflects
the whole-of-population approach. Sustainable peace
will not be achieved without women’s empowerment
and participation.
NATO is strongly committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. This year,
our Heads of State and Government reinforced that
commitment by endorsing a new policy and action
plan on women, peace and security that enjoys the
support of the 29 allies and many of our partners. The
new policy builds on a framework of three guiding
principles: integration, inclusiveness and integrity.
Those principles, aligned with global women and
peace and security commitments, draw from NATO’s
common values of individual liberty, democracy,
human rights and obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations.
Our principles reinforce the goal that gender
equality must be integral to all NATO-led activities,
operations and missions. We aim to implement that
agenda by dismantling barriers that stand in the way
of the full participation of women in the Alliance and
national forces, but, more important, we will enhance
the accountability of the women and peace and security
mandate by ensuring that we adopt the highest standards
of professional and personal conduct within both the
civilian and the military staff of NATO. Our new policy
represents the next step in advancing the agenda within
the Alliance and reaffirms the continuous commitment
of NATO allies and partners to the integration of
gender perspectives and the women and peace and
security priorities. The policy will become an integral
part of everyday business and support our Alliance
in addressing the complex challenges of the twentyfirst century.

S/PV. 8382

Today’s global threats are complex and multifaceted
and complicate the security landscape in unprecedented
ways. Therefore, we need to respond adequately
through a holistic approach to security. The link
between security and economic stability is well proven.
Women’s economic fragility is reinforced by political
instability. We must do better to support women in
being agents of their own future. NATO is actively
promoting and enhancing engagement with women’s
civil society organizations to strengthen the voices of
those most affected by conflict. We have established
the Civil Society Advisory Panel on Women, Peace and
Security, which is an independent coalition of women’s
organizations that represent the global constituency
of those most affected by inequality and conflict. The
Panel challenges us to broaden our understanding
of security, promote a more inclusive approach and
address the challenges to defence and security.
The members of the Panel have raised concerns
about the current threats to peace around the world
and highlighted their frustration at the slow progress
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
have listened, we have heard their voices, and we
have responded by making sure that the integration
of gender and the inclusion of women’s voices are
mainstreamed throughout NATO’s work. That is the
essential factor in the success of peace and security.
Women everywhere highlight the need to understand
and reinforce preventative measures, which include
gender perspectives in early-warning analysis. We
must recognize that violations of women’s rights and
women’s political and economic isolation are indicators
of potential conflict. The Civil Society Advisory Panel
urges us to make gender more visible within security
responses and provide a clear vision for the future
that relies on coordinated efforts with international
organizations and civil society.
Consistency and coherence across the international
system are critical if we are to advance this agenda.
We must articulate our vision, coordinate our efforts
and demonstrate our collective support while holding
accountable all those responsible for implementing
this mandate. Change requires courage, and courage
demands commitment. The women and peace and
security agenda needs collective action to ensure
tangible progress. We must be courageous in our work,
as we work together to achieve sustainable and lasting
peace not only for women, but for everyone.

18-34014101/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, we
would like to thank the presidency of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia for convening today’s open debate on
women and peace and security, and to welcome the
focus of this discussion on the political and economic
empowerment of women.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his yearly report on women and peace and security
(S/2018/900), which identifies the empowerment of
women and gender equality as cross-cutting issues
and outlines the main challenges affecting women
and girls, as well as the areas in which progress has
been achieved. We fully concur with the SecretaryGeneral that the significance of the equal participation
of women in the economy and in peace processes
cannot be downplayed, and that factors constraining
their inclusion must be tackled. Women have a critical
role to play in promoting and maintaining international
peace and security. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122
(2013) have recognized the importance of women’s
participation in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding.
Millions of women and girls around the world are
disproportionately affected by the impacts of armed
conflict, poverty, gender bias, discrimination and other
forms of disparity. Conflict-related sexual violence is
often used as a tool of humiliation and intimidation.
The devastating health consequences of violence
against women, their children and thus to society are
clear. Regardless of the circumstances and settings in
which violence takes place, perpetrators must be held
accountable for their action. It is the responsibility of
Member States to ensure that women and girls do not
suffer due to their gender.
As a country a part of whose territory is under
military occupation, with accompanying ethnic
cleansing and other atrocity crimes committed against
its civilian population, we consider the safety of
civilians to be of the utmost importance. More than
1 million Azerbaijani refugees and internally displaced
persons, half of whom are women, have been displaced
from their homes and have continued to suffer for the
past 30 years. The international community should not
remain indifferent to the plight of women and girls in
armed conflicts and has a duty to protect them from
harm. Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
102/108

25/10/2018

action is that of civilians, including women and children
taken hostage and reported missing in connection
with armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues its efforts
to raise awareness of the problem at the international
level, including through the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.
Prevention is the most effective strategy to empower
women and girls, as it allows us to pre-emptively
address obstacles limiting their ability to reach their full
potential. In that regard, enacting gender-responsive
policies and mechanisms can create an environment
that is supportive and conducive to women’s success.
In recent years, a number of important policies and
programmes aimed at ameliorating the situation of
women have been implemented in Azerbaijan.
From 2016 to 2017, the State Committee for Family,
Women and Children Affairs of Azerbaijan, together
with the United Nations Population Fund and other
partners, carried out a project on the elaboration of the
national action plan on women and peace and security.
A working group on women and peace and security,
representing women from different organizations, was
established for that purpose and oversaw the preparation
of the draft national action plan. In May 2018, the State
Committee held the fifth women’s forum, which was
dedicated to the hundredth anniversary of women’s
suffrage in Azerbaijan. That event marked one of the
most important milestones in the history of Azerbaijan,
which in 1918 granted women the right to vote.
The economic empowerment of rural women and
girls, who represent 77 per cent of the female population
of Azerbaijan, is among the key priority areas of our
Government. Since 2011, the State Committee and the
United Nations Development Programme have jointly
implemented a project on promoting rural women’s
participation in economic and social life. A number of
women with disabilities have developed business skills,
some of them have established businesses of their own,
and many women have benefited from gender equality
sessions held in schools. Water and sanitation systems,
which were installed in six locations throughout the
country, improved access to clean water and sanitation
infrastructure for schoolgirls.
We have made great strides in achieving gender
parity in State institutions. The representation of women
in the National Assembly increased from 11 per cent
in 2005 to 17 per cent in 2015. At the municipal level,
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

women represented 35 per cent of elected candidates
after the 2014 elections, as compared to 4 per cent
in 2004. The proportion of women appointed to key
Government positions has also significantly increased
in recent years. By the end of 2016, 80 of the 87 executive
power bodies in Azerbaijan had women deputy heads.
Azerbaijan has acceded to all major international
agreements in the field of women’s rights and gender
equality. We remain committed to advancing the
rights of women and ensuring their full and effective
participation in the decision-making processes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate. The women
and peace and security agenda was, as many members
know, a priority during our recent term on the Council
and continues to be so today.
We have all made progress since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). However, the data continue
to show a very low participation of women in peace
processes. We strongly agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the adoption of concrete measures
to address the practical and institutional barriers that
continue to prevent the full and meaningful participation
of women in all peace processes.
We welcome in particular the Secretary-General’s
urgent and extraordinary steps towards parity in the
United Nations system and his personal commitment to
improving parity in peace operations by encouraging
a substantial increase in the number of women in
security forces. In that context, the Foreign Ministers
of Spain and Finland jointly presented an initiative
called Commitment 2025 at the high-level event of
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network,
held in New York on 26 September. Today, on behalf of
Spain and Finland, I have the honour to share a broad
outline of our Initiative.
Through the Initiative, we will undertake a series
of commitments to strengthening the full and effective
participation of women in peace processes between now
and 2025. We will make those commitments available
to all Members and to the Organization in the near
future. Those commitments will include additional
measures to increase the institutional representation of
women at all levels in sectors relevant to the women
and peace and security agenda, and especially in

S/PV. 8382

peace processes. They will include the appointment
of women to decision-making positions in peace and
security institutions.
We will commit to funding incentives for women’s
participation. We will work firmly and hand-in-hand
with civil society to ensure that women and their
organizations are included in all peace processes and
negotiations, now and in the future, which could even
result in the setting of numerical targets. We require
international and regional organizations systematic to
progress towards the full participation of women in
peace processes and negotiations, including the sharing
of lessons and best practices, as well as the appointment
by the United Nations of gender advisers for women and
peace and security. We will commit to supporting the
work of the Women Mediators Networks and the Group
of Friends of Mediation to ensure that their efforts are
taken into account in peace processes and negotiations.
We will also commit ourselves to promoting the rights
of girls and women as a key element in identifying
responses to extremism and terrorism. We will consider
providing multi-year funding to support women’s
organizations in conflict-affected countries in order to
strengthen institutional capacity.
Next spring, Spain will organize the third
International Conference on Safe Schools within
the framework of the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration
initiated by Argentina and Norway. The Conference
will have a special focus on the gender approach in
access to education in armed conflicts. That will
require an analysis on specific attacks on the access to
education of women of all ages, including sexual and
gender-based violence. We are convinced that women’s
access to all levels of education — primary, secondary
and university — is a key enabler of women’s full
participation in peace processes; political, economic
and social empowerment; and full enjoyment of
human rights.
Those are the concrete and fundamental ideas
and measures of Spain and Finland’s Commitment
2025, which, as I have mentioned, we will present to
and share with the rest of the Members in the coming
weeks. That commitment will enable us to return
to the fundamentals of resolution 1325 (2000) and
commemorate its twentieth anniversary. At the same
time, it will also enable us to move forward with
definite, determined and concrete steps in the work of
ensuring the real and effective participation of women
in all peace processes.

18-34014103/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): We thank the delegation
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for convening
today’s meeting on women and peace and security. We
are pleased that this important issue continues to gain
prominence on the agenda of the Security Council.
No other country knows it better than Afghanistan,
which has faced nearly four decades of imposed
conflict, resulting in weakened State institutions and
severe collective trauma for our people. The impact
of the conflict has been borne disproportionately by
women, who saw their rights obliterated and voices
repressed during the violent years of Taliban rule.
Since 2001, Afghanistan has secured tremendous
gains towards the promotion and protection of human
rights, particularly those of women. We have prioritized
women’s empowerment as a strategic objective in our
overall efforts to achieve lasting peace, security and
stability. Today, many women are the vibrant voice of
our society. Our core efforts in advancing the rights of
women are primarily based in key national frameworks,
including the national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) and the national priority programme for
women’s economic empowerment. Their successful
implementation is reinforcing the continued effort
towards turning our women into drivers of peace. We
wish to also highlight the fact that our action plan and
national priority programme are embedded in the Selfreliance through Mutual Accountability Framework,
as the overarching umbrella for our partnership with
the international community. The advancement of
women will be discussed at the Novemeber ministerial
conference on Afghanistan, in Geneva.
In July, we submitted our second report on our
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). Through
the plan, we seek to enable women to actively participate
in shaping the future of our country by implementing
various measures to reach the following objectives:
first, increase the meaningful participation of women
in the decision-making process and executive levels of
the civil service, security, and peace and reintegration;
secondly, protect women from all kinds of violence
and discrimination through the implementation and
amendment of existing laws and policies; thirdly,
prevent violence and discrimination against women by
raising awareness and public outreach; and fourthly,
increase economic security for vulnerable women.
104/108

25/10/2018

Although we are in the early implementation stages
of the plan, our second report indicates continued and
steady progress. In the past year, our efforts to fully
implement the anti-harassment law and the penal code
have enabled us to address the societal barriers that
inhibit women from participating in the civil service.
As a result, we have witnessed the emergence of a
prominent presence of women in this field. Today,
around 27 per cent of Government employees are
women. Moreover, nearly 18 per cent of the High Peace
Council’s members are women, with four women at
the executive leadership level actively taking part in
decision-making processes in order to end the conflict
and secure stability and lasting peace.
We have made a concerted effort to substantially
increase women’s role and contribution in senior
Government positions across various ministries and
agencies. We currently have a large number of women
serving as senior-level officials in different sectors. As
such, they are undertaking a proactive engagement in
Afghanistan’s long-term stability and development.
This dynamic will continue to progress in a positive
trajectory. Last week’s parliamentary elections saw the
vibrant participation of women both as candidates and
voters, offering a glimpse of the way in which they are
helping to consolidate democracy in the country. Some
28 per cent of seats in our new lower house will soon be
occupied by women.
Yet, women’s empowerment extends beyond the
political sphere alone. Over the past two years, we have
increased the number of senior positions for women
to serve in our security institutions. Women are a key
part of our national security forces and police, and
have demonstrated exemplary courage and sacrifice in
countering international terrorism and upholding the
rule of law. Women recruits have joined the ranks of
our forces in large numbers, thereby bolstering our aim
of achieving gender equality in all sectors.
In the area of protection, we have undertaken
concrete steps to introduce legislation on violence
against women. We have amended existing laws and
implemented a law on eliminating violence against
women through our courts and other judicial institutions.
Family guidance centres have been established in
provincial capitals to provide legal advice, health and
psychosocial services for survivors of gender-based
violence. In addition, we have created specialized units
within the Attorney General’s Office in more than half
of all provinces.
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

Such measures are positively impacting overall
efforts to protect Afghan women. Initiatives such as
public awareness campaigns, the establishment of
provincial committees and military personnel trainings
are all under way to mitigate and prevent gender based
violence. Through the national priority programme for
women’s economic empowerment, we are increasing
women’s access to economic assets and providing them
with support in owning businesses and assisting them
in enhancing their job skills and financial literacy.
Additionally, we have also implemented and amended
policies to remove legal and societal barriers to women’s
economic participation.
Despite our progress, we have a number of
challenges ahead of us. The biggest impediment to fully
implementing our national plans is insecurity, caused
by violent proxies exported from outside Afghanistan.
The worsening security situation has prevented us
from delivering our objectives to all provinces and
consolidating the gains of the past 17 years. We once
again urge the Council to take appropriate action
against the orchestrators of such insecurity, based
on international legal commitments and core values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
To conclude, women’s empowerment and their
active participation in strengthening peace and
security are among our core priorities. In recent years,
we have strengthened this national will by expediting
the implementation of our national programmes to
advance and strengthen the rights of women. Although
we recognize the need for further progress, we will
remain steadfast in this noble endeavour to consolidate
our achievements. It is only through our persistent
efforts that Afghan women will become agents of
sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Molefe (South Africa): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and the Bolivian delegation
on the professional manner in which you have been
conducting the work of the Council for this month.
Focusing on the political and economic inclusion
of women during peace initiatives is most appropriate.
Research conducted by UN-Women has shown that
when women are included and participate in peace
processes, there is a significant increase in the
possibility of peace agreements leading to sustained
peace. It is generally understood that their participation

S/PV. 8382

improves the chances of dispute resolution and provides
a safe space for women and girls to report allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
The Secretary-General’s reform agenda, with its
focus on conflict prevention as the core pillar, can
be enhanced by focusing attention on the women and
peace and security agenda. The focus on women’s
contribution to conflict prevention should not detract
from our commitment to including women in all areas
of peace processes. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the recent adoption of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. The Declaration reiterates commitments
made by Member States to implementing the women
and peace and security agenda and its priorities. That
will eliminate the disproportionate burden placed upon
women in times of conflict because of sexual exploitation
and abuse, marginalization, forced displacement, loss
of livelihood and decreased access to education, health
care services and economic opportunities.
Having women in leadership positions illustrates
not only that governance and policymaking should be
inclusive of women’s voices but that women should also
be key decision-makers. It further plays a role in gender
mainstreaming through the strengthening of democratic
processes to ensure the equality of women and that such
processes are sensitive to women’s needs and entrench
women’s perspectives and leadership roles.
The historic Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), adopted in 2015, whose essential purpose is
to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment, highlight
the need for gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls. In addition to SDG 5, which
is dedicated to that objective, the SDGs recognize
the specific challenges that women and girls face
in realizing the other development goals. All of us
here must ensure that the objectives of the SDGs are
reflected in our national development plans and that we
all do what we can to ensure that there are adequate
means for achieving the Goals by 2030.
We wish to use this opportunity to highlight
some of the African Union (AU) instruments that
deal specifically with issues pertaining to women. Of
particular importance is the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa, better known as the Maputo
Protocol. The Maputo Protocol seeks to ensure and
guarantee women’s human rights as formulated in the

18-34014105/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

Charter of the AU, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights. In recognizing Member States’ duties
in relation to the Security Council’s resolutions dealing
with women, peace and security, the Maputo Protocol
calls on all States parties to take appropriate measures
to increase the participation of women in peacebuilding
processes and for States to take measures to protect
women in situations of armed conflict. That includes
protecting women from sexual violence and other
harmful practices, such as child marriage and female
genital mutilation.
South Africa remains committed to ending and
condemning the widespread and systemic sexual
violence perpetrated against women and girls. That
instrument of war is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights. We
call on all parties to fully support the survivors of these
brutal acts and strongly condemn the use of sexual
violence in all its forms, particularly as a tactic of war
and terrorism and as an instrument of torture. Ending
this evil scourge, addressing the resulting trauma and
holding accountable those responsible for committing
these heinous acts is integral to the reconciliation and
peacebuilding process. Therefore, my delegation calls
on all parties in conflict zones to create and implement
commitments to combatting sexual violence, in
accordance with resolution 2106 (2013) on sexual
violence in conflict.
The
Executive
Director
of
UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, recently called for
renewed commitments and investments to meet the
Beijing Platform for Action’s now 20-year-old target of
gender balance. She said,
“If today’s leaders front-load gender equality, if
they start now to make good on those 20-year-old
promises, we can look forward to gender equality
by 2030 at the latest”.
We must therefore stress that, ultimately, strengthening
democracy and resilience in peaceful and inclusive
societies requires women’s empowerment, political
participation and leadership.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this open debate. We
appreciate the briefing by the Secretary-General and
his annual report (S/2018/900) concerning progress,
106/108

25/10/2018

challenges and gaps in implementing the women and
peace and security agenda. We also thank the other
briefers for sharing their insights.
We take particular note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for further mainstreaming women’s
participation in peace processes and in United Nations
peace operations. Bangladesh is currently working to
conclude the preparation of its national action plan,
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and its successor
resolutions. We hope to finalize the process to coincide
with the advent of the twentieth anniversary of
the resolution.
We have often shared at the United Nations our
national experience with women’s empowerment in
the aftermath of gaining our independence as a warravaged country in 1971. It was evident from the outset
that without the active and meaningful participation
of our women, our nation-building initiatives would
not result in creating the peaceful, just and equitable
society that our founding fathers had envisaged. The
history of Bangladesh’s development trajectory has
been a story of continued forward strides by our women
in every sphere of our society. The photos of two of our
fighter helicopter pilots deployed in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — which were still to be found
around the United Nations premises recently — have
been an eloquent testimony to the heights our women
have scaled so far. The deployment of our first allfemale formed police unit in Haiti was a critical step
towards expanding women’s participation in United
Nations peace operations.
However, our women and girls continue to face
formidable challenges. It perhaps takes generations
to bring about changes in certain entrenched societal
norms that continue to retard women’s advancement in
the true sense. Considering the sea changes we have
witnessed so far, we are aware that any such change
needs to be actively facilitated in order to gain traction
within society in an organic manner.
In that context, the United Nations and its many
partners can indeed act as standard-bearers for
societies in transition. The women and peace and
security agenda has catalysed decisive and forwardlooking initiatives in a number of contexts around the
world towards expanding women’s participation in
maintaining peace and security. In Bangladesh, women’s
political participation has been ensured through
18-34014

25/10/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8382

certain statutory provisions and affirmative action
leading to their vibrant presence in all representative
institutions, from the local to the national levels. The
growing recruitment of women into our armed forces
and other law enforcement agencies will allow us to
reach our shared targets for the deployment of female
peacekeepers in the near future. Our policy approach
to consider gender as a cross-cutting issue across our
national development strategies has reaped dividends
in terms of reaching the gender-related targets in the
Millennium Development Goals, and currently in the
context of the Sustainable Development Goals. In the
course of their empowerment, our women at the grass
roots have emerged as key agents of change and a
preventive force against the spread of violent extremism
and intolerance.

and security agenda, and particularly in giving effect
to his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, we shall remain engaged in our
efforts to enhance women’s participation in mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and
disarmament and arms control.

Faced with the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
we are now currently working with the relevant
humanitarian partners to create safe, inclusive
spaces for the women and girls residing in camps.
The Independent International Fact-finding Mission
on Myanmar has once again brought to the fore the
inhuman brutalities unleashed against the Rohingya
women by the Myanmar security forces and their local
collaborators. The Fact-finding Mission concluded that
rape had been used against many of these women as a
premeditated tactic. In the initial days of the crisis, it
was a race against time to provide necessary medical
and psychosocial services to the victims. The trauma
suffered by these women continues to be exacerbated
in the backdrop of the prevailing uncertainty over the
prospects for their safe and dignified return to their
homes in Myanmar. The victims among the Rohingya
women and their families have every right to seek
accountability for those who perpetrated against them
the gravest crimes under international law.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has requested the floor to make
an additional statement. I now give him the floor.

On our part, we have recently concluded a
framework of cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for addressing the needs of the victims. Our authorities
will remain sensitized to promoting the effective
participation of Rohingya women in decisions affecting
their community in the present and future. We urge
the Security Council to remain seized of the gender
dimension of the crisis in its continued deliberations on
the situation in Myanmar.
In general, Bangladesh remains committed to
supporting the Secretary-General in all his initiatives
to promote the implementation of the women and peace

We acknowledge the critical importance of
preserving and augmenting the gender advisory
capacities in United Nations peace operations through
the allocation of adequate resources. Our delegation
will lend support to pursuing any items on the women
and peace and security agenda identified as unfinished
from the three review exercises undertaken within the
United Nations peace and security pillar in 2015.

Mr. Baror (Israel): Earlier today my colleague
took her place around this table and expressed the need
to have more women involved in matters of peace and
security and portrayed some of the ways Israel promotes
this agenda, including between Israelis and Palestinians
hoping for a better future for both peoples. It is with
regret that we take the floor once again to highlight the
fact that those who should have advocated the agenda
more than anyone else chose a different path.
The Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
has chosen to invite the head of a Palestinian
non-governmental organization to speak on behalf of
civil society. Civil society has a major role to play in
promoting women’s involvement in matters of peace
and security, and in Israel civil society groups are key
partners in that process. However, Bolivia has chosen to
invite Randa Siniora Atallah, the head of the Women’s
Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling (WCLAC), which
is a little more of a questionable choice.
The Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling
is a Palestinian organization that is supposed to assist
Palestinian women and advocate on their behalf. But
in too many cases WCLAC uses its mandate to spread
hatred and promote violence, all the things that we
believe women’s involvement could diminish when it
comes to issues of peace and security.
WCLAC takes pride in Manal Tamimi as one of its
key members, While Manal calls for violence against
Israeli citizens and uses her social media accounts to

18-34014107/108

S/PV.8382

Women and peace and security

describe how the vampire Jews presumably drink the
blood of Palestinians on their High Holy Days. That is
who the Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling
characterized as a human rights activist in its report to
the United Nations.
But perhaps we should not be surprised with the
Bolivian decision to invite such a person as its speaker
of choice. Bolivia itself is far from being a role model
for human rights, let alone peace and security, as is
well documented in Bolivia’s latest Universal Periodic
Review. Israel, on the contrary, is a free and open
society. What we do and how we do it is open for
ongoing scrutiny, first and foremos by our very own
courts, which are renowned for their strong stand on
behalf of human rights, although, when it comes to
Israel, the world is always watching as well.
The facts are out there and are not hard to find. The
truth, sadly enough, is that the biggest enemy of the
Palestinian people are the Palestinian Government and
Palestinian non-governmental organizations, which are
invited to take a seat at the table but would rather throw
stones at it instead.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
an additional statement in my capacity as representative
of Bolivia, which, I promise, will be very short.
If I may, I would like to read out rule 39 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, for
the benefit of the representative of Israel:
(spoke in English)
“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers
competent for the purpose, to supply it with
information or to give other assistance in examining
matters within its competence.”

108/108

25/10/2018

(spoke in Spanish)
It was the Security Council that made the invitation.
I believe that the immense majority not just of the
members of the Council but of those who were kind
enough to participate in this debate was very generous
in warmly welcoming the involvement of civil society
in today’s debate.
On the other hand, if we wish to speak of the
human rights situation in my country, I would like to
propose to the representative of Israel that his country
allow a delegation, as has been requested on a number
of occasions by the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to visit the
occupied territories in order to see the human rights
situation on the ground of the Palestinians living in
territories occupied by Israel. We have our doors open
to any delegation or committee that wishes to come and
look at the human rights situation in my country, of
which we are absolutely proud.
I have just one more comment — I promise it will
be the last — the greatest enemy of the Palestinian
people today — the more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees who cannot return to their lands — is the
Israeli occupation, the illegal Israeli occupation. When
the occupation ends, then the Palestinians will be able
to enjoy the exercise of their self-determination and
resolve the problems they face for themselves.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list. I
would like to thank all participants for their patience,
commitment and contribution to today’s debate. I would
especially like to thank the staff of the Secretariat, in
particular the entire support team that worked with us
throughout this long day. A special thanks goes to the
interpreters and translators.
The meeting rose at 8.25 p.m.

18-34014
