S/2021/946

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2021
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2576
(2021), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 3 August 2021 (S/2021/700) and the briefing to the Security Council by the
Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 25 August 2021.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Parliamentary elections were held in Iraq on 10 October 2021. The elections
were preceded by the dissolution of the Council of Representatives on 7 October. The
elections began with a special voting day on 8 October for Iraqi security forces
personnel, internally displaced persons, prisoners and detainees. On 11 October, the
Independent High Electoral Commission announced partial preliminary results for all
governorates. On 13 October, the results of 8,547 polling stations selected by lottery
for manual counting, as provided in the electoral law, were added to the overall
preliminary results. On 16 October, the Commission stated that it had completed the
cross-checking and manual count of 3,681 polling stations which had been unable to
send results electronically on election day owing to technical issues. The Commission
also announced the full preliminary election results, with a total voter turnout of
43 per cent. In a statement, the Commission reiterated its impartiality and outlined
the legal appeals process for disputes regarding the preliminary election results.
3.
Following the announcement by the Independent High Electoral Commission of
partial preliminary election results, the President of Iraq, Barham Salih, and the Prime
Minister, Mustafa al-Kadhimi, issued social media statements on 11 October
congratulating the winners of the elections and calling for the formation of a
government that would promote the aspirations of the Iraqi people and protect the
interests of the State. Earlier, on 10 October, on social media, Mr. Salih thanked the
Government, the security services, the Commission and “international observers” for
creating the requirements for the “success” of the elections, while Mr. Al -Kadhimi

21-15839 (E)

161121

*2115839*

S/2021/946

stated that he had succeeded in fulfilling “our promise and our duty in securing fair
elections”.
4.
Initial political reactions to the announcement of preliminary election results
varied across the country. Several political parties and actors rejected the partial and
complete preliminary election results, while others expressed concern about
perceived election irregularities and called for a manual recount. On 16 October, the
Shia Political Coordination Framework (a grouping of Shia political leaders which
includes the Fateh Alliance, State of Law Coalition, the National State Forces
Alliance and others) announced its “full rejection” of the complete preliminary
election results. On 17 October, Muqtada al-Sadr announced on social media his
acceptance of the preliminary election results. On the same day, the political bureau
of the Kurdistan Democratic Party issued a statement welcoming the announcement
of the complete preliminary election results.
5.
On 14 October, Mr. Al-Kadhimi, during a regular Council of Ministers session,
called on all those wishing to appeal the election results to do so in accordance with
the legal framework. This was echoed in a joint statement on 15 October by Mr. Salih
and the President of the Supreme Judicial Council Judge Fa’iq Zaidan, who called on
all parties to adopt a “responsible attitude”, calm tensions through dialogue and avoid
escalation to maintain peace and security, affirming that “the law [would] have a final
say” after all complaints and appeals were addressed.
6.
On 6 October, the Foreign Ministers of Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America
issued a joint statement in support of the early elections, on 10 October, in I raq. On
11 and 12 October, a number of countries issued congratulatory statements, including
China, France, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States.
7.
On 12 October, the European Union issued a preliminary statement by its
election observation mission in Iraq, in which it noted, among other things, that “the
elections were technically well-managed, competitive, and the largely calm electoral
campaigns enabled voters to make informed choices” and also that “the elections
recorded low turnout”. The League of Arab States (LAS), which had deployed
international observers for the elections, released a preliminary statement on
11 October in which it commended the security forces for “providing a safe
environment that allowed Iraqis to carry out their constitutional duty freely” . LAS
stated that the “voting process was smooth in most of the centres and stations visited
by the mission”, while also noting the “low turnout of young people” .
8.
Prior to the elections, the Government of Iraq and relevant authorities worked
to complete the preparatory process for the elections. The Prime Minister, during a
meeting of the Council of Ministers on 7 September, confirmed that the cabinet had
reached “full readiness” to hold the elections as scheduled and that the Government
had “completed all requirements of the technical and security electoral process”. On
11 September, the Prime Minister chaired an extraordinary session of the Council of
Ministers in the presence of the Chair of the Independent High Electoral Commission
and the chiefs of the security services, which was “devoted to providing support for
the elections”. The Prime Minister stressed the importance of the elections and
highlighted the role of all State, security and civil institutions, as well as the Iraqi
security forces, in promoting a safe and enabling environment for voters and
candidates.
9.
On 15 September, Mr. Salih convened a meeting with Iraqi political leaders to
present an Electoral Code of Conduct. The Code of Conduct set out values and
guidelines for ethical and professional conduct among all actors participating in the
2/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

electoral process aimed at encouraging a conducive environment for voters and
candidates. The preparation of the Code was coordinated by the Office of the
President and the Independent High Electoral Commission with support from
UNAMI. The Code was subsequently signed by the political leaders in the presence
of the President, the Prime Minister, the Chair and memb ers of the Independent High
Electoral Commission, as well as the Special Representative of the Secretary -General.
On 20 September, further signing ceremonies were held for candidates in each
governorate.
10. In the lead-up to the elections, political actors publicly encouraged voter
participation. At the National Dialogue Conference, held under his auspices in
Baghdad on 25 and 26 August, the Prime Minister called for participation and support
for the elections. Separately, in a statement published on 10 S eptember, the President
of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, urged “all parties to ensure civic
and peaceful election campaigns” and also called for a “strong renouncement of
slander and unfounded smear attacks against candidates, especially against women”.
11. On 8 September, Mr. Salih, during a meeting with the Chair and the other board
members of the Independent High Electoral Commission, highlighted the
responsibility of political and social actors to encourage high voter turnout. He als o
spoke of the need to ensure that elections were free and fair, with voters able to choose
their representatives without “fear of fraud or manipulation”. He commended the
efforts of the Commission and noted the important oversight role of the judiciary.
12. During the thirteenth annual Islamic conference on countering violence against
women, organized by the Al-Hakim Foundation, held on 11 September, the Prime
Minister emphasized the role of the Ministries of Interior and Justice in protecting
women’s rights in Iraq and called on women to participate widely in the elections.
The call was supported by the Electoral Code of Conduct, which was written to be
gender sensitive. Its aim was to enhance women’s electoral participation by urging
political and electoral entities to refrain from defamation and gender-based violence
targeting women candidates.
13. On 29 September, the Office of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani issued a statement
encouraging all “to participate consciously and responsibly” and not to under estimate
“the value of their votes” and also emphasizing that the Grand Ayatollah did not
support any candidate or electoral lists. On the same day, the President and the Prime
Minister, among others, issued statements echoing the Grand Ayatollah’s call.
14. On 27 August, Muqtada al-Sadr announced his intention to return to the electoral
process, from which he had publicly withdrawn on 15 July. This decision was
welcomed by the three presidencies, leaders in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and other
political leaders. However, the Iraqi Communist Party, the Iraqi Republican Gathering
and the Iraqi National Dialogue Front, all registered for the elections, maintained their
previously announced withdrawals. Several political and protest groups continued
their calls for a boycott of the elections.
15. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq promoted dialogue on
anti-corruption efforts. With the cooperation of LAS, the Government hosted an
international conference on the recovery of looted funds on 15 an d 16 September,
attended by Ministers of Justice from Arab States. Addressing the participants, the
President emphasized the importance of the conference and described corruption as
an “impediment to any nation’s economic and social development”.
16. The Government maintained measures to curb the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, including a nightly curfew from midnight until 5 a.m., and
reduced staffing in most ministries, alongside a national vaccination programme. On
31 August, the Council of Ministers approved a COVID-19 response and recovery
21-15839

3/14

S/2021/946

plan that had been prepared by the Ministry of Planning in cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). On 5 September, the Prime
Minister chaired a meeting of the Supreme Committee for Health and National Safety
at which mechanisms to restart in-person teaching at universities were approved.
17. On 14 September, the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq, in line with the
commitment in its Cabinet agenda to “emphasize establishing a decen tralized system
of power”, granted autonomous administration status for Sawran and Zakhu Districts,
formerly part of Erbil and Dahuk Governorates.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
18. Implementation of article 11 of the 2021 Federal Budget Law, which governs
the budget share of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and the requirements for its payment
to Baghdad, remained stalled. Nevertheless, the federal Government made three
advance payments of 200 billion Iraqi dinars (approximately $137 million) each to
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq on 11 July, 29 August and 4 October. During a meeting
with media outlet directors on 2 September, Mr. Al-Kadhimi noted the delay in
implementing the 2021 federal budget and stated that the federal Government would
continue to send monthly transfers of 200 billion Iraqi dinars to the Kurdistan
Regional Government until the end of 2021.

C.

Security situation
19. Da’esh continued to conduct asymmetric attacks during the reporting period,
primarily in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates.
From 25 August to 9 October, a total of 157 attacks against security forces in Iraq
were attributed to Da’esh. Da’esh also continued to target off-duty security personnel,
community leaders and civilians who were accused by Da’esh of collaborating with
Iraqi authorities. In addition, four improvised explosive device attacks targeting
power infrastructure in Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah al-Din governorates were
attributable to Da’esh.
20. On 5 September, the Security Media Cell of the Office of the Prime Minister
reported that a Da’esh attack to the south-west of Kirkuk had led to the death of
several police officers. It was later confirmed that 13 police officers had died as a
result of the attack. The Prime Minister chaired an emergency meeting of the National
Security Council the same day to discuss security developments and coordinate an
appropriate response. The Office of the Prime Minister reported that, during the
meeting, he had instructed the security services to improve coordination and ordered
an investigation. The Minister of Defence led a delegation to the Governorate on
8 September to investigate the incident and assess security coordination.
21. On 11 September, the spokesperson for the international counter-Da’esh
coalition reported via social media that “Coalition forces at Erbil airbase were
attacked by two unmanned aircraft systems”. The coalition spokesperson added that
“force protection counter-measures were used to defeat the drones” and that there had
been no injuries. No claims of responsibility were made.
22. From 25 August to 12 October, 12 attacks involving improvised explosive
devices were reported to have targeted trucks of Iraqi companies contracted to carry
supplies for the counter-Da’esh coalition, in Babil, Dhi Qar and Qadisiyah
Governorates.
23. In response to Da’esh activity, the Iraqi security forces conducted ongoing
counter-terrorism operations. As part of this, on 11 October the Prime Minister

4/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

announced that an Iraqi intelligence operation had led to the capture of Sami Jasim,
whom he described as being in charge of Da’esh’s finances and a deputy of the group’s
deceased leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
24. On 18 October, Mr. Al-Kadhimi announced via social media the arrest of the
“terrorist Ghazwan Alzawbaee”, allegedly responsible for a suicide car bombing in
Karradah district in central Baghdad on 11 January 2016 that reportedly killed
approximately 300 people and wounded 250.
25. On 16 September, the Security Media Cell reported via social media that “a
meeting was held between the Iraqi Military Technical Committee … and its United
States counterpart … within the framework of technical security talks, which were
agreed upon in the … strategic dialogue and the plan to transition to a non-combat
role for the international coalition forces” according to the outcomes of the strategic
dialogue held in July 2021. The two sides reiterated that the presence of the United
States forces and the international coalition forces was at the invitation of Iraq. The
sides agreed to hold regular sessions to discuss the “remaining steps to secure the
transition to a non-combat role”.
26. During the reporting period, the Ministry of National Defence of Turkey
reported ongoing operations against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in
northern Iraq.

D.

Regional and international developments
27. On 28 August, Iraq hosted the Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and
Partnership under the auspices of the Prime Minister. The conference was atte nded
by the heads of State of Egypt, France, Jordan and Qatar; the Vice -President of the
United Arab Emirates; the Prime Minister of Kuwait; and the Foreign Ministers of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Representatives of other
countries and international organizations, including the Secretaries-General of the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Gulf
Cooperation Council, as well as my Special Representative, attended as observers.
28. In a final statement, conference participants welcomed the “diplomatic efforts
[of Iraq] to reach … common ground at the regional and international levels”. In the
statement they noted the renewed support of participants to the Government of Iraq,
including its efforts to strengthen State institutions; hold representative parliamentary
elections with international monitoring; combat terrorism; conduct economic reform;
and ensure the return of internally displaced persons. The participants acknowledged
common challenges faced by the region, including the need for continued cooperation
to confront the COVID-19 pandemic and to strengthen efforts to address climate
change.
29. Subsequently, on 21 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs chaired a
follow-up meeting of foreign ministers from the participating countries in New York
on the margins of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly. As indicated in
a joint communiqué issued on 23 September, the participants agreed on the
“establishment of a follow-up committee by Iraq and Jordan, in cooperation with
France”. It was also decided that the committee would “coordinate with the
participants of the Baghdad Conference in order to support Iraq and address common
and regional challenges”. It was decided that the “next Baghdad Conference would
be held in Amman”. The participants reiterated their common support for the people
and the Government of Iraq and underlined the importance of continuing to strengthen
the regional dialogue.

21-15839

5/14

S/2021/946

30. At a press conference on the margins of the Baghdad Conference, held on
28 August in Baghdad, in relation to collective efforts against Da’esh, the President
of France, Emmanuel Macron, noted the need to “work both on the fight against
terrorism and regional stability”. During his visit to I raq, he also travelled to Mosul
and Erbil.
31. The Government welcomed the following high-level visitors to Baghdad for
discussions on strengthening bilateral ties, political and security developments,
including continued cooperation to counter Da’esh and reconstruction efforts in Iraq:
the Speaker of the Jordanian Parliament (1–5 September); the Minister of Interior of
Saudi Arabia (4 September); the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy/Vice-President of the European Commission
(6−8 September); the Commander of the United States Central Command (9 September);
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States (14–16 September).
32. Mr. Salih attended the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly from
19 to 24 September. On the sidelines of the General Assembly, he held bilateral
meetings with other high-level officials, including the President of Cyprus, the
Foreign Minister of France, the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Foreign Minister of Sweden, the President of Turkey and the President of the United
States.
33. On 12 September, the Prime Minister travelled to the Islamic Republic of Iran,
where he was received by the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ebrahim
Raisi. The Office of the Prime Minister reported that the visit showed the “importance
that Iraq attaches to strengthening cooperation between the two countries and his
aspiration to strengthen the bilateral partnership”, including through the expansion of
trade and economic ties. The Prime Minister met separately with the First Vice President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Speaker of the Islamic Consultative
Assembly and the Secretary of the National Security Council.
34. The Speaker of the Council of Representatives, Mohammed al-Halbousi, visited
Egypt on 15 and 16 September. He met separately with the President, the Prime
Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, the President of the Senate
and the parliamentary Speaker. The Council of Representatives reported that the
meetings included discussions on enhancing prospects for strategic cooperation. The
Speaker stressed the importance of parliamentary cooperation in Arab, regional and
international forums. He also met with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, the Speaker of the Arab Parliament and the Grand Imam of the al -Azhar
Mosque. On 26 and 27 September, the Speaker was in the United Arab Emirates for
meetings with the Speaker of the Federal National Council, Saqr Ghubash , and the
Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan. On
4 October, the Speaker met with the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, in
Ankara.
35. During the reporting period, the Minister for Foreign Affairs visited the R ussian
Federation to meet with government officials and, on 26 August, co -chaired a session
of the Iraqi-Russian Joint Committee with the Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian
Federation, Yury Borisov. According to a statement by the Ministry of Foreign Aff airs
of Iraq, the session covered economic, energy and agricultural cooperation, among
other issues. On 30 August, the Minister for Foreign Affairs went to Austria to
participate in the European Forum Alpbach for security and cooperation. During his
visit, he met with his Austrian counterpart, the Executive Secretary of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and others.
36. On 16 September, the Minister was hosted by the Ministerial Council of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in Riyadh. In an address to the Ministerial Council, he highlighted
6/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

potential economic, commercial, investment and security cooperation between Iraq
and the Gulf Cooperation Council. While in New York from 19 to 29 September, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs met with counterparts from a range of Member States;
participated in the annual consultative meeting of the Council of the League of Arab
States on 20 September; and attended a meeting of the Tripartite Coor dination
Mechanism with his Egyptian and Jordanian counterparts on 23 September. On
9 October, the Minister for Foreign Affairs travelled to Serbia, where he met
separately with the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Nikola Selaković. He also delivered a speech at the Non -Aligned
Movement summit in Belgrade on 11 October.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
37. In advance of the 10 October parliamentary elections, the Special Representative
continued her regular engagement with the three Presidencies, political party leaders,
parliamentarians, the Independent High Electoral Commission, religious and
community leaders and other civil society actors, as well as media outlets. Discussions
during these meetings focused primarily on electoral preparations, enhanced technical
support by UNAMI to the Commission and the deployment of United Nations monitors.
38. On 15 September, the Special Representative participated in the signing
ceremony for the Electoral Code of Conduct, which was supported by UNAMI.
Addressing the event, she encouraged Iraqi political leaders to adhere to the principles
of the Code of Conduct to support a conducive env ironment for credible elections.
39. In line with the mandate of UNAMI to conduct a strategic messaging campaign
to inform and update Iraqi voters on electoral preparations, the Special Representative
recorded video messages and held press conferences and multiple interviews with
Iraqi media outlets. She also participated in a “digital dialogue” with Iraqi voters from
all governorates and abroad.
40. Addressing the Iraqi media, the Special Representative outlined measures put in
place by the electoral authorities of Iraq to mitigate the risk of fraud. She also
emphasized the responsibility of all concerned, including political parties and
candidates, to abide by the principles and rules of the electoral process. She further
stated that all Iraqis should be free to exercise their democratic and electoral rights
and highlighted United Nations support for the country’s electoral process.
41. On 11 September, the Special Representative took part in the thirteenth annual
Islamic conference on countering violence against women, organized by the
Al-Hakim Foundation and attended by the President and the Prime Minister. During
her speech, she emphasized that gender-based violence in politics and elections
ranged from the escalation of harassment; to intimidation; se xual, psychological and
physical violence; to gender-biased scrutiny by the public and the media. She
underlined the importance of institutionalizing work to enhance security for women
in politics and elections.
42. On 2 October, the Special Representative travelled to Nasiriyah and Basrah,
where she met with local authorities, as well as with civil society representatives. In
her meetings, she acknowledged the importance of a conducive electoral
environment, while also highlighting the importance of every vote.
43. On 8 October, the special voting day for Iraqi security forces, internally
displaced persons, prisoners and detainees, the Special Representative travelled to

21-15839

7/14

S/2021/946

Erbil and Dohuk as part of the United Nations broader monitoring efforts. On election
day on 10 October, she visited a number of polling stations in Baghdad.
44. The Special Representative continued discussions with the political leadership
of the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments. She reiterated to both sides the
need to establish an institutionalized dialogue as a forum to discuss outstanding
issues, contributing to a positive and constructive relationship. She also called for the
urgent implementation of the Sinjar agreement to bring peace and stability in the area.
45. Meanwhile, the Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance also engaged with the Independent High Electoral Commission
and attended the second and third polling day simulation exercises on 23 August and
22 September, respectively. In addition, she visited Mosul, Erbil, Kirkuk, Diyala and
Karbala’, holding meetings with local government, political party representatives,
minorities, civil society and governorate offices of the Commission. She urged all
parties to contribute to the success and credibility of the elections.
46. The Deputy Special Representative engaged with Iraqi stakeholders to
encourage women’s participation in the upcoming elections. She met with members
of the Iraqi Women’s Network, women candidates, the Director Ge neral of the Iraqi
Women Empowerment Directorate and the General Secretariat of the Council of
Ministers, discussing the challenges impeding women’s electoral participation as
voters and candidates, in addition to difficulties facing civil society activist s and
organizations working on women’s rights.
47. The Deputy Special Representative visited polling centres in Baghdad during
the special voting day. On election day, she travelled to Kirkuk and monitored polling
centres throughout the governorate.

B.

Electoral assistance
48. UNAMI provided advice and technical support to the Independent High
Electoral Commission as it prepared for the parliamentary elections. As at 1 October,
the United Nations had 126 additional electoral personnel in country, in cluding
49 international staff, under the technical assistance project implemented by UNAMI
with UNDP support.
49. In response to Security Council resolution 2576 (2021), UNAMI also
implemented a project, in collaboration with the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS), that provided for the deployment of 150 United Nations
international electoral experts and approximately 550 support personnel in advance
of, and on, election day.
50. Relevant details of the United Nations electoral assistance role in the context of
the parliamentary elections held in Iraq on 10 October are presented in the detailed
summary report (S/2021/932) requested by the Security Council in operative
paragraph 3 of resolution 2576 (2021).

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
51. During the election campaign period, UNAMI documented instances of
election-related incidents. These primarily consisted of various forms of threats and
intimidation against candidates and their campaign teams, both in person and online,
as well as incidents of attacks on candidates or campaign meetings, including the
detonation of an explosive device at a campaign event in Salah al -Din Governorate
on 7 October, which killed one boy and injured four other persons. Owing to the small

8/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

number of such incidents, UNAMI has been unable to establish any discernible
patterns of violations towards particular groups, or specific geographical areas where
violations have been concentrated.
52. Women and minority candidates also raised concerns about campaigning in a
difficult pre-electoral environment. In particular, women candidates reported
defamatory messages on social media. Many women, minority and independent
candidates also highlighted that their political posters and banners were damaged or
destroyed.
53. UNAMI remains concerned about the lack of progress on issues related to
accountability and redress for crimes perpetrated against demonstrators and political
and civic activists by unidentified armed elements. There is also a concerning pattern
of intimidation of those publicly advocating for accountability in such cases. On
2 September, the uncle of an activist and human rights lawyer abducted from Maysan
Governorate in October 2019 by unidentified “militia” was the victim of an attempted
targeted killing. This incident follows the assassination, in March 2021, of the missing
activist’s father, who was a vocal advocate for accountability for his son’s
disappearance. On 30 September, the judge leading the criminal investigation into the
activist’s disappearance was also targeted by unknown gunmen, who opened fire on
his vehicle as he travelled to court.
54. In August, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights released a joint report entitled “Human rights in the adm inistration
of justice in Iraq: legal conditions and procedural safeguards to prevent torture and
ill-treatment”. In the report, risk factors for ill-treatment and torture in detention are
identified and recommendations provided on the elimination of poten tial causes of
ill-treatment and torture aimed at preventing torture in places of detention in Iraq.
55. As part of its ongoing dialogue and engagement with the judiciary, UNAMI and
the Supreme Judicial Council jointly distributed 650 posters to courts and police
stations throughout Iraq aimed at informing detainees and relevant authorities of the
procedural rights of suspects in detention and during criminal investigation.
56. On 30 August, the Government carried out the death penalty on seven prisoners
convicted of capital offences, mainly related to terrorism. Since the beginning of
2021, UNAMI has documented at least 19 cases in which the death penalty was
implemented.
57. UNAMI has expressed concern to the relevant authorities over the absence of a
duly appointed Board of Commissioners for the Iraqi High Commission for Human
Rights after the expiry of the previous Board’s four-year term of office in June. On
5 September, the Council of Representatives wrote to the State Council indicating its
intention to constitute a committee of experts to select a new Board of Commissioners
in accordance with procedures established under Iraqi law. UNAMI has since
advocated for the selection and appointments process to be carried out in a transparent
and expeditious manner in line with the principles relating to the status of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles).
58. UNAMI continued its ongoing social media campaign to raise awareness of the
human rights impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and to disseminate information on
health protection measures. The campaign included the dissemination through social
media of 20 cartoons by a female Iraqi artist and the distribution by 129 community
volunteers in 10 governorates of 17,000 posters detailing COVID-19 prevention
measures in seven minority languages.
59. On 16 September, the Council of Ministers adopted the by-laws for the Yazidi
Survivors Law. The by-laws outline the application process for survivors to access
the benefits to which they are entitled under the law and the administrative
21-15839

9/14

S/2021/946

arrangements to be established for the Directorate of Survivors Affairs to enable it to
meet its obligations and provide mechanisms to protect survivors as they access the
benefits under the law.
60. From 1 July to 30 September, UNAMI documented 69 incidents, resulting in at
least 246 civilian casualties (83 deaths, including 13 boys, 8 girls and 1 woman, and
163 injured, including 7 boys). A total of 193 civilian casualties (68 deaths and
125 injuries) were attributed to Da’esh and 19 civilian casualties (five deaths and
14 injuries) to unidentified armed elements. During the reporting period, the Ministry
of National Defence of Turkey reported ongoing operations against PKK targets in
northern Iraq. According to information verified by UNAMI, there were 11 civilian
casualties (six deaths and five injuries) in six incidents of aerial strikes and shelling.
UNAMI also received reports of the displacement of civilians and damage to
agricultural lands in Dahuk Governorate. The Ministry of National Defence of Turkey
has previously stated that, in determining targets, the “utmost sensitivity and attention
is accorded to protect the properties and lives of the civilian population and the
environment”. On 30 August, two civilian deaths (children) and seven civilian injuries
at a camp for internally displaced persons in Dahuk Governorate were attributed to a
PKK improvised explosive device.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
61. As at 9 October, the 2021 humanitarian response plan was 44 per cent funded,
having received $265 million out of the $607 million required. Approximately
850,000 people were reached with some form of humanitarian assistance, out of the
1.5 million people targeted.
62. As at September 2021, approximately 1.2 million people still lived in
displacement in Iraq, including 174,388 people hosted in 25 camps administered by
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and 8,258 people in two camps in other parts of Iraq.
63. Access has improved for non-governmental organizations (NGOs) following the
establishment of an online system for access authorization letter applications, which
became operational in early 2021. However, the letters are still not universally
recognized by all local security actors.
64. The Government of Iraq has facilitated two rounds of voluntary returns from
Hawl to Jeddah 1 Camp in Ninawa Governorate. The first, on 25 May, and the second,
on 29 September, led to the return of 211 households (864 individu als) in total. On
21 September, an initial 22 households departed Jeddah 1 Camp with their designated
“sponsor” (a community member, usually a relative), with most returning to areas of
origin in Anbar, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates. As at 6 October, a total of
27 households had departed from Jeddah 1 Camp to their areas of origin, while
184 households remained in the camp.
65. From 25 August to 1 September, the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) issued nine birth certificates and 22 public distribution system ration cards to
internally displaced persons living in Jeddah 5 camp in Ninawa Governorate, as part
of IOM support for families. This enabled access to schools and government services.
66. To address displaced persons’ difficulty in accessing documentation, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) collaborated with the Ministry
of Interior to conduct civil documentation missions and support the rehabilitation of
the Civil Affairs Directorate offices in several govern orates. On 1 September, the
rehabilitated Qayarah Civil Affairs Directorate centre in Ninawa Governorate was
staffed and opened, providing 300,000 displaced persons with the ability to obtain
and renew civil documentation.

10/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

67. To enhance protection against sexual exploitation and abuse, UNHCR conducted
a two-day training course from 8 to 9 September for staff and partners in Kirkuk on
protection against sexual exploitation and sexual harassment. On 12 and 13 September,
UNHCR conducted a train-the-trainer session for the Directorate for Combating
Violence Against Women in the Kurdistan Regional Government.
68. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) continued to work closely with the Government of Iraq in the roll -out of
vaccines obtained through the Government’s self-financed COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access (COVAX) Facility programme. Iraq has received nearly 18.5 million
vaccine doses, including 8.6 million doses through the COVAX Facility. According
to the Ministry of Health and Environment, as at 7 October, a total of 8,139,363 doses
had been administered, of which 4,993,114 (21.1 per cent of the population) were
first, and 3,146,249 (13.3 per cent of the population), were second doses.
69. To facilitate returns to areas of origin, the Funding Facility for Stabilization of
UNDP has completed 2,994 projects since 2015 aimed at restoring essential services
and civilian livelihoods, building municipal capacity and fostering cohesion in the
five governorates liberated from Da’esh. The Facility’s funding gap for 2021 is
approximately $150 million.
70. On 5 September, IOM met with the Public Prosecutor of the Supreme Judicial
Council to discuss support for vulnerable internally displaced persons. At the meeting,
options were explored for assisting men and boys, most of whom had formerly been
detained but had now completed their custodial sentences and faced potential
rejection by their communities. It was agreed to have a pilot programme led by IOM
legal teams, with an initial caseload of approximately 15 individuals. In the pilot,
those individuals’ legal cases would be followed up with authorities in the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, federal authorities in Baghdad and authorities in their areas of origin,
to map and ultimately resolve legal obstacles to return. UNDP completed its second
community security integration pilot, delivering 12-week long vocational training
courses to 75 male and 28 female former volunteer fighters from the Yazidi
community.
71. UNOPS continued to run the Iraq Information Centre on behalf of the
humanitarian country team, to help beneficiaries to address basic needs. Through its
free and confidential hotline, the Centre provides beneficiaries with critical
information about humanitarian assistance, as well as a mechanism for reporting
issues related to humanitarian assistance or the abuse of power. From 25 August to
5 October, the centre received 26,482 calls, predominantly about cash assistance,
protection and legal/registration assistance.
72. UNOPS concluded the first phase of the digitalization of the public distribution
system project in August 2021. The aim of the project is to transform the system from
a paper-based to a digital platform, including through the World Food Programme
(WFP) designed “Tamwini” mobile phone application.
73. Some 21,000 people benefited from WFP rural resilience building interventions,
including rehabilitation of canals and establishment of home food gardens in Anbar,
Dhi Qar, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates, while over 2,600 beneficiaries were
reached through various vocational training courses, toolkit supply, cash transfers and
market linkages in Maysan Governorate. WFP supported 186,088 internally displaced
persons and 68,599 Syrian refugees with food assistance, including cash-based
transfers, electronic vouchers and in-kind food distributions.
74. The Mine Action Service cleared 713,579 m 2 of areas in Anbar and Ninawa
Governorates, largely agricultural lands that had been contaminated with explosive
ordnance, to enable returns and livelihood activities. The Service also cleared
21-15839

11/14

S/2021/946

61,908 m 2 of legacy minefields from previous conflicts in Basra Governorate.
Explosive ordnance risk education was provided to 9,438 individuals, including 5,922
returnees in Anbar and Ninawa Governorates and 478 internal displaced persons in
the Jeddah 5 camp.
75. The International Institute for Educational Planning of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNICEF, the World
Bank and Iraqi ministries organized a workshop in Erbil from 12 to 16 September to
finalize the National Education Strategy for Iraq 2021–2031. In partnership with
UNICEF, UNESCO has developed an educational management information system,
which will be launched in nine general directorates of education between 2021–2023.
On 25 August, 1,500 Internet devices and Wi-Fi subscriptions were distributed to
governorates and schools to operationalize the system. UNESCO is providing laptops
for the 3,000 schools included in the first phase and has provided training for school
faculties.
76. As part of the “Revive the spirit of Mosul” initiative, UNESCO and partners
organized prevention of violent extremism training activities for more than 1,000
teachers, parents, principals and other school administrators in Anbar and Ninawa
Governorates.
77. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) updated the protocol on the
clinical management of rape, at the request of the Ministry of Health and
Environment. Train-the-trainer sessions on the clinical management of rape were
conducted in August and September. Some 4,200 girls and boys accessed and
participated in educational and training programmes on peacebuilding, social
cohesion, employability skills and sexual reproductive health rights, in UN FPArenovated youth centres. Through the programmes of the Gender-Based Violence
Sub-Cluster, 55,920 people were reached and services provided in 13 governorates in
August and September.
78. UNICEF, WFP and the International Labour Organization (ILO) engag ed in a
strategic partnership with the Government of Iraq to reform the social protection
system to improve conditions and regulations of the public service, upgrade financial
administration and enhance the services provided by public institutions.
79. The International Trade Centre (ITC) continued its activities through the
Strengthening the Agriculture and Agri-food Value chain and Improving trade policy
in Iraq project. ITC worked with public and private sector stakeholders to strengthen
agriculture and agri-food value chains and improve trade policy, with the goal of
fostering sustainable growth, diversification and job creation. The workplan of the
project was officially endorsed at the first meeting of the project steering committee,
chaired by the Ministry of Planning on 7 September 2021.
80. To boost women’s electoral participation, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) provided technical support
to the Supreme Committee on Women’s Political Participation, set up by the Council
of Ministers to enhance women’s participation in the parliamentary elections.
81. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) continued to provide
technical support to the Government of Iraq under the Iraq national adaptation plan
project, funded by the Green Climate Fund. Cross-sectoral working groups from key
line ministries were established in September to develop sector-specific adaptation
plans. On 5 June, the Government reaffirmed its contribution to climate action under
the Paris Agreement with the adoption of its nationally determined contribution
document by the National Committee on Climate Change, which is currently pending
formal endorsement by the Council of Ministers. The nationally determined
contribution was prepared with support from UNDP and UNEP.
12/14

21-15839

S/2021/946

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
82. The Department of Safety and Security monitored developments throughout
Iraq and implemented risk management measures to enable United Nations
operations. Regular security advisories and alerts, including broadcasts related to
COVID-19, continued to be disseminated to keep United Nations personnel informed
of the precautionary measures in place.
83. The Department has provided extensive support for United Nations electoral
activities. This has included the monitoring, collection and analysis of security
information and assessment of related threats and associated risks; the preparation
and coordination of emergency procedures and contingency plans; liaison with host
Government authorities; security assessments of locations hosting United Nations
personnel; provision of security briefings and training; and the issuance of United
Nations identification cards. On election day, the Department monitored the situation,
tracked United Nations personnel movements, disseminated information and
advisories and was prepared to coordinate emergency response activity.
84. The Department supported an average of 34 field missions per day across the
country, with assessed risk levels ranging from medium to high. A total of four low
and three very high-risk missions were conducted during the reporting period. Close
coordination and engagement with the host Government continued to ensure the
proper flow of information and the necessary security support for United Nations
operations, in particular, movements and access authorizations to regions still affected
by COVID-19 containment restrictions.

B.

Mission facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
85. The Mission continued refurbishment and construction projects in the United
Nations Integrated Compound in Baghdad, regional offices and the forward support
base, while maintaining strict health and security protocols.
86. To support the deployment of election experts and supporting staff, UNAMI
provided the necessary accommodation, office, telecommunications and aviation
support across Iraq. Additionally, UNAMI continued to provide logistical and
administrative support to the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the delivery of its mandate.
87. In collaboration with WHO, UNAMI continued its COVID-19 vaccination
campaign for United Nations personnel and dependents in Iraq. As at 11 October, the
Mission had administered about 4,880 first and second doses of COVID -19 vaccines.

V. Observations
88. I welcome the largely peaceful conduct of the parliamentary elections in Iraq
and commend the people of Iraq for making their voices heard through the ballot box
in their quest for reform, accountability and a better future. I also acknowledge the
commitment of the Government of Iraq to hold early parliamentary elections and the
extensive efforts made by the relevant electoral and security bodies to implement an
orderly electoral process.

21-15839

13/14

S/2021/946

89. As the electoral process is being completed, I urge all stakeholders to show
patience and respect for the electoral rules and timelines, while the Independent H igh
Electoral Commission and other relevant electoral bodies tabulate the election results
and resolve any electoral disputes that may arise through established legal channels
with a view to an expeditious ratification of final election results.
90. In the upcoming post-electoral period, I call upon all stakeholders to actively
contribute to a smooth and peaceful government formation process, which is key to
ensuring continuity in governance. This can be achieved first and foremost through
the timely formation of a new government that is responsive to the needs and
aspirations of the Iraqi people.
91. I reiterate my call to the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government to expedite the full implementation of the 2021 Federal Budget Law and
urge both governments to resolve outstanding key issues through institutionalized,
regular and structured dialogue.
92. Efforts by the Government of Iraq to maintain regional stability through
diplomatic means are highly commendable. I welcome the recent ho lding of the
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership. The conference is a clear
example of the commitment of the Government of Iraq to engage constructively with
the region, and of the commitment of regional countries to strengthen relations wit h
Iraq. I encourage its participants to follow up on what has been agreed, with the hope
that it contributes positively to regional stability and cooperation.
93. I encourage the Government of Iraq to make progress on issues related to
accountability and redress for crimes perpetrated against demonstrators and other
civil society actors. Impunity for human rights violations and abuses erodes public
trust and threatens democratic space. In this light, I reiterate my call on the authorities
to act decisively and to hold to account those responsible for targeting protesters, as
well as political and civil society activists.
94. The development priorities of Iraq were highlighted by the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, signed on 5 September by the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations. Work must now begin to deliver on the
promises contained in the Framework to ensure that no Iraqi is lef t behind. This will
be dependent on support and funding from Member States. I therefore encourage the
continued commitment of the international community to the people of Iraq.
95. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued dedication to
implementing the Organization’s mandate during extraordinary times and under
challenging circumstances.

14/14

21-15839
