General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

ll8

( e) The specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the World Tourism Organization, as well as interested organs of the United
Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions for their travel expenses and per diem;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding the Conference at
Geneva, to submit to the Conference all relevant documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities and services that it will require, including the
provision of summary records;
6. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/189.

Fifth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 159 of 21 December
1976, in which it decided to hold the fifth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 1979 and requested the Trade and Development Board at its seventeenth session to recommend
the place, date and duration of the session, taking into
account the offer made in this regard by the Government of the Philippines,
Taking note of Trade and Development Board resolution 154 (XVII) of 31 August 1977 adopted at the
first part of its seventeenth session, 167 in which the
Board recommended that the General Assembly should
convene the fifth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Manila from
7 May to 1 June 1979, and a pre-Conference meeting
of senior officials at Manila on 3 and 4 May 1979,
1. Notes with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of the Philippines to hold the fifth session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Manila;
2. Decides to convene the fifth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at
Manila from 7 May to 1 June 1979, and a pre-Confer,ence meeting of senior officials at Manila on 3 and
4 May 1979.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
167 Ibid.,

vol. II, part one, annex I.

32/190.

Special measures in favour of the least
developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Taking into consideration its resolution 3214
(XXIX) of 6 November 1974, in which it urged Member States and organizations of the United Nations system to intensify urgently their efforts for the benefit
of the least developed countries, including those in
the field of trade,
Reaffirming the special measures in favour of the
least developed among the developing countries adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its resolutions 62 (Ill) of 19 May 1972 168
and 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976,169
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2124 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Bearing in mind the results of the meeting convened
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development between 31 October and 8 November 1977.
at which the multilateral and bilateral financial and
technical assistance institutions, together with the representatives of the least developed among the developing countries, carried out a general review and assessment of their requirements and progress, 170 as called
for in paragraph 35 of Conference resolution 98 (IV),
1. Invites the developed countries as well as international institutions to increase the flow of financial
and technical assistance to the least developed among
the developing countries;
2. Further invites the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and other financial institutions to provide increased resources to meet the
particular needs of the least developed countries;
3. Urges the developed countries, as well as appropriate international organizations and financial institutions, to adopt specific and concrete measures in favour
of the least developed countries, as called for by the
General Assembly and in the decisions adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and other related organizations within the United Nations system;
4. Welcomes the inclusion in the provisional agenda
for the part of the ninth special session of the Trade
and Development Board to be convened early in 197 8
at the ministerial level1 71 of the review of measures
taken in accordance with resolution 98 (IV) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
concerning the debt and related development and financia! problems, inter alia, of the least developed
countries;
5. Takes note of the allocation of $1 billion to the
Specia! Action Programme pledged by the developed
countnes at the Conference on International Economic
Co-operation held in Paris;
HiB See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
1 9
~ Ibid., F_our:h Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations pubhcatJon, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
110 See TD/B/681.
171 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/32/15), vol. II, part two,
annex H.
