S/PV.8217

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8217th meeting

Tuesday, 27 March 2018, 11.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Blok . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and
2393 (2017) (S/2018/243)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-08569 (E)
*1808569*

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (S/2018/243)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
Mr. Lowcock is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2018/243, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393
(2017).
Recalling the latest note by the President of the
Security Council on its working methods (S/2017/507),
I want to encourage all participants, both members and
non-members of the Council, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. Note 507 also encourages
briefers to be succinct and focus on key issues. Briefers
are further encouraged to limit initial remarks to 15
minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: As all members of the Council
know, the Syrian conflict has now entered its eighth
year. When weapons speak, civilians pay the price — a
relentless price with horrific violence, bloodshed and
unspeakable suffering. The past few months have been
some of the worst yet for many civilians in Syria.
2/21

27/03/2018

Today I want to start with the situation in eastern
Ghouta. Since the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018)
on 24 February, military operations in eastern Ghouta,
in particular air strikes, have reportedly killed
more than 1,700 people. Thousands more have been
injured. Attacks on critical civilian infrastructure,
such as medical facilities, continue to be reported.
There have been at least 28 reported attacks on health
facilities since mid-February and more than 70 verified
incidents since the beginning of the year. The World
Health Organization has reported that attacks on health
facilities, health workers and health infrastructure were
recorded during the first two months of the year at three
times the rate that we saw during 2017.
In recent weeks in Damascus city, at least 78 people
were reportedly killed and another 230 injured by shells
fired from eastern Ghouta. That includes reports of at
least 35 people killed and scores wounded on 20 March,
when Kashkul market in Jaramana, a suburb in the
south-eastern part of the city, was struck by a rocket.
Tens of thousands of civilians have been displaced from
Douma, Harasta, Sagba and Kafr Batna in recent days
and weeks. So far, reports indicate that some 80,000
civilians have been taken to places in Damascus city
and rural Damascus. Nearly 20,000 combatants and
civilians have been transported to locations in northwestern Syria.
Nearly 52,000 civilians from eastern Ghouta are
currently being hosted in eight collective shelters
in rural Damascus. That displaced population has
endured months of limited access to food, medical care
and other essential items. In the words of the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, Ali Al-Za’tari, who
met and spoke to some of them, those people are “tired,
hungry, traumatized and afraid”. Most of the collective
shelters do not have the capacity or infrastructure to
accommodate such large numbers of people. They
are extremely overcrowded and severely lacking in
basic water, sanitation and hygiene facilities. There
are a number of serious protection concerns related to
risks of gender-based violence, unaccompanied and
separated children and restrictions on movement. The
United Nations is not in charge of the management
of those shelters. However, since 13 March, together
with humanitarian partners, we have mobilized a rapid
response to provide evacuees with basic support in
close coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local partners. So far, more than 130,000
non-food items have been distributed, 130 emergency
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

toilets have been installed, and water trucking services
have been provided to most shelters. In addition,
supplies to feed more than 50,000 people and a total of
38 mobile health teams and 18 mobile medical teams
are currently providing support to those in need inside
the shelters.
Humanitarian organizations also need access to the
people still trapped within eastern Ghouta, in particular
in Douma, where fighting and siege continue. The
United Nations and its partners are ready to proceed
to Douma with food for up to 16,500 people, as well
as health, nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies, but facilitation letters need to be signed by the
Government of Syria.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call on all
parties to fully respect international humanitarian law
and human rights law in order to ensure immediate
humanitarian access and guarantee the protection of
civilians, including in relation to displacements and
evacuations. The United Nations and its partners require
unimpeded access to all those affected by the situation
in eastern Ghouta. That means access to the areas
where civilians remain, through which they transit and
to which they exit, such as collective shelters, in order
to ensure that effective protection mechanisms are in
place so that we can deter any possible violations and
provide remedial protection support.
Eastern Ghouta is not the only place in which
humanitarian needs continue to increase. In northwestern Syria, in recent weeks, an estimated 183,500
people have been displaced by hostilities in Afrin district
in Aleppo governorate. The majority — some 140,000
people — have fled to Tell Rifaat and the remainder
have gone to Nubl, Al-Zahraa, Manbij, Hasakah and
surrounding areas. That massive influx of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is putting a strain on host
communities, which are already overwhelmed.
Two days ago, on 25 March, an inter-agency convoy
to Tell Rifaat delivered assistance for some 50,000
people. However, overall, humanitarian partners are
still struggling to gain sustainable access to the area.
Moreover, access to Aleppo city for IDPs from Afrin
district is currently restricted. Of particular concern
are medical evacuations that are urgently required
for severely sick people to receive care in specialized
hospitals in Aleppo city. Four deaths due to the lack of
proper health care have already been reported.

S/PV. 8217

Between 50,000 and 70,000 people are estimated
still to be in Afrin city. Humanitarian access to the
city and its outer perimeters is possible through crossborder operations mandated by the Council. Today,
the Government of Turkey told us that it is positively
disposed towards such access, and we plan to run
convoys in the very near future. We know that needs
are very substantial.
In Idlib governorate, the situation remains
catastrophic, with almost 400,000 people displaced
since mid-December. Local capacity to assist is
overstretched. Thousands more people are now arriving
there from eastern Ghouta, with no sites or shelters
available for the vast majority of them. We have
received reports of an increase in violence in Idlib in
recent days. According to local sources, on 20 March
air strikes hit an IDP shelter on the outskirts of Haas
village in southern rural Idlib governorate, reportedly
killing at least 10 displaced people and injuring another
15. On 21 March, air strikes on Kafr Battikh village,
also in southern rural Idlib governorate, reportedly
killed scores more. The next day, the central market in
Harim town was hit by an air strike, reportedly killing
35 people, including many women and children. On
12 March, air strikes also resumed in southern Syria,
with attacks being reported in and around Dar’a city.
There have been no air strikes in those areas since an
agreement was reached last year on the establishment
of a de-escalation zone for parts of the south of
the country. That therefore appears to be a major
unwelcome development.
Let me turn to Raqqa. On 19 March, we
received approval from the Syrian authorities for
an assessment mission to Raqqa city by the United
Nations Mine Action Service, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Health Organization. As Council members know, we
have been seeking agreement to that for some time.
That was on 19 March.
Three days later, on 22 March, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security deployed a team to
conduct a security assessment. They report that while
the city is considered calm and stable, considerable risk
remains. Raqqa city is still highly contaminated with
landmines, unexploded ordnances, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices. We hope that
access to Raqqa city will be possible for humanitarian
aid deliveries via Qamishli, Manbij, Aleppo, Hamah

18-085693/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

and Homs, depending on operational and logistical
arrangements. The United Nations and our partners
are now preparing a humanitarian assessment mission,
which is likely to take place next week.
Next I shall address Rukban, on the Syria-Jordan
border. United Nations partners received permission
from the Syrian authorities on 8 March to organize a
humanitarian convoy from Damascus to reach people
in need along the Syria-Jordan border. Last week, on
19 March, the United Nations itself received permission
to join that humanitarian mission. Preparations are
ongoing, and a first humanitarian convoy is expected
to deploy soon. As the Council knows, we have been
seeking approval for that for many months.
As we sit here today, almost at the end of the month,
we have reached some 137,000 people in need through
inter-agency convoys — that is, cross-line convoys
sent to hard-to-reach and besieged areas — to Tell
Rifaat, Al-Dar al-Kabirah and Douma. That is limited,
incremental progress, compared to the first part of the
year, thanks to the extraordinary efforts of the team on
the ground and some of those around this table. But
we are essentially just given crumbs — an occasional
convoy here and there, often, coincidentally, shortly
before our monthly briefings to the Council.
A total of 5.6 million Syrians in acute need cannot
live on crumbs, and with a quarter of the year gone,
our level of access is currently far worse than it was
this time last year. We need the support of all Council
members and members of the International Syria
Support Group humanitarian task force to do their part
to exert their individual and collective influence over
the parties.
A few days ago, the Government of Syria and
others asked for more United Nations help with
humanitarian aid in eastern Ghouta. In response, we
have, first, proposed that a team of United Nations
emergency response experts be deployed to strengthen
efforts on the ground. Visa requests for the team have
been submitted. Secondly, we have confirmed a new
allocation of $20 million from the Syria Humanitarian
Fund, which is managed by my Office, for eastern
Ghouta and those displaced from Afrin to provide
shelter materials, improve sanitation for displaced
people, ensure that safe water is available, provide
life-saving medicines and medical services and put
in place measures to enhance protection in relocation
sites.
4/21

27/03/2018

The United Nations and its partners, on average,
reach 7.5 million people every month with life-saving
humanitarian assistance across the whole of Syria.
Clearly, without that assistance, the situation would be
even more catastrophic than it is now and the loss of life
even greater. The United Nations has no money of its
own to do those things. We can do them only because
we receive voluntary contributions from our donors. I
want to take this opportunity to thank everyone who
has supported our appeal over the last year, including
our top donors: the United States, Germany, the United
Kingdom, the European Union, Norway, Canada, Japan,
Denmark, Sweden, Qatar, Kuwait and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.
Resolution 2401 (2018) was adopted just over
a month ago. I ask all in the Council to make the
resolution a reality. Whatever the difficulty, the United
Nations and its partners remain determined to follow
through, for the sake of the Syrian people.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
Recently, a Dutch photographer working with
Save the Children published a photo album featuring
48 Syrian children, all seven years old. Those photos
were school portraits, like we all had taken when we
were young. The children were born in Syria, but they
had to flee. They are as old as the Syrian war, so they
have never seen their country at peace. Their memories
of their homeland are fading. Sometimes they cannot
remember their country at all, nor their family members
left behind. But by giving those young children a public
face, the photographer has tried to restore some of the
dignity sacrificed to a war in which all humanity seems
lost. I have here a photo of Nour.
Those children were relatively lucky; they were
able to escape. At the same time, inside Syria, during
seven years of war, thousands of children have been
killed. I myself am a father, and I am certainly not
the only parent in this Chamber. Images of children
affected by war should leave no one unmoved. Despite
any differences between us, we should at least have one
thing in common: the belief that protecting children
should come first. Yet, such protection is lacking.
The Syrian crisis is, above all, a protection crisis — a
grave violation of the long-established norm to protect
civilians and their belongings in the time of war.
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Together, we — the international community — have
expressed our determination to prevent conflict and
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
And where conflict cannot be prevented, we have
agreed to regulate the conduct of warfare. One of the
very first steps to that end was taken in Russia, almost
150 years ago. In Saint Petersburg, it was decided to
forbid weapons that cause unnecessary suffering. Since
those first steps, the body of international humanitarian
law has grown considerably, including through the
adoption of the Hague and Geneva Conventions. The
imperative of those laws has always been to protect
civilians in conflict, to spare them from disaster, save
them from harm and respect their dignity.
Sadly, what we see in Syria today is the exact
opposite. Every day, many are showing total disregard
for civilians.
In eastern Ghouta, the Syrian regime and its allies,
including Russia, have trapped hundreds of thousands of
civilians and are relentlessly continuing their offensive.
The United Nations has reported air strikes on densely
populated areas, blatant attacks targeting hospitals and
medical personnel, the use of starvation as a weapon of
war and the use of chemical weapons. Many innocent
children, women and men are suffering. They should
be protected. Yet instead, families are seeing their
homes destroyed, their loved ones killed and their
dignity shattered. In Afrin, the effects of the Turkeyled offensive are clear for all to see: a worsening of the
already precarious humanitarian situation, with more
than 160,000 displaced people and a further obstacle to
efforts to fight the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS). I ask Turkey not to extend its military activities
to other border regions in Syria or Iraq.
Four weeks ago, the Council adopted resolution 2401
(2018). It is telling that in 2018, the Council should need
to spell out that warring parties should immediately lift
all sieges in Syria and grant unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in acute need. Those are by no means
exceptional demands. They are basic obligations under
international humanitarian law, developed over decades
to instil minimum standards of human decency in
warfare. Not even the presence of terrorists is an excuse
for disregarding those standards. It is humiliating
that the Council is unable to enforce those minimum
standards. If the Council is not willing or able to do it,
who is? With all that in mind, we should not forget that
the responsibility, and indeed the obligation, to execute

S/PV. 8217

the Council’s decisions lies with individual Member
States. So what should be done?
First, we should reaffirm these norms and enforce
the relevant resolutions. We call on all parties to the
Syrian conflict — including the Syrian regime, Russia,
Iran, Turkey and armed opposition groups — to respect
and implement the Council’s decisions. Secondly, we
must strengthen resolution 2401 (2018), with United
Nations monitoring of the implementation of the
ceasefire and with full access for fact-finding missions
to sites and collective shelters housing internally
displaced persons. These missions are ready to go; we
need their impartial information. Thirdly, with regard to
accountability, if there is to be any credible, stable and
lasting peace in Syria, the current culture of impunity
must end. All those guilty of crimes must be brought
to justice. The perpetrators of crimes, including ISIS
and Al-Qaida, must know that they are being watched,
followed and identified. They must know that files are
being compiled with a view to prosecuting them for
crimes that may include genocide. They must know that
one day they will be held accountable.
We urge all States to increase their support for the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which aims to ensure that
information about serious crimes is collected, analysed
and preserved for future prosecutions. The Netherlands
again calls on all Council members to support referring
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
What will become of the children in the photographs
I mentioned? Will they one day be able to return to
Syria? Like all children, they long for a normal life,
for stability, for safety. The Syrian regime believes in a
military solution. But there is none. There are no winners
in this war. But it is clear who is losing — the ordinary
people of Syria. In these most extreme circumstances
we commend the incredible courage and perseverance
of the humanitarian aid workers.
It is up to us to restore credibility to the Council.
It is up to us to ensure a negotiated political process,
in which all Syrians and other relevant actors are
represented. And it is up to us to end the agony and
restore dignity and humanity to the people of Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18-085695/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

I give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Sir, in presiding over this important
meeting. I am delivering this statement on behalf
of Kuwait and Sweden. At the outset, I would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for his briefing.
Today I will address three main areas: first, the
status of the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018);
secondly, measures needed to improve the humanitarian
situation; and thirdly, the responsibility of the parties to
implement the resolution.
First, on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), we are meeting today one month
after its unanimous adoption by the Security Council,
calling on all parties to cease hostilities without delay
for 30 days following the adoption of the resolution. We
deplore the fact that it has not yet been implemented.
However, we must continue to do everything in our
power to ensure the resolution’s full implementation
throughout Syria. The increased number of humanitarian
convoys entering the besieged areas during the month
of March shows that partial delivery was achieved
by comparison to the complete deadlock in access in
previous months. That indicates that progress can be
made in implementing the resolution, and we must
build on that progress.
We affirm that the provisions of the resolution
will remain valid beyond the first 30 days after its
adoption. We look forward to continued reports from
the Secretariat on the status of implementation through
monthly briefings, as stipulated in the resolution. In
that regard, we support the proposal for providing the
Council with further regular updates.
We appreciate the continued efforts of the United
Nations to facilitate talks among all parties in eastern
Ghouta with the goal of securing a ceasefire. We are
particularly concerned about the continued military
offensive by the Syrian authorities in eastern Ghouta,
as well as air strikes on Dar’a and Idlib. The shelling
of Damascus from eastern Ghouta is also a matter of
concern. All of those acts of violence have claimed the
lives of hundreds of innocent civilians.
Secondly, on measures needed to improve the
humanitarian situation, we must take the necessary
6/21

27/03/2018

measures to protect civilians fleeing eastern Ghouta
and to improve the humanitarian situation in collective
shelters. As we have said before, implementing the
provisions of resolution 2401 (2018) is the only way
to improve the humanitarian situation and to achieve
tangible progress in that regard. Those provisions
stipulate that there must be a cessation of hostilities
and that access for humanitarian aid to reach the
civilian population must be enabled. Regarding the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta, we have five
points to convey to the relevant parties, which represent
our special concerns about the protection of civilians.
First, all evacuations must be voluntary. People
must have the right to return and to choose safe places
to go to. Secondly, any negotiations on the evacuation
of civilians should include civilian representatives,
such as local councils. Thirdly, humanitarian aid
convoys should continue to enter eastern Ghouta for
the benefit of those who decided to stay there. Those
convoys should occur on a weekly basis, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018), according to the United
Nations assessment of needs, including medical
supplies, and with full access for United Nations staff.
Fourthly, human rights violations, including detentions,
disappearances and forced conscriptions, must end.
Those are serious protection concerns for civilians
staying in eastern Ghouta and for those leaving it. We
therefore encourage the United Nations to register the
names of those evacuated and their destinations and
to reinforce its presence in the collective shelters for
internally displaced persons, including through the use
of monitors to protect them and prevent sexual violence.
We call on the Syrian authorities to grant immediate
permission for that. Fifthly, the deteriorating situation
in the collective shelters for the internally displaced
persons should be improved as quickly as possible as
the number of new arrivals continues to rise.
We are deeply concerned that the United Nations
partners are bearing the brunt of a burden beyond
their capacity. It will therefore be essential to make the
maximum use of the United Nations, its staff and its
resources in order to assist in managing the increasingly
crowded collective shelters. We welcome the United
Nations plans to increase staff on the ground to that end,
and we encourage the United Nations to do the same for
eastern Ghouta as soon as the security situation allows.
We call on the Syrian authorities to grant visas for
additional United Nations staff immediately.
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, on the responsibility of the parties
to implement the resolution, we have a collective
responsibility, as members of the Council and,
specifically, as parties with influence, to work with
the Syrian authorities and urge them to implement
the provisions of resolution 2401 (2018) according
to international humanitarian law. We expect the
guarantors of the Astana agreement, Russia, Iran and
Turkey, to achieve progress towards the fulfilment of the
commitments undertaken in the statement they issued
on 16 March in advance of their summit meeting, to be
held in Istanbul on 4 April. Those commitments include,
first, ensuring rapid, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid to areas affected by the conflict;
secondly, increasing their efforts, as guarantors of
the ceasefire agreement, to ensure observance of the
respective agreements; and thirdly, pursuing their
efforts to implement the provisions of resolution 2401
(2018).
In conclusion, we affirm our full commitment to
continuing to follow up closely on the status of the
implementation of the resolution in the monthly reports
to the Council. We will spare no effort to make progress
in its implementation. This month marks the beginning
of the eighth year of the conflict in Syria. Sadly, there
is still a need for an end to the violence, sustained
humanitarian and medical aid through weekly convoys
across conflict lines, evacuation operations, the
protection of civilians and hospitals, and the lifting of
the siege.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank you,
Foreign Minister Blok, for presiding over this meeting,
and I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for once
again laying out the facts about what is happening in
Syria. I also want to personally welcome Karen Pierce
to the Council as the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom. I know all of us in the Chamber
look forward to working with her.
Today we have a very difficult subject to address:
siege, starvation and surrender. That is the awful,
unceasing rhythm of the Syrian war. As we meet today,
the third step, surrender, is taking place in eastern
Ghouta. After years of enduring siege and starvation,
residents are surrendering eastern Ghouta. The terrible
irony of this moment must be stated and acknowledged.
In the 30 days since the Security Council demanded
a ceasefire, the bombardment of the people of eastern
Ghouta has only increased and now, at the end of the
so-called ceasefire, eastern Ghouta has nearly fallen.

S/PV. 8217

History will not be kind when it judges the
effectiveness of the Council in relieving the suffering of
the Syrian people. Seventeen hundred Syrian civilians
have been killed in the past month alone. Hospitals and
ambulances are being deliberately targeted with bombs
and artillery. Schools are being hit, like the one in
eastern Ghouta that was bombed just last week, killing
15 children. Siege, starvation and surrender.
I would like to ask my Security Council colleagues
to consider whether we are wrong when we point to
the Russian and Iranian forces working alongside
Al-Assad as being responsible for the slaughter. Russia
voted for the so-called ceasefire in Syria last month
(see S/PV.8188). More than that, Russia took its time
painstakingly negotiating resolution 2401 (2018), which
demanded the ceasefire. If we watched closely during
the negotiations, we could see our Russian friends
constantly leaving the room to confer with their Syrian
counterparts. The possibilities for what was going on
are only two. Either Russia was informing its Syrian
colleagues about the content of the negotiations, or
Russia was taking directions from its Syrian colleagues
about the content of the negotiations. Either way, Russia
cynically negotiated a ceasefire that it instantly defied.
Russia even had the audacity to claim that it is the
only Council member implementing resolution 2401
(2018). How can that possibly be true when in the first
four days after the so-called ceasefire, Russian military
aircraft conducted at least 20 daily bombing missions
on Damascus and eastern Ghouta, while the people of
Syria remained under siege? The so-called ceasefire
was intended to allow humanitarian access to sick and
starving civilians. Russia even doubled down on its
cynicism by proposing five-hour pauses in the fighting.
It said that they were necessary to allow humanitarian
convoys to get through, but Russian and Syrian bombs
continue to prevent the delivery of humanitarian
aid. Only after territory falls into the hands of the
Al-Assad Government and its allies do they allow
food and medicine to be delivered. Russia and Syria’s
rationalization is that they have to continue to bomb
in eastern Ghouta in order to combat what they call
terrorists. That is a transparent excuse for the Russians
and Al-Assad to maintain their assault.
Meanwhile, from the very beginning, the opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta expressed their readiness to
implement the ceasefire. They told the Council that
they welcomed the resolution. Russia’s response was
to call those groups terrorists and keep pummelling

18-085697/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

civilians into submission, while the people of Syria
continue to starve.
Last week, after Syrian civilians had spent years
barely surviving, an agreement was reached to allow
them to leave eastern Ghouta. Who brokered it? Russia.
So we see the cycle being completed. The people of
eastern Ghouta are surrendering. That is the ugly reality
on the ground in Syria today. Cynical accusations of
bad faith from Russia will not stop us from speaking
out, and their blatantly false narratives will not keep
us from telling the world about Russia’s central role in
bombing the Syrian people into submission.
Fifteen days ago, when it was apparent that the
Russian, Syrian and Iranian regimes were utterly
ignoring the ceasefire, the United States developed
a plan for a tougher and more targeted ceasefire
focused on Damascus city and eastern Ghouta. Despite
overwhelming evidence that the ceasefire was being
ignored, some of our colleagues urged us to give
resolution 2401 (2018) a chance to work. Reluctantly,
we agreed and put off introducing the resolution. Now,
more than 80 per cent of eastern Ghouta is controlled by
Al-Assad and his allies. Their deception, hypocrisy and
brutality have overtaken the chance of a ceasefire in
eastern Ghouta, and for that we should all be ashamed.
If we were upholding our responsibility as a
Security Council, we would adopt a resolution today
recognizing the reality of what happened in eastern
Ghouta. A responsible Security Council would
condemn the Syrian authorities, along with Russia and
Iran, for launching a military offensive to seize eastern
Ghouta the same day that we called for a ceasefire.
A responsible Security Council would condemn the
Al-Assad regime for deliberately blocking convoys
of humanitarian aid during its military campaign and
removing medical items from convoys that attempted to
reach eastern Ghouta. A responsible Security Council
would recognize that the provision of humanitarian
aid was never safe, unimpeded or sustained, and that
there was no lifting of sieges. A responsible Security
Council would express its outrage that at least 1,700
civilians were killed during a military campaign that
it demanded to come to a halt — 1,700 civilians who
should have been spared in the ceasefire we demanded,
but who died on our watch.
But we cannot. We cannot take those actions
because Russia will stop at nothing to use its permanent
seat on the Council to shield its ally Bashar Al-Assad
8/21

27/03/2018

from even the faintest criticism. And we cannot take
those actions because instead of calling out the ways
in which Al-Assad, Russia and Iran made a mockery
of our calls for a ceasefire, too many members of the
Council wanted to wait. That is a travesty. This should
be a day of shame for every member of the Council and
it should be a lesson about what happens when we focus
on fleeting displays of unity instead of on what is right.
For those who think otherwise, the people of eastern
Ghouta deserve an explanation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mark Lowcock for his
briefing and to commend him on his tireless efforts and
those of his team in their response to the urgent and
severe humanitarian situation in Syria.
To address that urgency and severity, a month
ago almost to the day the Security Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018). We thus collectively and
unanimously demanded that all the parties to the
conflict cease hostilities throughout the country to
allow for sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access to civilians in need and for medical evacuations.
A month later, what is the situation? Not only has
resolution 2401 (2018) not been implemented, but the
humanitarian situation in Syria has worsened. The
civilian population is living in despair, trapped between
bargaining and fighting, particularly in eastern Ghouta.
Over the past few weeks, not only has the fighting
has not subsided; it has doubled in intensity, with a
land offensive launched by the regime, supported by its
allies Russia and Iran. The carefully planned offensive
was unremitting, using the double strategy of terror and
parallel negotiations that was used in Aleppo to obtain
the surrender of combatants and the displacement
of civilians. For a month there has not been a single
day when eastern Ghouta, which has been besieged
and starved for years, has not suffered indiscriminate
shelling by the regime and its supporters. They have
systematically bombed schools and hospitals and killed
more than 1,700 civilians, including more than 300
children. Those deaths are the result of a deliberate
strategy of the Syrian regime to forcibly bend an entire
population, annihilate any form of opposition and
remain in power.
Nothing should justify breaches of international
humanitarian law. Not one humanitarian convoy
has been authorized to enter eastern Ghouta since
15 March, and almost no humanitarian assistance has
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

been delivered in recent weeks. Meanwhile, there are
immense needs among those still in eastern Ghouta, the
majority of whom are women and children.
For several days we have been witnessing forced
evacuations of populations from eastern Ghouta, which
could constitute crimes against humanity and war
crimes. We have demanded humanitarian access to
eastern Ghouta in order to provide assistance to people
in their own homes, where they wish to stay as long
as the ceasefire allows. That was the reason for the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018). Instead, we have
witnessed just the opposite — an escalation of violence
to force a massive displacement of civilians. Bombing
has forced civilians, approximately 80,000 people, to
flee. The displacement of people from eastern Ghouta
is an integral part of the military strategy of the Syrian
regime to force the opposition to capitulate. Once again,
civilians are the primary victims.
As I said, those forced displacements could
constitute crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Evidence of such crimes will be collected, preserved
and used. We were clear on that point during the Arriaformula Council meeting with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights a few days ago. Some
55,000 civilians are now in eight collective camps
managed by the Syrian regime around eastern Ghouta,
without water or electricity and in disastrous sanitary
conditions. Their lot has not improved; their hell has
simply moved a few kilometres away. We are extremely
concerned about the fate of those civilians who now
live in overcrowded conditions, with no assurances of
protection or security, with no guarantee that they will
return home.
How do we protect civilians in the situation I have
just described? It is absolutely urgent to protect those
who can still be protected. Although the 30-day cessation
of hostilities demanded by resolution 2401 (2018) has
still not been implemented, that demand remains, more
urgent and relevant than ever. The resolution is still the
framework for our collective action. In that regard, and
in line with the briefing just given by Mark Lowcock, I
would like to underscore three vital demands.
First, it is indispensable and urgent that humanitarian
convoys be allowed to enter eastern Ghouta daily and
with adequate security. Although humanitarian needs
are great, the regime continues to deliberately block aid.
United Nations convoys must be able to enter and make
deliveries. Fighting must cease long enough to allow

S/PV. 8217

for delivery, unloading and distribution of supplies,
including of medical assistance.
The second demand concerns civilians who remain
in Ghouta, who have the right to emergency humanitarian
assistance and to protection. Aid must reach them
where they are. To that end, the United Nations and its
international and local humanitarian partners must be
able to work safely on site to assess the needs of those
populations. It is an obligation under international
humanitarian law, but it is the minimum required
to provide tangible assistance to those concerned.
The protection that is due them under international
humanitarian law must be unconditionally guaranteed.
In that regard I call again on the responsibility of all
actors with influence on the Syrian regime.
The third demand, which has taken on new
importance in recent days, is for assistance to be provided
to the displaced civilians in camps outside Ghouta.
Very concretely, that means that those populations, who
have been forced to leave everything behind in order to
survive, must be assured of their safety, access to basic
necessities and a chance to return home when they so
desire. Care must be taken that they are not threatened
with retaliation, threats or persecution of any kind.
In order to ensure that they are protected, the
United Nations and its partners must be able to escort
civilians who have been evacuated from their point of
departure to their destination in the collective shelters.
The United Nations and its partners must be granted
continuous access to civilians living in those camps.
We hope that the United Nations can strengthen its
support to displaced persons who have fled eastern
Ghouta. That would call for an increase in the number
of international staff on site. We hope that approval will
be granted to that end as soon as possible. It would also
call for security guarantees for humanitarian workers.
The situation in Afrin is also extremely worrisome.
A great many civilians are in a critical situation. More
that 180,000 people have been displaced. A single
convoy was authorized, yesterday, which is insufficient
given the tremendous needs of the population. Ongoing
fighting in Afrin has forced the Syrian Democratic
Forces to halt operations against Da’esh, whose threat,
as we all know, has not dissappeared. Our position
on the issue is the same. The legitimate concerns of
Turkey with regard to the security of its borders cannot
in any way justify a lasting military presence deep
inside Syria.

18-085699/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

More than ever, we need the fighting to end.
We call on all parties on the ground to conclude the
negotiations under way and respect a cessation of
hostilities. We support the efforts of the Special Envoy
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his commitment
to resuming the Geneva process and to reaching a
lasting political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015) that starts with the establishment of an inclusive
constitutional committee, under the auspices of Mr. De
Mistura. It is the only way to end the Syrian crisis.
It is absolutely essential to work on both the
humanitarian and political fronts. I appeal on behalf of
France, first, to those who can make a difference on the
ground, starting with Russia. It is never to late to save
lives. Let us be well aware that without urgent, decisive
action, the worst is undoubtedly yet to come in the form
of a worsening and enlargement of the conflict.
The time has come for us to learn seriously
the lessons of the Syrian tragedy. This tragedy is
the illustration of a new global disorder where the
rappelling ropes have disappeared due to a lack of
strong international governance, a lack of a power of last
resort and a lack of convergence among key actors — to
which we add the well-known attitude of Russia.
In other words, if we want to avoid other tragedies
of this type in future, it is essential to structure the
multipolar world in which we now find ourselves
around a robust multilateralism embodied by a
reformed United Nations. It is the only alternative to
the fragmentation of the world and the return to the
zones of influence — and our history teaches us all the
dangers of that — and it is with the settlement of the
Syrian crisis, which is our priority today and which is
the emergency before us, one of the other challenges of
our generation.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, both for being here today to underscore
the vital importance of this topic and, in particular, for
your very powerful statement. The United Kingdom
supports your call for a referral of the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court.
I also wish to express our thanks to the UnderSecretary-General for his continued efforts to keep the
Security Council informed of the toll that hostilities
are having on civilians in Syria. We also thank him for
the heroic efforts of all his teams on the ground. Their
efforts are much supported by most of us on the Council.
10/21

27/03/2018

The Under-Secretary-General’s briefing eloquently
underscores why it is essential that the Council comes
together to agree on concrete steps to allow the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to fulfil
its mandate to ensure humanitarian assistance and
protection for everybody who needs it. Ambassador
Haley has laid the situation bare, Ambassador Delattre
has set out the regime’s intentions, and Ambassador
Alotaibi has focused on the need for protection and
registration. I support their calls. I will not rehearse a
catalogue of suffering that we have heard expressed so
eloquently today, but that omission should not be taken
as any indication that the United Kingdom is not as
horrified as others by what is happening on the ground.
Specifically, it is diabolical that access is actually
worse in the face of such suffering. Diabolical is a
strong word, but there are no others to describe what
is happening. The worst destruction and suffering
has continued in eastern Ghouta. Those who support
Al-Assad have not taken steps to help stop the violence.
Instead, Al-Assad and his supporters have violated the
strong words of the Security Council in resolution 2401
(2018), making mockery of the Council’s authority, as
Ambassador Delattre stated.
Since 11 March, an estimated 100,000 people have
left eastern Ghouta and are in makeshift reception sites
in rural Damascus. Thousands more have been bused
to Idlib. Because there is no independent monitoring
nor provisions for civilian safety, those fleeing
and those staying remain vulnerable and at risk of
mistreatment and abuse by the regime, including being
detained, disappeared or separated from their families.
Humanitarians, health workers and first responders
on the ground report that the regime is deliberately
targeting them. That is illegal, and those who help the
Al-Assad regime are complicit in that illegality.
The situation continues even for those who are
left behind. An estimated 150,000 civilians remain in
eastern Ghouta. They suffer from acute food shortages
and lack of medical supplies. They are afraid, and
above all they remember how the regime punished the
civilians who fled from eastern Aleppo in December
2016. That is why Ambassador Alotaibi’s call for
protection and registration is so urgent.
We welcome United Nations plans to scale up
support to deal with the dire situations in the internally
displaced persons camps and collective shelters. We
call on Russia to use its influence with the regime to
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

ensure that the United Nations and its partners can also
provide assistance and protection for those who remain
in eastern Ghouta. Whether civilians choose to stay
or leave, it is essential that they be protected against
attack and have access to the essentials to survive. This
is not just a plea on the grounds of humanity; it is a
requirement under international humanitarian law. It is
the job of the Council and all members of the Council to
uphold international humanitarian law. Those who side
with the regime in its actions are themselves guilty of
violating that law.
In concluding, I would like to highlight two further
areas. The suffering of the Syrian people continues in
Idlib, where civilians have been under attack by regime
forces for many years. More than a million internally
displaced Syrians live there, including those who have
fled eastern Ghouta. In Afrin, we recognize Turkey’s
legitimate interest in the security of its borders, but at
the same time we remain concerned about the impact of
operations on the humanitarian situation, and my Prime
Minister and Foreign Secretary have raised the need
for protection of civilians and access with President
Erdoğan and his Ministers. It was good to hear from the
Under-Secretary-General that there may at last be signs
of progress in Afrin.
After seven years of conflict, over 13 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria. The
Al-Assad regime has created the situation and is now
preventing humanitarian actors from relieving some
of the horror it has inflicted. We call on Russia to use
its influence to ensure that at a minimum the United
Nations can fulfil its mandate to ensure humanitarian
assistance and protection for Syrians on the basis of
need, regardless of any other considerations.
I was at Geneva in 2012. I think we all feel that that
was a huge missed opportunity, in the light of events.
The situation has escalated every year since that time,
and, as the Under-Secretary-General said, the level of
access is worse. The Council has a small opportunity to
put measures in place to reduce the risk of reprisals. As
you said, Mr. President, if the Security Council cannot
do it, who can?
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. I also wish to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, His Excellency Mr. Stephanus Abraham
Blok, who is presiding over today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8217

Kazakhstan remains committed to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at solving humanitarian
issues in Syria. We believe that it is most important to
preserve all possible humanitarian-access modalities,
including cross-border assistance, which are
indispensable in bringing humanitarian aid to millions
of people in Syria.
Implementing resolution 2401 (2018) is a collective
responsibility, with each Council member and State
Member of the United Nations playing a significant
role. We must all continue to do everything we can
to ensure full implementation across Syria. We look
forward to continued reporting on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) to the Council through the
regular Syria briefings and reports of the SecretaryGeneral, as stipulated in the resolution.
Urgent attention must be focused on long-term
humanitarian assistance, with the assurance of safe
humanitarian access by the United Nations and other
aid agencies, and evacuation of the wounded. We
commend the sterling contribution of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Health Organization and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
for their provision of increased medical supplies and
life-saving services, including surgical procedures. In
that regard, we welcome the increase in humanitarian
convoys gaining access to besieged areas in Syria in
March, compared to previous months.
It is necessary to take note of the worrisome
humanitarian situation in Syria, as fighting in different
parts of the country are causing massive displacement.
We endorse the appeal of the United Nations to help
stem the catastrophic situation for tens of thousands of
people, from both eastern Ghouta and Afrin. We look
forward to the next round of talks, to be held in mid-May
in our capital, Astana, where the stepping up of efforts
to ensure observance of the relevant agreements will
be addressed.
We also believe that the dialogue between UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock and the Government
of Syria should be ongoing. We reiterate that all
obligations under international humanitarian law
must be respected by all parties. A further United
Nations needs-assessment mission to these troubled
areas, similar to that which Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock led recently, may be required very soon. The
Syrian authorities must cooperate fully with the United
Nations and relevant humanitarian organizations in

18-0856911/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

facilitating the unhindered provision of humanitarian
assistance and thereby mitigating the suffering.
Lastly, we are of the view that the crisis in Syria
can be resolved only through an inclusive and Syrianled political process, based on the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), subsequent
Security Council resolutions and relevant statements of
the International Syria Support Group.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
briefing by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We also welcome your presence here
today, Sir, in presiding over our meeting.
Peru deeply regrets that violence and human
suffering continue to characterize the situation in
Syria, 30 days after the humanitarian ceasefire
demanded by the Council. Resolution 2401 (2018)
remains in full force, and we consider that the Syrian
Government and other actors with the capacity to
influence developments on the ground are obliged to
ensure its full implementation. The ceasefire should
be immediate and enable unrestricted access to
humanitarian assistance throughout Syrian territory.
While there has been some limited progress in that
regard, the delivery of humanitarian assistance must be
continuous and unrestricted.
In view of the Council’s responsibilities in line
with international law and international humanitarian
law, Peru will continue to advocate for the protection
of civilians in all conflicts and humanitarian crises.
An indeterminate number of Syrian citizens, including
thousands of women and children, have been driven
out of eastern Ghouta by the violence. We note with
concern that the shelters in the vicinity of Damascus
cannot cope and that they lack food, clean water and
medical supplies. We must remember that international
humanitarian law has mandatory provisions for the
evacuation of civilians. It is also compulsory to take
measures to safeguard private property from looting
and destruction. Syrian citizens must be able to
return to their homes and businesses when security
conditions improve. We must also protect the majority
of the remaining population in eastern Ghouta, who are
particularly vulnerable to reprisals, forced recruitment
and sexual violence.
We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Afrin, Idlib and Raqqa, among other areas
12/21

27/03/2018

of Syria. The responsibility to protect civilians cannot
be conditional or subordinated to political or strategic
interests. We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies, such as the Red Cross
and the Red Crescent, to assist people in such a difficult
situation. They have our full support.
Given the intensification of violence in recent
weeks and its devastating consequences for the
population, we must once again reiterate how urgent
it is to make progress towards achieving a political
settlement on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). In that
regard, we hope that progress will soon be made in the
establishment and composition of the constitutional
committee agreed on in Sochi. All the Syrian
parties, and especially the Government, must engage
constructively in this.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing. We
want to express our appreciation to the United Nations
and humanitarian partners for their continued selfless
and courageous service in providing assistance to all
Syrians in difficult circumstances.
We remain concerned about the humanitarian
crisis in all the areas of Syria where it is prevalent.
As the Under-Secretary-General said, the Syrian war
has entered its eighth year, bringing unspeakable
suffering to the people of the country. The escalation
of violence that we witnessed last month in eastern
Ghouta and other parts of the country has been a source
of extremely grave concern. According to the statement
issued on 21 March by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, shelter, protection, water and
sanitation remain the key priority humanitarian needs
of the internally displaced. In that regard, we thank
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
providing much-needed assistance.
Alleviating the suffering of Syrians requires urgent
and coordinated action on the part of all actors, while
respecting the relevant resolutions of the Council,
particularly resolution 2401 (2018). It was encouraging
that the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a cessation of hostilities throughout
Syria for at least 30 days so as to ensure the safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid
and medical evacuations. In that regard, while much
remains to be done to fully implement the resolution,
compared to the previous month there has been positive
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

action, including aid delivery to some of the areas that
are especially badly affected and difficult to reach.
The conflict has also diminished in intensity in some
areas, according to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/243).
However, this does not mean that the action taken
has been sufficient. We therefore stress that it is vital
to redouble our efforts to do everything possible to
fully and comprehensively implement the resolution
with a sense of urgency and enhanced political will. We
believe that what the people of Syria need is a cessation
of hostilities, along with protection and access to basic
goods and services. All of those demands are contained
and affirmed in resolution 2401 (2018). All Syrian parties
should therefore respect and fully implement resolution
2401 (2018), and all States that have influence over the
parties should try to bring the maximum pressure to
bear on them, with the ultimate objective of helping to
fully operationalize the resolution, which was adopted
unanimously by the Council. In that regard, we hope
that the Astana guarantors, Russia, Turkey and Iran,
will play their role in implementing resolution 2401
(2018), strengthening the ceasefire arrangements and
improving humanitarian conditions, as stated in their
final statement of 16 March.

S/PV. 8217

While the primary responsibility for resolving the
conflict lies with the Syrians themselves — a principle
that is firmly embedded in resolution 2254 (2015) — the
Council also has an important role to play in supporting
the efforts in a spirit of unity, which we believe can
have a positive impact on the ground in alleviating the
suffering of all Syrians. That may be a tall order, in
the light of the fragmentation that Ambassador Delattre
mentioned earlier. However, the effort must be made.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome your presence,
Sir, and the fact that you are presiding over the work
of the Security Council today. We would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing. We support
him in the difficult work with which he is entrusted.

In addition, while we acknowledge that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners have been able to
reach millions of Syrians using all modes of aid delivery,
the fact remains that humanitarian access, particularly
inter-agency convoys, remains a critical challenge. In
that connection, it is absolutely vital to ensure safe,
sustained and need-based humanitarian access so that
life-saving aid can reach all Syrians in need.

We must once again express our regret that this
conflict has continued for eight years and that we are
still witnessing the ongoing sieges and violence being
endured by the Syrian people, particularly women and
children. In addition to living with the psychological
consequences of the situation, they urgently need
humanitarian assistance. We unequivocally condemn
the ongoing bombardment of civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals and schools, and the military activities
in residential areas in the cities of Damascus, Afrin and
Idlib, as well as in eastern Ghouta. They have only led
to more civilians being killed, wounded and displaced.
According to the most recent report of the Secretary
General (S/2018/243), between December and February
alone, there were 385,000 internally displaced persons
and 2.3 million people living in besieged and hard-toreach areas.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that only a
comprehensive political dialogue, under the auspices of
the United Nations, can ultimately end the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria. We reiterate our position that the
only solution to the Syrian crisis is a political solution
based on resolution 2254 (2015). We support the
continued efforts of the Special Envoy and encourage
all Syrian parties to engage with him constructively
and meaningfully in order to revitalize the Geneva
intra-Syrian talks and support the establishment of a
constitutional committee, in line with the outcome of
the Sochi congress. We fully concur with the SecretaryGeneral, who states, in his report of 20 March, “Political
efforts to bring the war to an end must be accorded
priority and redoubled by all parties to the conflict.”
(S/2018/243, para. 48)

We regret that so far there are still obstacles
preventing the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018). We call on all parties involved to make
every effort to ensure the effective implementation of
the resolution throughout Syria in order to facilitate
the safe, sustained and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian aid and services, as well as to enable the
medical evacuation of those who are seriously ill or
injured. In addition, according to the same report, since
October 2017, 86,000 civilians have returned to the city
of Raqqa, of whom 20,000 arrived in February alone.
Regrettably, 130 civilians have died and 658 have been
seriously injured by explosive remnants of war and
anti-personnel mines. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the visit by the United Nations mission to
Raqqa last week. We reiterate that the work of clearing

18-0856913/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2018

anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of war is
crucial to facilitating the safe return of the displaced.

decide their future and their political leadership in the
context of their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

While it does not reflect what has gone on throughout
Syrian territory, it is important to highlight the recent
delivery of humanitarian aid through convoys, of which
the first, on 5 March, was to Douma in eastern Ghouta,
bringing food for more than 27,000 people. We also
believe that cross-border assistance is an important part
of the response to the situation, and we highlight the
food assistance to 2 million people and the dispatch by
the United Nations to areas of northern and southern
Syria of 449 trucks carrying aid for 1 million people.

Finally, we reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated and agreed
political process, led by and for the Syrian people, and
aimed at achieving sustainable peace on their territory
without foreign pressure of any kind.

We welcome the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, all the
humanitarian agencies concerned and the Russian
Federation that have enabled humanitarian assistance
to be delivered to various populations, in particular in
eastern Ghouta, which three convoys recently entered.
We call for that assistance to continue as safely as
possible. In that regard, we believe it is important to
strengthen the dialogue and coordination among the
humanitarian agencies, the United Nations and the
Syrian Government in order to facilitate the entry of
convoys and humanitarian aid workers, as well as the
safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We emphasize the dangerous work of
the personnel of the various agencies and humanitarian
assistance bodies, whose staff risk their own lives
in carrying out their dangerous work on the ground.
We therefore reiterate the importance of full respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We want to take this opportunity to reiterate how
important it is to build on the political momentum
following the commitments made at the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress in Sochi. That should be
the channel for reinforcing the Geneva process, led by
the United Nations in the context of resolution 2254
(2016). We hope for the speedy implementation of the
Sochi outcome and, as a result, the establishment of
a constitutional committee that can facilitate a viable
political transition. In that regard, we support the
results of the latest Astana meeting, which enabled
the agreements establishing de-escalation zones to
be strengthened. We hope they will be reflected on
the ground so as to reduce the violence and meet the
urgent humanitarian needs. We condemn any attempt
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria and
believe that it is the Syrian people who must freely
14/21

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome you as you
preside over the Council today, Sir. We also welcome
Ms. Karen Pierce, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, who is now here with us. We thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
The difficult humanitarian situation continues in
a number of areas in Syria. The Russian Federation
has been taking active steps to normalize things,
including within the framework of the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). While some here may not
like it, it is a fact that we are the only ones who have
been making concrete efforts to implement resolution
2401 (2018). Since we first established humanitarian
pauses, with the assistance of the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic, and the participation and oversight of the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
nearly 121,000 people have been evacuated, on a
strictly voluntarily basis — let me stress that — from
eastern Ghouta. Many of them have talked about how
difficult it has been for them to live under the repressive
regime established by the armed group militants.
Civilians continue to flee eastern Ghouta through the
Muhayam-Al-Wafedin humanitarian corridor. There is
real-time video of this running on the Russian Defence
Ministry’s official website. In just the past few days
more than 520 civilians have left Douma. Russian
agencies have organized the distribution to them of
hot food, food kits and individual food rations, as well
as bottled drinking water. Yesterday alone, Russian
military doctors treated 111 civilians, including
42 children.
At the same time, the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation continues to organize the return of
residents of Saqba and Kafr Batna. On 24 March, as
a result of an agreement reached by the Centre with
leaders of illegal armed groups, another checkpoint was
opened for fighters and their family members to leave
from Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain Terma and Jobar.
In the past few days, militias from the Ahrar Al-Sham
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and Faylak Al-Rahman groups and their relatives
have been evacuated along the corridor and bused to
Idlib governorate. In three days, more than 13,000
people were evacuated from Arbin alone. However,
many have decided to remain, taking advantage of the
presidential amnesty. Incidentally, there have been
active efforts to plant stories about detentions and
torture and possibly even executions. They are lies.
The Syrian police are ensuring that these operations
are safe, under the oversight of specialists from the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation and representatives
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Yesterday 26 Syrian
soldiers and civilians who had been taken prisoner by
Faylak Al-Rahman were freed. In our view, those facts
clearly attest to the difficulty and extent of the work
being done by the Russian specialists on the ground,
in communication with the Syrian authorities and the
leaders of the armed groups. There are some members
of the Security Council who prefer wasting their time on
inflammatory speeches and letters making groundless
claims about our country, probably to conceal their own
unwillingness to do anything constructive to implement
resolution 2401 (2018) in cooperation with the groups
they sponsor.
At the same time, yesterday the fighters from Jaysh
Al-Islam who remain in Douma detonated four mines
yesterday in several districts in Damascus. Six civilians
died and another six were wounded. Al-Mazraa, a
residential neighbourhood in the capital was shelled
earlier. As a result of mine explosions around the
Al-Fayhaa sports complex, a 12-year-old boy died and
seven children were injured. Hundreds of people have
died from mine explosions in Damascus overall. This
is apparently the message that the militants are sending
every day about the willingness to implement the
ceasefire that they loudly proclaimed in their famous
letter to the Secretary-General.
I want to again point out the importance of
clarifying the data used in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/138), including on possible attacks on
civilian infrastructure and the victims of such attacks.
Where does that information come from? The February
report has a footnote that mentions various United
Nations agencies and departments of the Secretariat.
The main source cited is the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, which does not
have a staff presence on the ground. The big question,
and what we are trying to get to the bottom of, is who
is providing the United Nations staff with this kind

S/PV. 8217

of information? Is it the anti-Government groups and
terrorist accomplices like the White Helmets? But they
are interested parties. So why is there only a sprinkling
of the information provided by the Syrian authorities?
We call on the United Nations, humanitarian
organizations and States to deliver urgent assistance to
help the people who are evacuating eastern Ghouta. It is
also essential to strengthen the United Nations presence
around the humanitarian corridors. The Syrians
need immediate assistance with the infrastructure
reconstruction that the Syrian Government has begun
in the liberated residential areas of eastern Ghouta.
We would like to ask Mr. Lowcock to oversee that
issue personally.
We also hope that as soon as possible the
coalition will create the conditions and provide the
necessary security guarantees enabling a United
Nations assessment mission to be sent to Raqqa and
humanitarian convoys to the Rukban camp. The Syrian
authorities gave their official consent to this some time
ago, as Mark Lowcock confirmed today. We should
note that we were shocked by the recent reports that
more than 2,000 civilians may have died during the
coalition forces’ assault on Raqqa. Let me ask it once
again — where were the weeping and wailing and calls
for humanitarian aid then? We have noted the statistics
in the Secretary-General’s report on the numbers of
people who have returned to Raqqa, but we would like
to see similar information on other parts of Syria and
the country as a whole. How many people are returning
to their permanent homes? We would like to propose to
the United Nations representatives that they designate
the areas where those indicators are the highest as a
priority for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
monitor how effectively it is being implemented.
We also think it would be appropriate to include
information on reconstruction assistance in the reports.
Resolution 2401 (2018) stipulates that Syrian districts,
including those that have been liberated from terrorists,
need support in restoring normal functioning and
stability. One of the key areas in that regard is mine
clearance. We get the feeling that external donors are
losing interest in delivering assistance to residents in
areas under Syrian Government control. We are seeing
signals from some capitals that only opposition-held
enclaves should be helped. Such double standards go
completely against the core principles of neutrality and
impartial humanitarian assistance. We hope that we are
wrong about this and that Mr. Lowcock will refute the

18-0856915/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

possibility of such a trend. But if our suspicions are
borne out, how does the United Nations intend to deal
with the issue? Just the other day a meeting of senior
officials was held in Oslo under the auspices of the
United Nations and the European Union to address the
humanitarian situation in Syria. No representatives
of the Syrian authorities were invited. How does
Mr. Lowcock view the prospect of another assessment
of the humanitarian situation in Syria without the
participation of its official representatives? Does he
consider that a productive format? That is a very urgent
question considering that the forthcoming second donor
conference is scheduled for the end of April in Brussels.
I would also like to ask Mr. Lowcock what is
known at the United Nations about the facts of sexual
services being provided in exchange for humanitarian
assistance in the context of cross-border operations.
There is information about that in the November report
of the United Nations Population Fund, and the BBC
did a journalistic investigation of the issue. If this issue
is known about, why is it avoided in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports? And if it is not known about, it
should be investigated.
We hope that in close cooperation with the Syrian
authorities and consideration of their views, the United
Nations will agree on an emergency humanitarian
response plan for this year as soon as possible, with an
emphasis on the delivery of assistance to liberated areas.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you here today, Sir, and to commend the presidency’s
leadership. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for his comprehensive but once
again alarming update.
Like many around this table, we share a sense
of urgency on this issue, especially following the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), which we adopted
unanimously a month ago. Unfortunately, we have to
recognize that it has not been implemented in the first
30 days since its adoption. We are meeting again when
there has been no substantial change on the ground and
the fighting is far from over. The military offensive in
Syria continues and the human suffering is growing
as a result. Any action, even against terrorists, cannot
justify attacks on innocent civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including health facilities. That must
stop, and the parties to the conflict must strictly
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Accountability for serious violations
16/21

27/03/2018

is a requirement under international law and central to
achieving sustainable peace in Syria.
As indicated in the last report of the United Nationsmandated Commission of Inquiry, there is a need for
the international community to take a broader view of
accountability and to take urgent steps to ensure that
the needs of Syrian conflict victims for justice and
accountability are met both immediately and in the long
term. We call upon all parties to alleviate the suffering of
the civilians, including children, by granting them free
and safe access to humanitarian assistance, including
voluntary medical evacuation, which should be strictly
overseen by the United Nations and the implementing
partners in order to ensure the voluntary character of
the process.
While discussing evacuations, let me underline that
people must have the right to return and to a safe location
for settlement. Any evacuation negotiations should also
include civilians. Humanitarian aid convoys to eastern
Ghouta must continue for those who choose to stay.
We would like to stress that all actors should use
their full influence to immediately improve conditions
on the ground. We urgently call for the cessation
of hostilities in the whole of Syria. Attacks against
civilians, civilian property and medical facilities must
stop in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of
the Syrian people.
Some small positive steps have taken place, such
as a larger number of humanitarian convoys reaching
the besieged areas in March, especially when compared
to previous months, when humanitarian access was
almost completely blocked. That improvement shows
that it is possible to make progress, although much more
is needed. In that context, we call on Russia, Iran and
Turkey — as the European Union did, and as the High
Representatives did through their respective ministers
after the Foreign Affairs Council of the European
Union in February — to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities as Astana guarantors.
It is also important to note that the cessation of
hostilities may also provide a chance for the peace talks
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva
to gain momentum so that a political solution may
finally be reached. Once again, let me underline that
we should seek to reach an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, in line with Council resolution
2254 (2015). In that connection, we strongly believe
that the conclusions of the Congress of Syrian
18-08569

27/03/2018

S/PV. 8217

The situation in the Middle East

National Dialogue in Sochi could and should be used
to advance the Geneva process, especially with regard
to the creation of a constitutional committee by United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question of
the full implementation of the humanitarian resolution
across Syria. The civilian population of Syria has already
suffered too much. The adoption of the resolution was
just the beginning of the process. We call on all with
influence on the ground to take the necessary steps to
ensure that the fighting stops, the Syrian people are
protected and, finally, our joint humanitarian access
and necessary medical evacuations continue.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome Mr. Stef Blok, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, to New York.
We take this opportunity to congratulate him for the
commendable presidency of the Netherlands during the
month of March.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful for
the holding of this informative meeting, which enables
us to once again assess humanitarian resolution 2401
(2018), which we approved one month ago. We thank
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock, who, as he always does, has just given
us a very informative and detailed briefing on the
developments on the ground in Syria.
The 30-day ceasefire throughout Syria, established
under resolution 2401 (2018) in order to carry out
humanitarian operations, has expired. Despite the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations team in Syria,
violence has increased in eastern Ghouta, in Damascus,
in Idlib and in Afrin, where there is an ongoing Turkish
military offensive. Daily air strikes and bombardments
have increased, including in residential areas, among
Government forces, opposition forces and non-State
armed groups, making it difficult to ensure the
protection of all civilians and the immediate, secure
and sustained provision of humanitarian aid. That
excessive resurgence of violence, orchestrated by
the various parties, only serves to exacerbate and
aggravate the already grim humanitarian situation in
those conflict zones.
As we have reiterated, the solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is tightly linked with a
ceasefire. The prolongation of the conflict can only
further aggravate the tragic humanitarian situation,

which in turn creates greater instability and negatively
affects neighbouring countries that take in the millions
of refugees fleeing the war.
As the Secretary-General
20 March report:

underlines

in

his

“Our common objective” — and one of high
priority — “should be to alleviate and end the
suffering of the Syrian people. What the Syrian
people need immediately has been made abundantly
clear and affirmed in resolution 2401 (2018).
Civilians need a cessation of hostilities, protection,
access to basic goods and services” — and access
to humanitarian and sanitary assistance — “and an
end to sieges.” (S/2018/243, para. 48)
All parties involved in the Syrian crisis must
accept that none of them can achieve a military victory.
Government forces, opposition forces and armed
groups must accept that no matter how much death and
destruction they cause in their country, there will be no
victor but rather one single loser — the Syrian people.
Similarly, national parties and international partners
that have significant political and geostrategic interests
and that have the capacity to exercise their influence
on their respective allies must redouble their efforts
and political commitments in order to bring sustainable
peace and stability to the country. Any party that
insists on political red lines that block the necessary
commitments must also consider the setback caused by
the loss of innocent human lives.
It is evident that the Council has not entirely reached
its goal by unanimously adopting resolution 2401
(2018). The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support
any humanitarian initiative that seeks to definitively
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, I renew the tribute of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to Mr. Lowcock and to the entire
humanitarian team of the United Nations for their noble
and tireless work in Syria to provide relief to the Syrian
people living through a humanitarian catastrophe.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Like
others, my delegation would like to welcome Mr. Stef
Blok to New York and to congratulate him on the
holding of the current meeting in the Security Council.
My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Syria.

18-0856917/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

As we are all aware, the war in Syria has unleashed
one of the most serious humanitarian crises in recent
history and continues to have a devastating impact on
the Syrian people. My country remains particularly
concerned about the attacks and bombings, including
those against hospitals and civilian infrastructure,
that continue to punctuate the daily lives of people
subjected to forced displacement in the areas of Afrin,
Idlib and eastern Ghouta. Côte d’Ivoire condemns
those actions and calls on the parties to take the steps
necessary to protect people, civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian personnel.
More than a month after its unanimous adoption
by members of the Security Council, resolution 2401
(2018), on which so much hope was pinned, has fallen
woefully short of our expectations, much to our
regret. The fact is that the demand for an immediate
cessation of hostilities to allow safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian aid and related services, as
well as medical evacuation of the seriously ill and
wounded, in accordance with relevant international
humanitarian law, has still not been adhered to, despite
our joint efforts.
The ongoing fighting has forced hundreds of
thousands of civilians to flee to camps and makeshift
shelters where living conditions are extremely difficult.
Côte d’Ivoire calls once again for the effective
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) with a view
to resuming the delivery of humanitarian aid, including
medical evacuations from besieged areas and camps
for internally displaced persons, in order to ease the
suffering of people in distress. We urge the Council
to overcome its differences and to demonstrate unity
in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution, which is more relevant than ever.
My delegation reiterates its belief that the
humanitarian situation will not improve unless
significant progress is made at the political level, as the
two issues are closely linked. We therefore encourage
the parties to prioritize political dialogue and resume
peace talks in the framework of the Geneva process, in
accordance with the road map established by resolution
2254 (2015).
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
China commends the active efforts of the relevant
United Nations agencies to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in some areas of Syria.
18/21

27/03/2018

The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year and has
caused terrible suffering for the people of Syria. The
humanitarian situation in parts of the country has
recently deteriorated. China calls on all parties in Syria
to put its country’s future and destiny, as well as its
people’s safety, security and well-being first, cease
hostilities and violence without delay, resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation and ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria as soon as possible.
United Nations humanitarian convoys have now
gained access to eastern Ghouta in order to deliver aid
supplies to the people there. China welcomes Russia’s
establishment of temporary truces in eastern Ghouta,
opening up a humanitarian corridor for Syrian civilians.
As a result of the efforts of the parties concerned, some
ceasefire agreements have been reached and a large
number of civilians evacuated through the corridor.
In the circumstances, it is important to continue to
promote the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
so as to alleviate the humanitarian situation in areas
such as eastern Ghouta.
China welcomes the meeting between Foreign
Ministers held by Russia, Turkey and Iran in Astana,
and commends Kazakhstan for hosting the meeting.
We hope that the upcoming meeting of the Heads of
State of the three countries and the next round of the
Astana dialogue will contribute positively to restoring
the ceasefire momentum in Syria and supporting the
Geneva talks.
The international community should continue
to support the role of the United Nations as the main
mediator, and back Special Envoy de Mistura’s diplomatic
efforts to relaunch the Syrian political process.
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be respected, and all Syrian
parties must be encouraged to reach a political solution
to the Syrian issue, based on the principle of the
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned peace process, and in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), with a view
to fundamentally easing the humanitarian situation in
Syria and continuing to advance the counter-terrorism
agenda, as mandated by the Council’s resolutions. The
Council should remain united on the Syrian issue and
speak with one voice. China stands ready to work with
the international community and to contribute actively
and constructively to a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): As the representative
of Kuwait has already delivered a joint statement on our
behalf, I will make my remarks very brief.
One month ago, the Council adopted resolution
2401 (2018) by consensus, in response to the deafening
calls for action to address the horrific humanitarian
situation in Syria. Today we have heard around this
table a continued commitment to moving forward
with the implementation of that important resolution. I
wanted to speak last in order to identify some points of
convergence. From the discussion today, I believe that
there are a number of critical areas where there is broad
agreement within the Council.
First, we all share a deep disappointment and
sense of dissatisfaction and frustration with the lack of
implementation. While a limited increase in access for
humanitarian convoys shows that progress is possible,
much more is needed. The resolution remains in force
and all parties remain obliged to comply.
Secondly, we have heard a common concern about
the continuing hostilities throughout the country,
particularly the ongoing military offensive in eastern
Ghouta. Those who leave the area should do so
voluntarily, with the right to return and a choice of
safe places to go to. At the same time, humanitarian
aid convoys must continue to support those who choose
to remain.
Thirdly, we agree that efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians must be stepped up by the United
Nations and its partners, both inside eastern Ghouta and
for those leaving and in the collective shelters. I want
to emphasize that preventing sexual and gender-based
violence should be an integral part of those efforts.
We condemn the attacks in February that affected
health facilities.
Many colleagues also reiterated today that resolution
2401 (2018) applies across the whole of the country. I
just wanted to mention our concern about the Turkish
operation in Afrin and the statements that Turkey has
made about expanding its military operations in the
north, beyond Afrin. We are also concerned about
the protection of civilians fleeing Afrin, as well as
the difficult conditions for those remaining. We call
on all relevant parties, especially Turkey, to ensure
the protection of civilians and facilitate cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian aid deliveries, as well as
freedom of movement, for internally displaced persons.

S/PV. 8217

The need for the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) remains as urgent today as when it was
adopted. As Ambassador Alotaibi has said, we will spare
no effort in making progress on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). We will continue to work
actively and tirelessly to that end, be creative in
considering possible further steps, and remain ready to
reconvene the Council at any time should the situation
warrant its renewed action. We are convinced that the
unity of the Council, as difficult as it may be, is the only
way to effectively make a real difference on the ground
and alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. For our
part, even when terribly frustrated, we will never give
up trying to achieve that change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey the
condolences of the Government and people of my
country to my colleague on the Russian Federation
delegation in the wake of the tragic incident that claimed
children’s lives in the commercial centre in Kemerovo.
A few minutes ago, I was checking the list of the
States members of the Security Council and I realized
that two — only two — of its 15 members have embassies
in Damascus. That is why the statements made by the
representatives of those two countries offered the most
accurate description of the humanitarian situation in
my country. They were able to provide an objective and
fair assessment of the situation there.
In late 2016, right here in the Chamber (see
S/PV.7834), we announced the good news to our people
in Syria that the Syrian Government would liberate
eastern Aleppo from armed terrorist groups, and as a
Government, an army and a responsible State we have
done just that. Today we announce to our people the
good news that the time has come to liberate all of
eastern Ghouta from these armed terrorist groups. We
declare that we will liberate the Golan, Afrin, Raqqa,
Idlib and the rest of our occupied territory because, as
a State, we reject the presence on our territory of any
illegal armed group or occupying Power, regardless of
the excuses, just like all other States represented in the
Council. Such victories would not have been possible
if we had no just cause. They would not have been
possible without the sacrifices made by the Syrian Arab
Army, the support of our people and the support of our
allies and friends.

18-0856919/21

S/PV.8217

The situation in the Middle East

Facts that have come to light recently with the
liberation of eastern Ghouta from armed terrorist groups
again prove what we have always told the Council since
the first day of the global terrorist war waged by Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, Israel, Turkey, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France against my country. We
said that the suffering of Syrians is the result of the
practices of armed terrorist groups against civilians.
The testimonies of the tens of thousands of our people
leaving eastern Ghouta underscore that those groups
have continued to deprive them of their freedom,
destroy their livelihoods, disperse their families and
prevent them from leaving to areas under State control
in order to continue using them as human shields. They
have seized control of humanitarian assistance in order
to distribute it to their supporters or sell it to civilians
at exorbitant prices. They have also targeted the safe
corridors allocated by the Government with explosive
bullets and mortar shelling, which has led to the death of
dozens of people, including some Palestinian brethren.
We have borne witness to a state of hysteria in
recent days and weeks in the Council as the Syrian
Government has sought to exercise its sovereign right,
combat terrorist groups and eliminate terrorists in
Syria in order to restore security and stability to all
Syrians and implement Council resolutions against
terrorism. That state of hysteria proves that the States
supporting those terrorist groups have never sought to
end the suffering of Syrians. They have sought only
to perpetuate and prolong their suffering in order to
blackmail the Syrian Government, at the political and
humanitarian levels, and save terrorists from their
certain deaths. I would like to assure the supporters of
terrorism, some of whom are present in this Chamber,
that the plan that they have promoted for the past seven
years has failed. Their plan was to deny that the Islamist
takfiri groups were terrorists and instead present them
as moderate Syrian opposition. That plan has failed.
Eastern Ghouta has not fallen, as my colleague
the representative of the United States stated. It was
liberated in the same way we liberated eastern Aleppo.
It is terrorism that has fallen in eastern Ghouta, not
civilians. As the representative of the United States
said, today should be a day of shame for the supporters
and sponsors of terrorism and terrorist groups. They
have supported those terrorist groups for years in order
to topple the Syrian Government by force in favour
of Islamist takfiri groups. Such actions have led to
considerable suffering among the Syrian people, and I
20/21

27/03/2018

have proof of it. Two days ago, at the Senate Armed
Forces Committee, led by Senator Lindsey Graham,
the Chief of Central Command, General Joseph Votel,
stated that “the change of the Government in Syria by
force in favour a number of Islamist opposition groups
has failed”.
The Security Council has to date held 49 formal
meetings to discuss the so-called humanitarian situation
in Syria and a number of informal emergency and Arria
Formula meetings. The Council has read reports and
heard briefings that were replete with falsehoods that
senior officials of the United Nations sought to present
in order to serve the policies of some influential
Western countries that are members of the Council and
to pressure the Syrian Government. Such reports and
briefings were completely devoid of professionalism
and objectivity. They have failed to take note of the
attacks on the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, including the attacks by
the international coalition, led by the United States, and
those by the Turkish regime and the Israeli occupying
force. Those same parties have also sought to provide
all kinds of support to terrorist groups associated with
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other militias fabricated
in those countries.
After 49 reports and hundreds of meetings, briefings
and thousands of working hours, some countries
continue to refuse to recognize that the humanitarian
crisis in Syria is the result of an external investment in
terrorism and unilateral coercive measures. Forty-nine
reports have been issued, and I say today that my words
are falling on deaf ears. People from the Netherlands
say that beautiful flowers have thorns. The Netherlands
is famous for its flowers. Perhaps that saying reflects
the situation on the ground.
Mr. Lowcock stated that the Kashkul was targeted
by a missile but he did not specify its origin. He
said there are eight shelters for those leaving eastern
Ghouta. He did not mention the efforts of the Syrian
Government to host the 150,000 civilians leaving eastern
Ghouta. He does not know who manages those shelters.
Perhaps aliens are taking care of the 150,000 civilians.
Mr. Lowcock stated that the United Nations, its partners
and the Syrian Red Crescent are helping people from
Ghouta. He did not mention the Government at all. If
the Government has no role to play, why ask it to help
the Council? Why does the Council request its approval
for the entry of humanitarian convoys? Mr. Lowcock
stated that 153,000 people left Afrin and went to Tell
18-08569

27/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Rifaat because of military operations. Who forced
153,000 people to leave Afrin? Was it not Turkey that
forced them to leave? Was it not the Turkish aggression
against Afrin that forced these people to leave?
Mr. Lowcock mentioned the Syrian Government
only once, saying that it approved the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the Rukban camp. He did
not say that the United States was behind the obstacles
preventing the deployment of the humanitarian convoy
in question. The United States occupies the Rukban
camp and the Tanf area. I will not go into detail now
for the sake of time. I will not even go into the details
of the forty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/243). I will give only one example to prove that
the report lacks objectivity and impartiality.
The report devotes nine paragraphs to the suffering
of civilians in eastern Ghouta and the damage to the
infrastructure there as a result of Government military
operations, as the report claims — nine paragraphs. As
for the situation of the 8 million civilians in Damascus,
the targeting by terrorist groups of the capital with more
than 2,500 missiles, the killing and injury of thousands,
and the destruction of homes, hospitals and clinics, the
report dedicates only one sentence to Damascus. The
report says,
“Attacks on residential neighbourhoods of
Damascus also continued from eastern Ghouta,
resulting in deaths, injuries and damage to civilian
infrastructure.” (S/2018/243, para. 8)
We hope that the United Nations will not adopt
in eastern Ghouta the same approach that it has taken
in previous situations by not providing support to the
areas liberated or achieving reconciliation. We hope
that the United Nations will adopt a new approach in
line with the Charter and international law, based on
full coordination and cooperation with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is the only party
concerned with the protection and support of Syrians.
We hope that the United Nations will not succumb to
the dictates of certain influential Western countries in

S/PV. 8217

the Council that run counter to humanitarian action, the
Charter and international law.
During the past week alone, the Syrian Ministry
of Commerce has distributed 4,000 tons of food to
civilians leaving eastern Ghouta. I am not sure about
the sources mentioned by the representative of France,
because France does not have an embassy in Damascus.
So its sources of information cannot be credible.
In conclusion, the States sponsoring terrorism
have instructed armed terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons once again in Syria. I ask the Council to
pay attention to this information. They asked them
to fabricate evidence, as they have in the past, in
order to accuse the Syrian Government. We sent this
information to the President of the Security Council
yesterday. According to that information, this theatrical
act will be produced by the intelligence agencies of
these countries, and the starring roles will be the White
Helmets. The production will be directed by foreign
media. This theatrical act will take place this time
in the areas close to the separation line in the Syrian
occupied Golan. Terrorist groups will use poison gas
against civilians in Al-Harra. Afterwards, the injured
will be moved to the hospitals of the Israeli enemy for
treatment there. Council members can already imagine
the testimony that will be offered by doctors of the
Israeli occupation forces.
The information we submitted also refers to
another theatrical act in the villages of Habit and
Qalb Lawza in the suburbs of Idlib, where a number
of satellite transmitters and foreign experts have been
spotted. This time, the cast will include women and
children from an internally displaced persons camp on
the Syrian-Turkish border. Once again, I provide the
Council with this serious information.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

18-0856921/21
