United Nations

S/PV.6657

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6657th meeting
Monday, 14 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
pursuant to Security Council press statement (S/2011/693)
First report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations
Office for Central Africa (S/2011/704)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-59157 (E)

*1159157*

S/PV.6657

It is an honour for me to address the Council and
introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/693) on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected
areas. The report assesses the threat posed by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and the regional and
international efforts to address it, particularly those
made by the United Nations.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the Lord’s
Resistance Army-affected areas pursuant to
Security Council press statement (S/2011/693)
First report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for
Central Africa (S/2011/704)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Central African Republic and of
South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s rules of procedure,
I invite Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite General Louis Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/693, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Lord’s Resistance Armyaffected areas pursuant to Security Council press
statement. I wish also to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/704, the first report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.
Mr. Moussa: I would like at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month.

2

This is the second report on the LRA since 2006.
Members will recall that on 21 July 2011, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun briefed the Council on the
transnational threat posed by the group in the Central
African region, particularly in remote areas of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan.
Over the years, the LRA’s brutal and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians have resulted in
deaths, abductions, looting and the displacement of
some 440,000 persons, who are today displaced or
living as refugees in the countries affected. Although it
does not pursue a political agenda, the group continues
to perpetrate serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law with impunity, and
to instil fear and terror among local populations. The
affected countries’ limited capacity to control their
porous borders, which stretch over vast areas, means
that the group can move easily, crossing the borders of
the affected countries.
The toll has been particularly heavy in
communities in the Haut and Bas Uélé districts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where 335,000
persons have been displaced due to the LRA. The
majority are being generously hosted by local
communities, which already have only limited access
to basic infrastructure, such as schools and health care.
The humanitarian situation has deteriorated further this
year, with 49,000 persons newly displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone during the
first half of the year. Constrained humanitarian access
due to insecurity continues to be a significant
challenge, and the remoteness of and logistical hurdles
involved in reaching many locations make operations
costly and time-consuming.
Recently, the Governments of the LRA-affected
countries have taken important steps to address the
threat, including through coordinated military
operations. However, the national security forces of
those countries lack the full range of resources and
capabilities in areas such as logistics, intelligence-

11-59157

S/PV.6657

gathering and air mobility to effectively deal with the
problem on their own as well as extend their authority
throughout their respective territories, protect the
civilian populations and enforce the rule of law.
Over the years, the affected countries, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations and the
wider international community, for that matter, have
made a significant investment in efforts to address the
LRA threat, including through the provision of troops
and logistical support. It is crucial that we collectively
remain engaged on this important issue.
In this context, over the years the quest to engage
in further analysis regarding the LRA has produced
much in the way of results. Therefore, additional
concerted actions that yield concrete results on the
ground for the communities living with the
consequences of this crisis must continue.
In our view, the military operations being
conducted by the Member States affected should be
intelligence-driven and targeted, and ensure the
containment rather than the dispersal of LRA elements
in order to maximize their impact. In that regard, the
recent deployment by the United States of 100 combatequipped military personnel to provide training and
advisory support to national armies in the Central
African region that are carrying out operations against
the LRA should enhance the efforts already being
undertaken by the Governments of the affected
countries.
In addition, while LRA combatants attempting to
leave the group face serious risks and challenges, the
Governments of the affected countries should continue
their efforts, in collaboration with their partners, to
facilitate the defection of LRA combatants and ensure
that they are able to participate in effective
reintegration programmes.
The Secretary-General welcomes the African
Union’s initiative to develop a regional strategy to
address the LRA, as it provides an important new
opportunity for coordinated action by the affected
countries. The United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU) is continuing to provide planning
support for the modalities of the strategy, including
military planning for the regional intervention force
and, together with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and humanitarian partners, is
helping to develop a plan for the protection of
civilians.

11-59157

Meanwhile, as indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that is before the Council, the United
Nations system is taking a number of actions aimed at
addressing the LRA problem in a more effective and
coherent manner through its political, peacekeeping,
human rights, humanitarian and development efforts in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. In that
connection, steps have been taken to further strengthen
coordination and synergy among the United Nations
entities, including with the UNOAU and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
In addition, the United peacekeeping operations in the
region are taking further steps to strengthen civilian
protection, within their mandates and capabilities, in
strategic locations in the LRA-affected areas, so as to
help deter attacks against civilians and facilitate
humanitarian operations.
UNOCA, in its capacity as the United Nations
political focal point for the LRA in the region, and in
close cooperation with all relevant United Nations
presences on the ground, will continue to enhance the
linkages in the work of the United Nations and other
partners and facilitate coordination and informationsharing among them. Meanwhile, I will continue to
engage the United Nations presence in the region with
a view to articulating the modalities for coordinated
support to the African Union regional initiative and for
the affected countries.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to our partners for their continued
efforts in addressing the LRA threat. These efforts
should be strengthened and sufficiently supported by
all concerned so that they can be sustained in order to
help eradicate the threat posed by the LRA.
The President: I thank Mr. Moussa for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): It is with great
pleasure that I take the floor for the second time in the
Security Council to address the issue of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), which is of great concern to
the African Union (AU), as members of the Council are
aware. The inclusion of this item on its agenda
demonstrates the Security Council’s commitment to
finding a solution to this problem, which has assumed
an alarming regional dimension, as was just stressed by
Mr. Moussa.

3

S/PV.6657

On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
thank you, Sir, for your kind invitation to our
organization to participate in this meeting. The
convening of this debate under Portugal’s presidency is
further proof of the extent to which your country, close
as it is to Africa, is concerned with the fate of the
continent and its inhabitants.
I take this opportunity to commend the SecretaryGeneral on his very comprehensive report
(S/2011/693). I welcome the presence here today of the
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa,
whose briefing shed a bright light on the situation in
Central Africa, in particular the range of issues related
to the LRA. We wish him every success in
accomplishing his noble mission.
I also welcome the presence of Mr. Louis
Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States.
The AU involvement in resolving the security
issues created in Central Africa by the LRA can be
traced back to its special session on the consideration
and resolution of conflicts in Africa, held in Tripoli,
Libya, on 31 August 2009. In the action plan adopted
at the session, the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union agreed, inter alia, to redouble their
efforts, including military efforts, to neutralize the
LRA and to put an end to its atrocities and
destabilizing activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic.
The fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government, held in Kampala,
Uganda, in July 2010, reiterated the commitment of the
African Union and asked the Commission to organize
as soon as possible action-oriented consultations
among countries affected by the activities of the LRA
and all other interested parties in order to facilitate
regional coordinated action to address the threat posed
by that group. In that context, regional ministerial
meetings were held on the activities of the LRA in
Bangui, Central African Republic, on 13 and
14 October 2010, and in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on
8 June 2011.
The seventeenth African Union Summit, held in
Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, in July 2011 welcomed in
particular the initiatives taken by the Commission. The
meeting lent its full support to the decisions taken, and

4

asked the AU Peace and Security Council to speedily
authorize the planned operation and all its components,
including the regional intervention force, the joint
operations centre and the joint coordination
mechanism. The conference requested the United
Nations and other AU partners to support the initiative
to protect the affected civilian populations, including
through financial and logistical support.
In following up on these decisions, the AU
Commission
has
undertaken
the
necessary
consultations with the countries concerned to designate
a special envoy for the LRA. The special envoy will
have to ensure political coordination and overall
strategy. The AU Commission also established an
integrated planning team, comprised of officers of the
Commission and of affected countries, to conduct
detailed operational planning. The team has undertaken
a series of activities, in particular developing a mission
plan for ongoing operational procedures, as well as
force generation and finalizing the legal framework
and the protection of civilians strategy document.
On 27 September, the Commission submitted an
interim report to the Peace and Security Council. The
Council took note of the efforts made and asked the
Commission to submit as soon as possible final
planning documents so that the mandate could be
adopted. The Peace and Security Council will meet on
21 November to consider the draft operational mandate
submitted to it. In the meantime, the Commission is
striving to finalize arrangements for role-sharing
among the affected countries so as to mobilize support
for capacity--building of the countries affected by LRA
attacks and to ensure the availability of financial,
material and logistical resources necessary for the
regional cooperation initiative.
In that context, the Commission has pursued
consultations with the European Union on financing
certain components of the initial phase of the
operation. I welcome the European Union’s willingness
to contribute to the success of the AU’s efforts. At the
same time, other contributions will be vital to allow for
the effective implementation of the operation. The
Commission is in contact with other partners,
particularly the United States, in order to mobilize
additional support and ensure the closest possible
coordination of efforts to neutralize the LRA and put
an end to its activities.

11-59157

S/PV.6657

The Commission is also in contact with the
United Nations Secretariat to follow up on the
conclusions of the earlier meeting of the Security
Council on the LRA. The AU is grateful to the United
Nations for its renewed commitment to supporting our
implementation of the regional LRA initiative.

developments, namely, the possibility of establishing a
force and setting up an operations centre in order to put
in place a framework for political follow-up. Final
decisions will soon be taken by the Peace and Security
Council, as the observer of the African Union has also
just pointed out.

The AU anti-LRA regional cooperation initiative
is an important action. It is the object of great interest
and expectations on the part of countries affected by
LRA atrocities, as well as of the attention of foreign
partners. It complements and gives new impetus to the
earlier efforts of the States concerned. This meeting of
the Council is therefore opportune to take stock of
efforts already made and to maintain and to enhance
the mobilization of the international community.

How those issues affect the Economic
Community of Central African States should be seen in
the context of the fact that all of us are concerned
about peace and security problems on the continent.
For ECCAS in particular, however, they are of concern
given that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic are members of the
Community. Given that fact, there can be no holding
back when it comes to engaging on those issues. A
mere look into the situation bears that out.

The President: I thank Mr. António for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sylvain-Goma.
Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, Sir, to welcome your assumption of
the Council presidency this month, and to thank the
Ambassador of Gabon for his efforts to facilitate my
presence at this debate. We in Central Africa are proud
of the establishment of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in Libreville, and
we welcome the invitation of the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to this debate to discuss the development of
the Office’s activities.
With regard to the issues before the Security
Council, I shall very briefly touch on a few aspects in
connection with the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
while speaking at greater length on the Gulf of Guinea.
I would also like to take advantage of our presence in
the Council to make some comments on the problems
that concern us and efforts we are carrying out at
ECCAS that we believe could benefit from cooperation
with UNOCA.
With regard to the LRA, ECCAS is aware of the
developments that have just been recounted here.
ECCAS has been involved in various meetings
organized by the African Union, especially at Bangui.
That has made it possible to take note of the
developments in the activities between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and what is now South Sudan. The observer of the
African Union has just spoken about possible

11-59157

In 2008, ECCAS undertook its first activities in
the field by setting up the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), which began its work on 1 January 2009.
MICOPAX’s efforts led the European Union
assessment missions to determine that several positive
steps had been taken, but that there were also concerns.
In an official statement, the Central African Republic
expressed its satisfaction with the cooperation that had
taken place, in particular in connection with
MICOPAX’s ability to control certain aspects that
could have jeopardized the presidential election.
The work of ECCAS with the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
has now reached the mid-point, making it possible for
us to address two concerns. In no particular order, the
first has to do with the desire of the Government of the
Central African Republic to acknowledge that more
than 20 years of peacekeeping missions on its territory
had not been enough to focus on the training of the
Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA). Secondly,
ECCAS member States believe that the time has come
to ensure that the forces of the Central African
Republic can strengthen their capacity to take control
of the security situation throughout the country.
Taking those two concerns into consideration,
MICOPAX officials and the ECCAS Council of
Ministers took the decision to begin the gradual
drawdown of the Mission, while continuing, in the two
following years, the capacity-building previously
agreed. Three hundred and ninety-nine force members
will receive training in 2012. That will be reviewed

5

S/PV.6657

prior to the end of the mandate given to the mission by
ECCAS, in 2013. In that context, given that
developments in the setting up by ECCAS, through the
structures for regional brigades, require a great deal of
caution, we will endeavour to ensure that the emphasis
continues to be placed first on MICOPAX, bearing in
mind the goals to which I have just referred in the area
of training. We will also focus on the training of the
armed forces against the backdrop of the contribution
they will have to make in the context of the regional
force that is still being put together to deal with the
LRA.
It is of course true that things are continuing to
evolve and that the situation in Central Africa will
continue to be of concern to ECCAS heads of State. As
the recently conducted African Union assessment
mission suggested, if constraints necessitated that
senior political officials consider a different approach
from the one I have just outlined, then indeed other
decisions may have to be taken, for peace has no price.
Those are the comments I wished to make on this
issue. In brief, the current capacity of ECCAS imposes
constraints on it in connection with carrying out the
peacebuilding Mission in Central Africa in accordance
with the current mandate, including gradually drawing
down MICOPAX prior to its full withdrawal in 2013.
However, ECCAS stands ready to follow up any
measures that may be called for by the African Union’s
senior political leaders.
The President: I thank Mr. Sylvain-Goma for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abou Moussa to
present the report (S/2011/704) on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa.
Mr. Abou Moussa (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to present to the Security Council the first
report (S/2011/704) of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). I would also like to welcome
the presence in the Chamber of Their Excellencies the
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Ambassador
and Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations. That further demonstrates the interest
in cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

6

The report before the Council presents the
process of setting up the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in Libreville, Gabon, and
underscores the difficulties encountered during the
launching phase. It also notes the practical provisions
made for the effective functioning of the Office. In that
regard, I would like to renew the thanks of the United
Nations to the Gabon Government for the cooperation
given to UNOCA to facilitate its operation. The report
further indicates the vital support given to the Office
by various entities of the United Nations system, in
particular the Secretariat, the logistical base in Brindisi
and the United Nations bodies in the Central African
subregion. Without that support, it would have been
difficult for the Office to achieve the current results.
(spoke in English)
The establishment of UNOCA follows the
willingness of the leaders of Central Africa to find
appropriate solutions to the conflicts that have affected
a number of countries in the subregion in the past. In
that regard, the leaders of the subregion worked closely
with the United Nations to establish the Office on
1 January 2011, and subsequently to inaugurate it on
2 March. On 11 March, the Secretary-General
appointed me as his Special Representative for Central
Africa and Head of UNOCA. I assumed my functions
on 24 May and arrived in Libreville on 15 June.
Since my arrival in Libreville, I have focused on
three key issues: first, the operationalization of the
Office; secondly, courtesy visits to the authorities of
the subregion to familiarize myself with the key
challenges confronting the subregion; and thirdly,
taking initial steps towards enhancing coordination
among the United Nations entities in the subregion.
I am pleased to report that the Office is now fully
operational and that we have started implementing its
mandate. About 87 per cent of the staff have assumed
their duties in Libreville, and the remaining
outstanding recruitment and operational tasks will be
completed soon. Besides those actions, I have engaged
in a process of consultations with the Heads of State
and Government, the representatives of subregional
institutions and of the United Nations system, and
other partners in the subregion.
The objectives of those consultations were
twofold, namely, to obtain a broader awareness of the
nature of the peace and security and other challenges
confronting the subregion, and to better explain the

11-59157

S/PV.6657

mandate of UNOCA to the region’s leaders and other
stakeholders, as well as to obtain their perspectives on
and their expectations of the implementation of that
mandate. I have visited all ECCAS member States
except one, which I plan to visit in the near future. I
also visited the African Union headquarters in Addis
Ababa and the United Nations Office to the African
Union.
Following those consultations, UNOCA brought
together representatives of the United Nations system
in Central Africa at a regional seminar held in
Libreville in October. The seminar provided an
opportunity for the United Nations system to agree on
how to align its support to countries in Central Africa
in a more coordinated manner, with UNOCA playing a
coordinating role. In that regard, we are working with
the United Nations Subregional Centre for Human
Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, in Yaoundé,
and the Central Africa Subregional Office of
UN-Women, in Kigali, which have agreed to
strengthen cooperation with UNOCA.
Following consultations with leaders and other
stakeholders in Central Africa, the following emerged
as the key challenges facing the subregion: crossborder security and the activities of armed groups such
as the Lord’s Resistance Army, the circulation of small
arms and light weapons, drugs and human trafficking,
transnational organized crime, youth unemployment
and stability, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, piracy and maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea, the impact of the conflict in Libya, terrorism,
election-related disputes, and the strengthening of the
institutional capacity of subregional organizations and
their peace and security mechanisms, in particular
those of the Economic Community of Central Africa
States.
Regarding the issue of small arms and light
weapons, it is noteworthy that States members of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa signed the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly — known as the Kinshasa
Convention — in Brazzaville during the Committee’s
thirty-first ministerial meeting. UNOCA intends to
work closely with the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, in collaboration
with ECCAS, to promote the ratification of the

11-59157

Convention with a view to ensuring its early entry into
force and implementation.
The issue of piracy and maritime security remains
of great concern. Apart from seizing vessels, criminals
are carrying out other unlawful activities, including
poaching and the use of the Gulf as a hub for the
trans-shipment of narcotics. Recognizing the
importance of enhanced cross-border security in that
area, the countries of the subregion adopted the
Framework to Secure the Gulf of Guinea and a
protocol creating the Regional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Security in Central Africa in Kinshasa in
2009. The subregion has been subdivided into zones.
The countries of Zone D — Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe — where
significant acts of piracy and terrorism have been
reported, have reached a technical agreement on the
modalities of conducting maritime security operations
and surveillance.
On the same issue, I am in close contact with my
colleague, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office for
West Africa, in Dakar, to better coordinate our
respective actions, and those of the two subregions, in
response to that growing challenge. As the Council
certainly knows, an assessment mission that was
recently deployed to West and Central Africa by the
Secretary-General is expected to come up with
recommendations for a coordinated strategy to improve
security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Lastly, the Security Council is equally aware of
the seriousness of the persisting threat to peace and
security in Central Africa posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). The report of the SecretaryGeneral that I have just introduced (S/2011/693)
describes the actions undertaken at various levels to
fight against the LRA.
The fallout in Libya presents new challenges for
countries in the subregion, particularly Chad and the
Central African Republic. The vulnerability of
returnees, the loss of revenue from remittances and the
illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons by
armed groups, including the LRA, are of grave
concern. There are concerns that stolen weapons from
Libya could fuel criminality and undermine the
progress achieved in the subregion.
As most of the issues noted during my
consultations with Heads of State and Government and

7

S/PV.6657

other stakeholders are also of concern to the secretariat
of the Economic Community of Central Africa States, I
am working in close collaboration with the SecretaryGeneral of that institution. Desk-to-desk meetings are
also taking place, bringing together experts of UNOCA
and the ECCAS secretariat to examine specific
questions of common concern. The subregion would
benefit tremendously from United Nations support to
national and subregional actors in their efforts to
address the causes of conflict and to put in place
durable mechanisms for sustainable peace. The report
before the Council emphasizes the need to enhance our
support through existing peace and security
mechanisms in Central Africa and to better coordinate
our collective efforts to ensure coherence and
comprehensiveness in our support to the region.
There are three key factors working in our favour.
The first is the political will shown by subregional
authorities to collectively address the challenges in
Central Africa. We need to continue to reinforce this
political will by, among other things, enhancing our
support in the subregion to address underlying
challenges such as poverty and unemployment. In that
regard, UNOCA will work closely with United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in the subregion.
The second factor is the existence of a regional
architecture for peace and security, comprising a set of
institutions and mechanisms, including ECCAS, which
serve as the basis for our support. In that regard, also,
we are going to maintain close cooperation with
subregional organizations, particularly ECCAS.
Finally, the establishment of UNOCA, tasked
with facilitating the coordination of peace initiatives in
the subregion, is generating new momentum and
creating strong expectations for a more robust
approach to dealing with the challenges that the
subregion is confronting. UNOCA will continue to
work closely with the leaders of the subregion, other
United Nations missions and key partners in the
subregion. Needless to say that UNOCA will, in
addition, continue to actively follow developments on
the two issues that I have already mentioned, namely,
the LRA and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate UNOCA’s
gratitude for the support of the United Nations system
as a whole, and to the Security Council for its strong
and continued support of our efforts.

8

The President: I thank Mr. Moussa for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting on the two reports of the Secretary-General
on, respectively, the United Nations Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), nine months after its opening, and
on the troubling threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in Central Africa and the Great Lakes
region (S/2011/704 and S/2011/693). I would also like
to thank and commend Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNOCA, for his briefing. I also welcome the presence
and participation of Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), in our debate. I also
thank Ambassador Téte António for his briefing.
Lastly, I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
the Republic of South Sudan in our meeting.
I would like to reverse the order of topics in our
debate today and start with UNOCA. I should like to
reiterate my country’s full willingness to continue to
support the Office, as well as to express our
appreciation for the work accomplished by the Office
in the past few months. We welcome the different
contacts that Mr. Abou Moussa has undertaken with
States in the subregion, with organizations and with
other stakeholders in Central Africa. Those contacts
will make it possible to assess situations on the ground,
but also to better develop United Nations support
strategies for countries, given the challenges to peace
and security in Central Africa. Mr. Moussa has just
summed up what those challenges are, as perceived by
the authorities in the subregion.
In supporting the creation of UNOCA, ECCAS
heads of State and Government expressed the hope
that, like its counterpart in West Africa, the Office
would contribute to implementing an integrated
approach to challenges to peace, security and
development in Central Africa. The Office should also
facilitate coordination between the United Nations and
subregional organizations.
In the presidential statement of 31 October 2002
(S/PRST/2002/31), the Security Council, for its part,
sought the same objective, emphasizing capacity-

11-59157

S/PV.6657

building of countries in the subregion, conflict
prevention through mediation and good offices and
economic integration. As Mr. Moussa said, the
subregion is implementing a number of initiatives,
which UNOCA has been called upon to support.
You would agree with us, Mr. President, as we
have already emphasized, that a mandate of this scope
requires substantial financial, human and logistical
resources. UNOCA will also need enough time to grasp
the regional context to do a good job dealing with very
complex and delicate issues having to do with peace
and security in Central Africa. In that regard, we
welcome the attention that UNOCA has already paid to
pressing questions, such as the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the issue of the
destabilizing circulation of small arms and light
weapons in Central Africa.
The disturbing development of piracy, which
affects the States of the Gulf of Guinea, is a new
challenge for Central Africa and a threat to security
and navigation and maritime activities. UNOCA must
support the fight against that scourge and do so in the
context of an integrated strategy and in coordination
with the Office for West Africa and the concerned
agencies of the United Nations, subregional
organizations such as ECCAS, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and States themselves.
Finally, the Office should support subregional
efforts to reform the security sector in countries
emerging from conflict. Additionally, in taking up
coordination and administrative functions of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, the Office should
contribute to promoting good governance and relations
of trust between States.
With respect to the Lord’s Resistance Army, the
LRA continues to be a serious threat to security in the
Great Lakes and Central African region. Civilian
populations, including women and children, are the
leading victims of the deadly violence of that and other
armed groups. Humanitarian action is impeded in
countries affected by new waves of violence by the
LRA. Villages and towns are often targeted in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in South Sudan.
Joseph Kony and his combatants are operating in the
north-eastern part of the Central African Republic. We
know that the weakness of the army of the Central

11-59157

African Republic, with its inability to cover the entire
territory, creates fertile soil for the LRA.
Given the defiance of the LRA, the international
community must step up its pressure in order to put an
end to LRA attacks against civilian populations, stop
the recruitment, abduction and use of children, and
secure the release of women, children and other
non-combatants held by the LRA.
We would like to commend the actions against
the threats and violence of the LRA conducted by the
military forces of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
South Sudan and Uganda. Similarly, we welcome the
commitment and initiatives of the African Union
against the LRA, which it calls a terrorist group, not
only in terms of civilian protection but in building the
capacities of States. Gabon would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the support that the European
Union is giving to the African Union to that end. These
efforts, by States and by the African Union, should be
strongly supported by the international community.
For its part, Gabon participated in the ministerial
meetings on the LRA recently held in October 2010 in
Bangui and in June 2011 in Addis Ababa. Gabon
welcomes the establishment of the regional
intervention force and the Joint Information Operations
Centre. These bodies are part of a coordinated regional
strategy developed by States affected by LRA violence,
in cooperation with the African Union, the United
Nations and other partners. They should certainly be
operational by 2012.
We would like to thank bilateral and multilateral
partners for their contribution to these initiatives,
especially the United States of America, France, the
United Nations and, as I mentioned earlier, the
European Union. My delegation would also like to
welcome the personal commitment of President Barack
Obama and the support of the United States
Administration through its LRA disarmament support
strategy. My country welcomes the deterrence actions
and actions to protect civilians conducted by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and by MICOPAX, the Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic. Here we also
wish to commend the commitment of the units of
MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding

9

S/PV.6657

Office in the Central African Republic that have
continued to work closely together on that issue.
In that context, the United Nations must be at the
centre of a strategy comprised of the following
elements:
protection
of
civilian
populations,
re-establishment of regional stability, support to States
by building their military capabilities, and strengthened
action to put a definitive end to the threat of the LRA.
Gabon also wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
the fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
massive crimes and violence. We call for the execution
of the arrest warrants issued in 2005 by the
International Criminal Court for the main LRA leaders,
in particular Joseph Kony and his two commanders
who are still active: Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen. As recommended by the Secretary-General
and by the Council, combating the LRA must be a
priority of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and that Office must continue its
cooperation with ECCAS, the African Union and the
States affected by the matter.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General, who has taken the initiative to
establish UNOCA, as well as members of the Council
who supported it. We also wish to endorse the
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
our debate.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): Thank you, Sir,
for scheduling this important briefing. Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Mr. Abou Moussa for
his briefing and, moreover, for the valuable
contribution he makes to peace and security in the
Central African region. I also thank His Excellency
Mr. António, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and General Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), for their briefings. I
also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of South Sudan and
the Central African Republic. As the report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2011/693)
makes
clear,
engagement by the Governments of countries affected
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) is vital to
addressing the threat presented by the LRA.
As Mr. Abou Moussa has just reminded us, the
LRA continues to pose a substantial threat to regional
security in Central Africa. The atrocities that they
commit have serious humanitarian and human rights

10

consequences. The United Kingdom condemns in the
strongest terms their continued violations of
humanitarian law and their human rights abuses, which
have resulted in the displacement of 440,000 people
across the region. The LRA’s campaign has the
potential to cause further instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, and to hamper the efforts of those
countries to progress towards peace and security.
Removing the threat of the LRA is important in terms
of creating and consolidating a secure and stable
environment in the affected countries.
Tackling the threat posed by a group that, as the
Special Representative has pointed out, has no obvious
political agenda is a particular challenge that requires
strong commitment and effective coordination among
all of those acting in the region: the United Nations and
its missions, the African Union (AU) and the
Governments of the affected States, supported by the
international community.
I recognize the significant efforts that the
militaries of Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
have undertaken to pursue and apprehend the
remaining LRA fighters. It is important, of course, to
record that all action against the LRA should be
conducted
in
compliance
with
international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. And it is
essential that the protection of civilians is a clear
component of any military operation — a point already
emphasized by the Permanent Representative of
Gabon.
I am pleased that the Secretary-General’s report
has highlighted the many ways in which United
Nations peacekeeping operations have worked with the
affected countries to protect civilians from this ongoing
threat. I believe that the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) could enhance its
effort by promoting regional programming by United
Nations agencies and missions in support of
humanitarian operations and the reintegration of
combatants. Facilitating high-level liaison among
heads of the affected States, heads of United Nations
missions and the AU’s Special Envoy for the LRA, and
collecting and disseminating data would help United
Nations missions to protect civilians against LRA
atrocities.

11-59157

S/PV.6657

Turning to UNOCA’s wider role, I am pleased to
note that UNOCA’s first six months have seen it put on
a sure footing. I join Special Representative Abou
Moussa in thanking the Government of Gabon for its
support in facilitating the launch and operations of
UNOCA.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/704)
rightly points out the financial constraints under which
UNOCA will need to operate. It is therefore essential
that UNOCA delivers against a limited number of
prioritized objectives, particularly while in its early
stages. Tackling the LRA is primary among those, but
it is also welcome to see efforts to tackle piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, efforts which have the clear and strong
support of the Security Council.
I am also pleased to see that upstream conflict
prevention will be central to UNOCA’s work. I hope
that best practices from the United Nations Office to
the African Union (UNOAU) will be adopted by
UNOCA in its efforts to pre-empt tensions in the
region and mediate between parties. So I am highly
encouraged by what Special Representative Abou
Moussa has said about his close cooperation with his
colleague, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNOAU.
In order for the Council to effectively review and
support the efforts of the United Nations, AU and
affected countries, we must be well informed. To that
end, we would like to request that the SecretaryGeneral report to the Council before the end of May
next year regarding opportunities for improved
information-sharing among the AU, LRA-affected
States and United Nations missions, and outlining the
role of UNOCA in coordinating activity against the
LRA.
Finally, I thank Council members for their
support for the presidential statement which the United
Kingdom delegation has prepared and which we will
shortly be adopting.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
meeting to discuss the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). I
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive
briefings, and Ambassador Téte António and General
Louis Sylvain-Goma for their presentations.

11-59157

After decades of instability and conflict, the
countries in the Central African region have now
embarked on a process of moving towards democracy
and development. The Governments have shown
tremendous resolve and determination to handle their
problems, individually and collectively, through
regional cooperation and with the assistance of the
international community, led by the United Nations.
Several countries are conducting democratic elections
largely on their own. They have undertaken economic
reforms and initiated measures to improve the capacity
of their security and police forces.
In this transition process, it is natural that
countries are faced with many challenges, including
from the remnants of past conflicts. It is critical that
the international community continues to assist the
nation-building efforts of the Central African countries.
It is also important that international assistance not
impinge on national ownership and the sovereign
functions of States.
With its mandate to help prevent conflict and
consolidate peace in Central Africa, UNOCA has
started its work on a positive note. The countries in the
region, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/704),
have
warmly
welcomed
the
establishment of UNOCA and have started taking
active interest in its work. UNOCA’s activities during
the past six months have been able to create a positive
environment, paving the way for regional cooperation
on important issues.
The region faces several challenges, such as the
proliferation of small arms, organized crime, drug
trafficking, illegal exploitation of mineral resources,
governance issues, high unemployment, internally
displaced persons and refugees and of course, the
problems associated with the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA). As stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the conflict in Libya has exacerbated some of
those problems.
The effective functioning of UNOCA would
greatly help the United Nations, including this Council,
in assisting the countries to address those issues, many
of which have a regional dimension and require a
regional approach for their lasting resolution. The
focus should be on finding local solutions to problems
involving governance, capacity-building, security and
transnational crime.

11

S/PV.6657

Towards that end, creating synergy with other
United Nations offices, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Office to
the African Union, would greatly benefit UNOCA’s
work. Those United Nations offices should work
closely with the African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
Central African States, and channel regional initiatives
more effectively into their programmes. It is necessary
that the United Nations offices and missions, including
UNOCA, be adequately staffed and resourced if they
are to effectively and efficiently implement their
mandates.
Given the adverse impact of past conflicts on the
social fabric of the countries in the region, the threat of
the LRA cannot be neglected. The measures taken by
Uganda in cooperation with its neighbours have helped
to contain the problem. Nevertheless, the LRA, with its
leadership at large, continues to pose a serious threat to
peace and security, particularly for innocent civilians,
given its ability to move freely and carry out
operations across borders in several countries of the
region. The inhuman acts inflicted by the LRA on local
communities have resulted in the large-scale
displacement and uprooting of communities. While
long-term solutions to this problem are to extend the
reach of the law enforcement agencies of States and
focus on socio-economic development in the affected
areas, it is important that serious efforts be made to
eliminate the remaining active groups and bring the
leadership of the LRA to justice.
While UNOCA has a critical role to play in
coordinating United Nations efforts to assist national
Governments in their fight against armed groups,
including the LRA, it is necessary for the international
community to strengthen the capacity of the countries
in the region, particularly that of their armed forces
and other law enforcement agencies, to take the lead in
combating the LRA. In that connection, we welcome
the initiatives of the AU to appoint a special envoy for
the LRA and establish a regional intervention force. We
have already seen in the African Union Mission in
Somalia that the AU is capable of mounting such a
force with the assistance of the international
community, and hope that those initiatives will bear
fruit soon.
We have also taken note of the individual efforts
of several countries to assist the countries in the region
in building capacity to fight the LRA. Such assistance

12

should be apolitical in nature and respect national
sovereignty and policy, as well as operational matters.
In addition, helping the affected communities to
overcome the trauma of displacement and social stigma
should also become an immediate priority. It is
important that the affected communities be reintegrated
through the provision of necessary resources.
In conclusion, let me state that long-term
socio-economic
development
and
broad-based
inclusive political systems are the key to addressing the
threat posed by armed groups including the LRA.
Towards that end, India is committed to enhancing
cooperation with its African partners, including
through the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations. We have announced credit
lines of $5 billion for the next three years, as well as a
number of projects designed for human resource
development in African countries, including the PanAfrican e-Network Project. These projects will
strengthen national capacities to meet the development
needs and aspirations that would also help address
security problems, including the LRA.
Finally, we will support the draft presidential
statement that has been proposed.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his briefings. I also thank Mr. António and
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their statements.
First, I would like to respond to the report
(S/2011/693) on the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Secondly, I will add some remarks on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
With regard to the LRA, which continues to pose
a serious threat to regional security, we concur with the
view that a multifaceted and balanced approach is
needed to tackle the problem. Military efforts carried
out in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law are required, as are non-military
efforts, including better coordinated and enhanced
humanitarian aid and development measures. Germany
has given humanitarian assistance since 2009 to
internally displaced persons, refugees and other
vulnerable communities in LRA-affected areas in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic and the
north and east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We stand ready to continue our support. We
commend the efforts of the United States to work with
the regional militaries, but it is understood that the

11-59157

S/PV.6657

countries of the region need to take the lead in
resolving the LRA problem.

LRA elements
and
MONUSCO’s
contribution to DDRRR efforts.

We encourage the regional Governments to
strengthen their cooperation at the State, military and
community levels and to assume the primary
responsibility
to
protect
civilians.
Enhanced
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement (DDRRR) efforts,
should also be given priority in order to encourage
defections from the LRA. In that context, amnesty
based on international standards, reintegration and the
rehabilitation of rank and file ex-combatants should be
pursued in a targeted and coordinated manner.

Enhanced regional radio stations and communityled networks in the LRA-affected areas are important
steps to improve the protection of civilians, which is
paramount in the response to the LRA. In that context,
we also appreciate the strengthening of United Nations
peacekeeping capacities, within the missions’ mandates
and capabilities in strategic locations, as already
envisaged by Special Representative Hilde Johnson in
connection with the deployment of UNMIS troops to
Western Equatoria state, South Sudan.

We hail the establishment of standard operating
procedures by the Uganda People’s Defence Force for
the reception and handover of women and children
separated from the LRA to ensure their care and
repatriation. The national security forces of the region
should implement similar procedures, in cooperation
with the relevant United Nations agencies. Children
and women remain most vulnerable. Continuous
human rights violations by the LRA, especially
affecting children and women, remain of deep concern
to us.
More focus and support should be given to the
LRA-affected areas in the Central African Republic,
where local military and United Nations capacity is
limited. At the regional level, the leadership role of the
African Union (AU) in coordinating efforts against the
LRA is crucial. We advocate the swift appointment of
the AU special envoy for the LRA to strengthen
regional cooperation and donor support.
We also encourage the African Union to take
forward its military planning for the AU initiative and
to share information on the design of the military
component and its purpose. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to work in support of
the African Union and its efforts to enhance
cooperation among the United Nations missions,
United Nations offices and all relevant actors in the
region.
We notably support the intensified inter-mission
cooperation between the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to repatriate former

11-59157

successful

Ensuring efficient information-sharing between
the missions and the relevant partners must be a
priority. We encourage the United Nations to identify
further opportunities to help address the LRA threat in
a more coherent and comprehensive manner. We
welcome UNOCA’s role as the United Nations political
focal point for the LRA. More specific information on
UNOCA’s role in coordinating activities against the
LRA would be useful. This request also figures in the
draft presidential statement submitted by the delegation
of the United Kingdom, which we fully support.
Focusing finally on UNOCA’s overall mandate
and first activities, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Regional Office and its contribution to conflict
prevention in Central Africa. The broad range of
requests for assistance from the region stresses the
need to prioritize UNOCA’s work programme and to
concentrate on specific activities. It will remain crucial
to build on existing expertise and mechanisms and to
work closely with all relevant actors in order to avoid
duplication. Priority should be given to contributing to
early warning and early political action; to
strengthening the capacities of the Economic
Community of Central African States, including in the
areas of mediation, capacity-building and skills for
addressing cross-border security threats such as the
LRA; and to supporting United Nations missions and
agencies to intensify their regional cooperation.
We consider it to be vital for member States of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to further strengthen the subregional
organization and to foster their regional cooperation.
We hope that the next ECCAS summit, to be held in
N’Djamena in January 2012, will contribute to that
end. We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s support to ECCAS in that regard.

13

S/PV.6657

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
for his briefing on the initial work of the Office and his
report on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2011/693). I welcome Mr. Sylvain-Goma, SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and thank him for his
briefing. I also welcome Ambassador António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.
I will discuss two points. The first is related to
the work of UNOCA. The expectations for this new
political mission are very high. It is essential that it
focus its efforts on a realistic number of priorities. In
that respect, the efforts undertaken to forge quality
partnerships with organizations in the region, in
particular ECCAS, are most welcome and should be
pursued.
Choosing from among the range of regional
situations requiring cross-cutting responses, such as
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea or the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), is also desirable, given the
limited resources of the Office. We call on UNOCA to
increase its collaborative efforts with United Nations
missions, primarily the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as with the family
of United Nations agencies working on such issues.
In regard to resources, we are grateful to the
Gabonese authorities for having provided adequate
logistical means to set up the Office, and we encourage
continued efforts to identify sources of flexible
voluntary funding.
Regarding the Lord’s Resistance Army, we
roundly condemn the violence and massacres that it has
perpetrated over the past 20 years, beginning in
Uganda and extending to several Central African
countries today. The humanitarian impact, with
440,000 displaced in the most recent period, is
enormous and demands a strong and effective response.
We urgently call on LRA combatants to leave that
criminal group and to reintegrate into civilian life. We
applaud the efforts of MONUSCO in that regard and
encourage it to pursue its efforts.

14

Beyond the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we would like to think about the best way to expand
that programme to include all of the countries affected
by the LRA, within the limited available resources of
UNMISS and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.
We recall that the International Criminal Court
has issued arrest warrants for the leaders of the LRA
and that those warrants must be executed. We
encourage the African Union to pursue and accelerate
its efforts to respond to that threat. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decisions taken by the African
Union on the mechanisms to be established to tackle
the LRA issue.
We recall the primary responsibility of States in
the region to protect their civilians from the LRA, and
encourage them to bolster their coordination efforts to
that end. Information sharing among the various actors
is crucial in effectively fighting the LRA.
In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement and would like discuss the situation in the
region on a regular basis.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I join others in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing. We
are also grateful to Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma and
Ambassador Téte António for their very inspiring and
constructive contributions to our discussions this
morning.
The devastating impact of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) on peace, security and humanitarian
activities in the Great Lakes region must not be
underestimated. While its operational capacity and
cohesiveness have been significantly diminished, its
ability to wreak havoc in the affected areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and Uganda remains
unhindered.
According to a recent United Nations report, the
LRA has killed close to 3,000 people and displaced
more than 400,000 since December 2008. The
indication is that the LRA has been emboldened by the
absence of effective State authority, especially in the
affected areas. If we act to overcome the threat posed
by the LRA, we must address the critical capacity,
institutional gaps and resource constraints inhibiting

11-59157

S/PV.6657

the establishment of State authority in the affected
areas.
Cooperation and coordination though information
sharing and joint operations must be prerequisites for
effectively addressing the LRA threat. We therefore
welcome the improved cooperation and coordination of
operations against the LRA by affected States, as
agreed at the second meeting of the defence and
security Ministers of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and South
Sudan, held in June. Beyond that, a great deal more
needs to be done to enhance the efficiency of joint
operations, particularly in the areas of cross-border
information, logistics, intelligence and airpower.
We recognize and welcome the regional
coordinating role assumed by the African Union (AU)
in the fight against the LRA. The establishment of the
Integrated Core Planning Team should be expeditiously
complemented by the appointment of the AU Special
Envoy on the LRA and the establishment of the
regional intervention force. The LRA threat also
requires enhanced coordination of efforts by the United
Nations missions in the region, namely, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Office in Burundi, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the various United Nations country
teams working in LRA-affected countries.
While we commend the United States for
spearheading efforts to counter the LRA, we must state
that sustained international, bilateral and multilateral
support will remain imperative for the implementation
of the comprehensive counter-LRA strategy and the
provision of humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected
areas.
Turning to the issue of UNOCA, Nigeria
welcomes the first report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the Mission (S/2011/704). It is
encouraging that UNOCA has not only become fully
operational but is also working vigorously towards the
implementation of its mandate.
We recognize that, through broad consultations,
the major security threats undermining sustainable
progress in the region have been duly identified. Those
threats, namely, the activities of the LRA, cross-border
tensions, arms trafficking, terrorism and piracy in the

11-59157

Gulf of Guinea, will be more vigorously addressed if
the States of the region consistently and faithfully act
in concert.
As a country directly affected by the economic
and security impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
Nigeria welcomes the concern and interest in that great
menace. We believe that the fight against piracy and
other forms of organized crime is a collective
responsibility. We are therefore committed to joining
efforts with other member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission to eliminate that threat, especially
though the implementation of resolution 2018 (2011).
Indeed, our bilateral security arrangement with Benin
to patrol our coastal waters is already proving to be an
effective deterrent to pirates. We look forward to the
forthcoming summit of the Heads of State of the Gulf
of Guinea to outline a comprehensive and effective
strategy to address the threat.
Nigeria remains unwavering in its efforts to
strengthen its relations with the countries of the
Central African subregion. That commitment is
manifest in our support of UNOCA as it explores
opportunities to make contributions to a more peaceful
and prosperous future for the countries and the peoples
of Central Africa.
We lend our unreserved support to the draft
presidential statement prepared by the delegation of the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me also to express our delegation’s thanks for the
briefings by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Central Africa and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa Abou
Moussa. Similarly, I wish to express our thanks for the
briefings by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and the Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States. I also welcome
the presence in the Chamber of the representatives of
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Colombia is deeply concerned about the
hostilities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
against the populations of the affected countries — the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. They show that
group’s brutality and utter disregard for the most
fundamental human rights standards and for

15

S/PV.6657

international humanitarian law. Despite the reduced
number of soldiers in the Army, the impact and
magnitude of its violent attacks on the civilian
population continue to be gravely troubling and
threaten the security of the affected countries in the
Central African region.
Colombia therefore believes it greatly important
to continue developing strategies to respond in a
coherent way to the challenges posed by that armed
group’s activities. Those strategies must be based on
the principle that the fundamental responsibility to
protect civilians falls to the States affected by the
presence of the Lord’s Resistance Army. The
international community’s response must therefore be
aimed at building national capacities, strengthening
institutions and improving the logistical and
operational capacities of national security forces. We
must also support regional and subregional initiatives
to combat this scourge.
At the same time, there is a need for efforts not to
be limited to military operations. An effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is essential, as is as a coordinated strategy on
assistance to victims. We must implement concrete
steps to improve the quality of life for populations in
affected areas through economic and social
development.
We stress the importance of developing joint
plans and operations based on coordinated cooperation
among the security forces of affected States. The
international community should promote and
encourage a common acknowledgement of the impact
of this armed group on the security and well-being of
populations as part of an effort to build upon the
progress made against the Lord’s Resistance Army in
all areas affected by its presence. The initiatives
adopted by the African Union also deserve our
acknowledgment. The broad vision and concrete
proposals to establish a regional intervention force, the
Joint Information Operations Centre and a joint
coordination mechanism provide a framework for
coordinating effective regional efforts, which would be
greatly bolstered by the African Union’s naming of a
special envoy for the LRA-affected areas.
Moreover, through the United Nations Office to
the African Union, the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, United Nations missions in the
affected countries and the country teams, the United

16

Nations plays a very important role in developing and
implementing efforts to fight the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Thy should have the necessary logistical and
financial means to carry out their assigned tasks. Under
the leadership of the States affected, it is essential that
the international community make it possible for the
legitimate authorities of those States to strengthen the
exercise of their sovereignty and gain full control over
their territories, in keeping with the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and non-interference the domestic affairs of States.
Moreover, the role of justice in resolving the
conflict is another factor we should not lose sight of. In
that regard, all States should lend their cooperation in
bringing to justice those guilty of the heinous crimes
committed by the Lord’s Resistance Army and support
the officials of affected States and of the International
Criminal Court with regard to the cases brought
forward against the leaders of the group.
Lastly, we support the draft presidential
statement, as we believe that it addresses all of these
issues.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our gratitude to you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for initiating this important
discussion. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his informative
briefing. I also express our thanks for the briefings by
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Louis SylvainGoma, Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States. We also welcome the
presence of the representatives of South Sudan and the
Central African Republic at this meeting.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). We welcome UNOCA’s
initial steps in facilitating regional initiatives and
coordinating the conflict prevention and peacebuilding
activities of United Nations entities in the Central
African region. UNOCA has an important role to play
in assisting the countries of the region to address some
of the major challenges to peace and security in that
part of Africa and in supporting their efforts to
consolidate peace and prevent conflict, as well as to
deal with cross-border challenges such as the flow of
illicit arms, drug trafficking and organized crime.

11-59157

S/PV.6657

We praise the determination of UNOCA to work
closely with the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) in tackling serious security challenges in
the two subregions. Joint UNOCA and UNOWA efforts
will be indispensable in addressing the negative
consequences of the Libyan conflict on West and
Central Africa.
We are encouraged by the readiness of countries
of the region and regional intergovernmental
organizations to work with UNOCA in resolving
common threats to peace and security, as well as
outstanding issues among countries of the region. It is
essential that the broader international community
continues to support UNOCA to fulfil its mandate and
bring peace, security and stability to the Central
African region.
UNOCA will play a pivotal role in promoting
cooperation among countries of the region on crosscutting issues, among others, in addressing the issue of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). In that regard, it is
vital that UNOCA, as the United Nations regional focal
point for the LRA, coordinates United Nations
activities with the affected countries at the political
level.
We are deeply concerned about the continuing
criminal activities of the LRA and its devastating
effects on civilian populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South Sudan
and the Central African Republic. We fully support
initiatives and activities undertaken by the United
Nations and the African Union to protect civilians and
facilitate regional action against the Lord’s Resistance
Army. We welcome the steps taken by the African
Union and affected countries to strengthen cooperation
and develop a regional strategy on the LRA.
The establishment of a regional intervention force
on the LRA and of centres for sharing information, as
well as the appointment of the African Union special
envoy on LRA-affected areas, will be important
instruments in the process of eliminating that
organization and the threats it poses. The
implementation of those proposed measures is a matter
of urgency. It is vital that the United Nations continues
to support the African Union in that regard.
It is important to underline that effective national
security forces are an essential element for addressing
existing security challenges, including the LRA. The
Governments of the affected countries must continue to

11-59157

build their defence and security force capacities in
order to provide security and protection for their
civilian populations. We welcome international efforts
to enhance the military capacities of the countries
affected by the LRA. In that context, we commend the
United States Government’s decision to deploy 100
military personnel to the Central African region in
order to assist regional forces.
Finally, due consideration must be given to
effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programmes for those associated
with the LRA. We believe that efforts aimed at
strengthening the capacities and reach of State
authorities, alongside proactive DDR programmes
combined with other non-military means, can
contribute significantly to effectively combating the
LRA.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you for holding this
important meeting, Mr. President. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his informative briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on actions to address the
threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). I
also thank Mr. Téte António and Mr. Louis SylvainGoma for their presentations, and welcome the
presence at our meeting of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
South Sudan.
Brazil reiterates its confidence that UNOCA can
foster a stronger relationship between the United
Nations and the countries of Central Africa, as well as
better coordination with regional and subregional
organizations. Brazil commends UNOCA for having
already improved coordination within the United
Nations system in Central Africa. One good example of
that is the recent initiative of bringing together
representatives of the Organization in the region to
discuss how the United Nations can increase synergies
and better support the Economic Community of Central
African States. We also value the fact that the Office
has included in its agenda the development of an
integrated approach in the field of peacebuilding,
which we believe is indispensable to ensuring
sustainable peace in the region.
We encourage the Office to continue to consider
ways of mainstreaming United Nations support for
electoral processes in the region, especially with regard

17

S/PV.6657

to facilitating political dialogue, mediation and
technical assistance. It is encouraging that UNOCA has
begun to cooperate with countries of the region in
security matters. Support for regional initiatives to
control the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa is most welcome.
The international community should spare no
effort in assisting Central African countries in finding a
lasting solution to the LRA threat. If such an endeavour
is to succeed, Brazil believes that a threefold policy
must be pursued. This involves, first, lending full
support to all the regional initiatives under the auspices
of the African Union, with a view to assisting the
countries concerned in developing a common strategy
for tackling the LRA.
Secondly, it involves striving to develop a more
holistic approach, including actions to consolidate
State authority in isolated regions. This means stepping
up support for peacebuilding activities, with a focus on
improving national capacities, infrastructure and access
to basic services in the areas most affected by LRA
attacks.
Thirdly, the United Nations and countries in the
region should continue to strengthen disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes,
including through the use of mass communications
such as radio, with a view to stimulating further
defections from the LRA ranks. It is also worth
recalling that military operations against the group
must be planned in accordance with international
humanitarian and human rights law in order to avoid
further suffering for the civilian population.
The creation and functioning of UNOCA
reassures us that the United Nations will continue to
enhance its dialogue and cooperation with Central
African countries in order to help them attain
sustainable peace, security and development. Brazil
pledges its full support for this process.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his
valuable statement and for his efforts in leading the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). I would also like to thank Ambassador Téte
António and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their briefings.
We have had the pleasure of hearing Mr. Moussa
say that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) is carrying out its role in full,

18

justifying the hopes that we have placed in it,
particularly given the current situation in Central
Africa. In that regard, we are grateful to Gabon for
hosting the Office and helping it function well. We
commend the Special Representative’s visits to the
region and for his preparations for the 33rd ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, to
be held at early next month in Bangui.
We affirm the importance of UNOCA’s
responsibility for improving cooperation in Central
Africa with regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as with United Nations agencies and missions in
the region, in order to strengthen stability and security,
to combat piracy in Equatorial Guinea and
repercussions from the Libyan crisis — including
weapons trafficking and incursions by armed
combatants — to promote the role of women, and to
mitigate the impact of economic and other crises,
which is particularly important. We emphasize the
Office’s importance as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy and as an effective and affordable resource
for preventing conflicts in that strategically important
part of the world.
As an institution with regional dimensions, the
Office is genuinely needed in fighting the dangers
posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in four
countries. We reiterate our condemnation of that armed
group’s attacks on civilians, occupation and
terrorization of villages, and use of various methods of
violence and intimidation, including the abduction of
women and children, which has led to internal
displacement or refugee status for hundreds of
thousands and to the suffering of many in the region.
In that regard, we call for more regional
coordination and international cooperation in putting
an end to the LRA’s bloody attacks. We welcome the
meeting held under United Nations auspices in
Kinshasa on 29 and 30 September, which brought
together the Chiefs of Defence Staff of the four
countries concerned. We encourage the African Union
to expedite the implementation of its regional
coordinated strategy for combating the LRA, the
appointment of a special envoy, and the establishment
of the regional intervention force and the joint
operations centre. All of this should dovetail with
intensified efforts to deal with the roots of the problem
by encouraging combatants to lay down their arms and

11-59157

S/PV.6657

return to society. We can only commend the efforts of
the various United Nations missions in the countries of
the region to help civilians and end the dangers posed
by the LRA.
Finally, we would like to thank the mission of the
United Kingdom for having prepared the draft
presidential statement, which we support.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
will begin by thanking the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs for their reports
(S/2011/693 and S/2011/704, respectively). I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Abou Moussa, for his briefing.
I would like to welcome the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations and our colleagues from
the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) is one of the
most brutal terrorist organizations on the planet. Its
leaders, including Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and
Dominic Ongwen, all under indictment by the
International Criminal Court for crimes against
humanity, continue to hold hundreds of abductees
hostage, forcing them to loot, rape and kill. There is no
ambiguity here; the LRA’s continued activity is an
affront to human dignity and a stain on our collective
conscience.
The United States Congress and President Obama
have responded. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General and graciously mentioned by the
Ambassador of Gabon this morning, President Obama
announced last month that the United Nations would
deploy a small number of military personnel to the
LRA-affected region, in consultation with host
Governments, to act as advisers to regional militaries
pursuing the LRA. That deployment is in line with the
LRA Disarmament and Northern Uganda Recovery
Act, which was passed last year by our Congress with
widespread bipartisan support.
Sending American personnel in a non-combat
capacity crystallizes the United States commitment to
supporting regional partners and ending this threat. Our
advisers will work to enhance the capacity of regional
militaries to coordinate and fuse intelligence with
effective operational planning. United States forces

11-59157

will not engage in direct action against the LRA, but
they will be equipped for self-defence.
The United States notes the importance of the
continued leadership and cooperation of the regional
Governments in this effort. Over recent years, regional
militaries have worked together to pursue the LRA
across a vast area of dense jungle. They have had some
success in reducing the LRA’s numbers and keeping
them from regrouping.
The United States is committed to working with
the Governments of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
South Sudan and Uganda, as well as the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations, to end the threat posed
by the Lord’s Resistance Army. We hope that, with our
enhanced support, they will be able to make a final
push to bring an end to this long-standing problem.
We will be working to ensure that protection of
civilians is incorporated into operational planning. We
are encouraged to hear that once again the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will
be taking proactive steps, as it did last year, to ensure
civilian protection over the Christmas period, given
that massacres have occurred previously at that time.
As we work together to increase military pressure
on the LRA, we also believe that there should be a
renewed push to get LRA fighters and abductees to
escape and defect. In the last month, some 30 women
and children have left the organization’s ranks in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are receiving
food, medical attention and transportation assistance to
return home and reunite with their families. Several of
them are already at rehabilitation centres in Uganda,
where they are receiving support to reintegrate into
society.
MONUSCO has done excellent work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to encourage and
facilitate LRA defections, but no organization is yet
playing a similar role across the border in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We encourage the
United Nations to work with regional Governments and
other relevant United Nations missions to address these
gaps and develop a coordinated regional approach to
encourage LRA defections. The AU, through its
Special Envoy, can also play an important role in this
area.

19

S/PV.6657

The United States fully supports the important
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in the Central African subregion. We
commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Moussa for his efforts in standing up
UNOCA’s operations and embarking on a very
ambitious and substantive diplomatic agenda. We
encourage UNOCA’s continued efforts to enhance the
coordination of United Nations missions working in
the region and advance cooperation with regional
organizations, including ECCAS and the AU. We hope
that UNOCA will work to establish a clear structure
with focal points in all of the United Nations missions
in the LRA-affected area as well as the United Nations
Office to the African Union to help ensure better
coordination in information-sharing.
We join regional Governments in calling on the
remaining members of the LRA to disarm peacefully,
go home and take advantage of offers of reintegration
support. As President Obama said a year ago upon
signing the LRA Disarmament and Northern Uganda
Recovery Act: “We mourn those killed; we pray for
those abducted to be freed; we call on the ranks of the
LRA to disarm and surrender”.
Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement, which we hope will be adopted shortly.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abou Moussa for his briefing and Ambassador António
and the Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States for their respective
statements.
At present, the situation in Central Africa as a
whole is stable, but many challenges still exist in
connection with maintaining and consolidating peace
and achieving the sustainable development of the
economy. The volatile situation in neighbouring
regions has negatively affected regional security
development
and
the
humanitarian
situation.
Transnational organized crime and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons constitute a grave threat
to regional security.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has seriously
affected regional economic activities and navigational
safety. China expresses its concern in that respect. We
are in favour of regional countries strengthening their
cooperation in a joint effort to address the threats and
challenges.

20

Since its creation, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has actively
carried out the Security Council’s mandate by
strengthening communication with the affected
countries and regional organizations and improving
coordination within the United Nations system,
working actively to maintain regional peace and
security and promote economic and social development
in the countries of the region. China expresses its
appreciation in this regard.
We hope that UNOCA will build upon the
activities it has carried out so far, formally seek and
respect the views of the affected countries; keep up the
good work in the area of communication and
coordination; and enhance the relevant efforts of the
United Nations system, the countries of the region and
regional organizations so as to create synergies and
make the necessary contributions to lasting peace and
stability in the region.
Recently the LRA has repeatedly crossed over the
borders between the affected countries to commit
atrocities, committed violations against the safety and
security of civilians and created a grave humanitarian
crisis. China expresses its grave concern in this regard.
We strongly condemn the LRA for its attacks on the
Government forces of the affected countries and its
violations against civilians. We call on the LRA to lay
down its arms immediately, cease all violence and
hostilities and accept disarmament.
The ultimate resolution of the LRA problem will
require close cooperation among countries of the
region, the support of regional organizations, and the
vigorous assistance of the international community. We
welcome the African Union’s efforts to formulate an
integrated strategy to resolve the LRA problem, and
appreciate the practical measures and cooperation
undertaken by the countries of the region.
China calls on the international community to
maintain its support of the efforts of the African Union
and countries of the region to combat the LRA. We
appreciate the Secretariat’s dispatch of a mission to the
affected countries to assess the situation on the ground.
We expect the Secretary-General and the relevant
United Nations agencies to maintain their practical
support to the affected countries in order to help them
to build their own capacities, promote economic and
social development on the ground, improve the

11-59157

S/PV.6657

humanitarian situation and play a positive role in the
due resolution of the LRA problem.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank you, Sir,
and your delegation for having organized this
important meeting. My delegation wishes also to join
in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). We also thank the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) to the
United Nations, Ambassador Téte António, and the
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), Mr. Sylvain-Goma,
for their comprehensive statements. My delegation
welcomes the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic and the
representative of South Sudan in this debate.
Allow me to focus my statement first on the
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
UNOCA (S/2011/704). We welcome the fact that
UNOCA has become fully operational, and are pleased
to learn of the extensive consultations that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has carried out
with the States of the region, regional bodies, civil
society formations, UN-Women and relevant United
Nations agencies since assuming his duties. South
Africa is encouraged by the level of cooperation
between the three United Nations offices, including the
exchange of staff between UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We thank the
Government of Gabon for the support it continues to
provide to UNOCA.
The challenges confronting the Central Africa
States — such as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, drug
trafficking, the proliferation of illicit weapons and the
continued threat of the LRA — are transnational in
nature. The role of UNOCA will therefore be crucial in
assisting the United Nations in developing a regional
approach and strategy for the Central Africa States.
Given the nature of the socio-economic and security
challenges, the role of UNOCA in collaborating with
individual United Nations missions and country teams
will be important in developing complementarities for
the United Nations entities in the region and for
addressing the development and security challenges
confronting the region.

11-59157

One of the key mandates of UNOCA is to build
institutional capacity and harmonize subregional
approaches to peace and security. We are of the view
that UNOCA has a critical role to play in contributing
to peace and security in the region through mediation
and the provision of good offices, among other things.
We welcome the working relationship established
between UNOCA and ECCAS. We further welcome
UNOCA’s assumption of the secretariat functions of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. The convening of
the 33rd ministerial meeting of the Committee on 5 and
6 December will be an important platform for
developing a regional geopolitical approach to
security-related developments in the subregion.
Turning to the LRA, my delegation continues to
be concerned about the devastating effects of that
armed group and its ongoing activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic. The brutality
of those activities continues to haunt thousands of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
UNOCA’s plan to devote increased attention to and
focus on the peace and security challenges faced by
women and children is a welcome step towards the
resolution of the challenges. In that regard, UNOCA
has an important mandate to work with the United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the affected areas,
the United Nations Office to the African Union and the
African Union itself in order to facilitate cooperation
and counter the threat posed by the LRA.
South Africa welcomes the ongoing military
cooperation between the countries affected by LRA
activities in addressing this challenge. In particular, my
delegation welcomes the regional strategy developed in
June at the African Union 2nd Regional Ministerial
Meeting on the Lord’s Resistance Army. The strategy
includes the establishment of a regional intervention
force, a joint operations centre and a joint coordination
mechanism. In that regard, we welcome the call made
by the African Union Peace and Security Council on
27 September for the Commission to provide a report
on the implementation modalities for this regional
cooperation initiative so as to enable it to authorize the
envisaged cooperation. We welcome the decision of the
AU to appoint a special envoy for the LRA.
We further recall the request of the AU Assembly
in July for the United Nations and other AU partners to
provide timely financial and logistical support.

21

S/PV.6657

Important in that regard is the decision made at the
2nd Regional Meeting that “support should be
coordinated by the AU Commission but should not be
prejudicial to any existing bilateral arrangements
between the countries concerned and partners”.
My delegation welcomes the readiness and
commitment expressed by the Secretary-General to
support the regional strategy of the AU through the
United Nations presence in the region. We are of the
view that the United Nations peacekeeping missions,
including the good offices of the Secretary-General,
have an important role to play in building the
capacities of States of the region through training, the
provision of logistical support and information-sharing.
To that end, this approach will deliver more effective
support to dialogue and peacebuilding efforts on the
ground. South Africa wishes to underscore that the
military operations against the LRA should be part of a
broader strategy that includes, inter alia, the granting
of amnesty, policies for facilitating defections and
reintegration, and the arrest of LRA commanders
indicted by the International Criminal Court.
Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by Special
Representative Abou Moussa and his team, and wishes
him well in his ongoing endeavours. If UNOCA is to
be able to implement all these plans and programmes
for the region, it is important that it be allocated the
resources it requires. My delegation supports the
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council
later today.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his informative
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
situation in the region with respect to the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). We listened with interest to
the statements made by the Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Permanent Observer of the African Union.
We are pleased to note some recent progress in
the consolidation of democratic processes and in the
organization of the work of State institutions in a
number of countries of Central Africa. The situation in
some conflict zones is being normalized.
However, there are obvious factors militating
against stability in the region, including the growth in

22

the scope of organized crime, banditry and armed
violence, and the deterioration of the humanitarian and
human rights situations. Moreover, new, common
regional problems are emerging. We share the
conclusions of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/704) concerning the need for active efforts to
avert the regional proliferation of the consequences of
the Libyan crisis, including preventing the illegal flow
of weapons and combatants.
A comprehensive approach is required to curb the
criminal activity of the LRA in the region and to
identify solutions to the problem of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. In that regard, there is a
growing need for UNOCA to develop a comprehensive
approach to preventing conflicts, ensuring peace and
security, peacebuilding and promoting economic
integration and sustainable development throughout
Central Africa. We see UNOCA as a key link in the
work of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in that part of the African
continent. Strengthening the coordination of their
efforts will help us to meet the challenge of enhancing
the effectiveness and success of their work and will
redound to the benefit of the States and peoples of the
subregion.
We agree with the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the issue of the
LRA (S/2011/693). Despite the fact that, thanks to the
joint efforts of countries in the region, it has been
possible to significantly reduce the military capability
of that armed group, the LRA continues to remain a
serious destabilizing factor in remote and regions of
difficult access in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
We are deeply concerned about the truly terrorist
nature of the LRA’s actions. We welcome the increased
efforts of and developing coordination and interaction
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
the Central African Republic and South Sudan in
countering that threat. We support the development of a
coordinated strategy within the African Union to
combat LRA initiatives and to establish a joint
mechanism to respond to the issue. In our view, such
steps should become systemic, with the active support
of the international community and UNOCA’s political
coordination.
We are convinced that the LRA issue is unlikely
to be resolved solely by military means. All prior

11-59157

S/PV.6657

military operations against that group have not helped
to eliminate the threat. We must maintain a
comprehensive cross-cutting approach. Along with
keeping up military pressure, the challenge of
encouraging LRA members to voluntarily disarm and
of demobilizing, repatriating and reintegrating them
remains relevant. Certainly, strengthening State
authority institutions, national security and law
enforcement bodies and economic development in the
regions affected by the group’s activities would help
address the issue. Of course, in the conduct of military
operations to deactivate the LRA, priority attention
must be given to the protection of civilians.
We are grateful to the United Kingdom delegation
for preparing the draft presidential statement for the
Council, which we support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Portugal.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for a very comprehensive briefing on the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), and also
Mr. Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States, and Ambassador
Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their important
statements to the Council. I also welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of the Central
African Republic and South Sudan.
The Lord’s Resistance Army has committed
atrocities across Central Africa for too long. Portugal
strongly condemns the continued violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law by the
LRA, including the use of brutal tactics that include the
deliberate recruitment and use of children, killing,
maiming, rape, sexual violence and abductions. We
firmly urge the LRA to put an end to those practices
and to release all abductees.
Over the years, the Governments of the region,
with the assistance of the international community,
have taken steps aimed at ending the threat posed by
the group. As a result, the LRA has seen its numbers
reduced significantly. However, regardless of its
current small number, the LRA remains capable of
having a terrible impact on the civilian population, thus
threatening regional stability. It is therefore crucial that
all actors — the Governments of LRA-affected

11-59157

countries, the African Union (AU), the United Nations
and other international, regional and bilateral
partners — continue to engage until the threat is
removed. We are very much encouraged by the
renewed attention that the AU and the United Nations,
including the Council, are giving to the issue, which
now needs to be sustained and translated into further
action.
We commend the important efforts undertaken by
the armed forces of the four LRA-affected countries to
counter the threat posed by that group, as well as other
initiatives by the international community, in
coordination with the United Nations and the AU, to
work with the military of those countries. However,
there is room for further improving the effectiveness of
those efforts, particularly through enhancing
coordination, cooperation and information-sharing
among the different actors, including both the States in
the region and the United Nations missions. We believe
that the United Nations is well positioned to lead the
in-depth process, in coordination with the AU.
The African Union’s efforts to implement the
regional cooperation initiative on the LRA must, on the
other hand, be supported by the international
community. In that regard, we highlight the importance
of the rapid appointment of a special envoy. At the
same time, we must bear in mind that, in order to
effectively counter the LRA threat, we must increase
international and regional efforts, under United Nations
leadership, in coordination with the AU, to support the
affected countries in protecting their civilian
populations. That means increasing not only initiatives
that support capacity-building, good governance and
the rule of law, but also very concrete improvements
regarding relevant communications infrastructures,
which will have a considerable impact on the safety of
local communities.
In parallel, the international community, the
United Nations and the AU need to reassess ways to
improve the provision of humanitarian and
development assistance to the populations of LRAaffected areas. Humanitarian organizations can play a
very important role in that context and must be
encouraged to strengthen their presence in those areas.
At the same time, their presence has an important
deterrent effect on LRA attacks, and therefore again
contributes to the safety of local communities.

23

S/PV.6657

Another important action to counter LRA
activities is to intensify messages urging LRA fighters
to defect and promoting disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation
programmes. Consistent messaging reaching all LRAoperating areas must be expanded. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made progress in that
regard, but similar programmes should be developed in
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
I will conclude on the LRA by underlining once
again the importance of sustaining the engagement of
the Security Council on the issue. The recent
developments to combat LRA activity are encouraging
and should continue. The draft presidential statement
to be adopted today, the first since that of 2006 (see
S/PRST/2006/29), is another step. It sends a strong
signal to LRA leaders, on the one hand, and to the
civilians living in LRA-affected areas, on the other. It
ensures that the Council will continue to follow the
issue closely. Portugal will spare no efforts in
continuing to mobilize the international community
and to improve the United Nations response to that
scourge.
Turning now to UNOCA, whose work so far
seems very encouraging, as stated in the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/704), particularly
considering that the Office was only established in
January. With regard to the LRA, which is the main
issue linking the two comprehensive briefings that we
had the opportunity to hear today, UNOCA can play a
very important role in facilitating cooperation among
the various United Nations entities present in the
region, the AU and the LRA-affected countries in order
to counter the LRA threat.
Furthermore, we believe that UNOCA’s work will
contribute significantly to enhancing United Nations
engagement towards the achievement of peace and
security in Central Africa, namely, through providing a
focal point for United Nations engagement, helping to
build the institutional capacity of countries in the
region, and supporting regional efforts to address
cross-cutting issues of concern. The importance of
UNOCA continuing to develop its activities, in close
coordination with the Economic Community of Central
African States, must be highlighted. In that regard, the
participation of the Secretary-General of that regional
organization in today’s meeting is a very positive and
encouraging sign.

24

We must commend the ongoing efforts
undertaken by UNOCA, in coordination with the
United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU)
and regional and international partners, regarding the
relevant security challenges with great impact not only
on the West and Central Africa subregions, but also on
the entire international community, such as piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea and illicit flows of arms and
fighters. The joint UNOCA-UNOAU initiative to
promote an integrated United Nations response to the
negative consequences of the recent conflict in Libya
in West and Central Africa is another project that
should be developed and encouraged.
I conclude by reiterating strong support for the
innovative efforts of UNOCA addressed at helping to
prevent the emergence of new conflicts, resolving
existing ones by peaceful means and promoting
democratic and accountable governance in the
subregion of the Central Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the leading organ of the
United Nations. I would also like to thank and
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
I also commend, and express my gratitude for the
quality of, the briefing by the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, as well as for
the outstanding statement by the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States.
The question that brings us together today is of
major importance for my country, the Central African
Republic. Mine is a State that faces many internal
challenges and, since 2008, has been in the throes of an
external rebellion. We are still asking ourselves today
what the motive and justification is for that barbarous
aggression. To tell the truth, the only fault of my
country — which does not share a border with Uganda,
I might add — is merely that we are living on our own
territory in peace. In talking today about transnational
or transborder terrorism, our specific case provides a
perfect illustration. One morning in March 2008,
heavily armed men, coming from who knows where,

11-59157

S/PV.6657

arrived, pillaged, burned, raped, murdered and forcibly
enlisted men to carry off the spoils of war and later to
become soldiers. They also recruited women to become
sexual slaves and children to become child soldiers.
Villages that not long ago were genuine havens of
peace and breadbaskets for major towns suddenly
became emptied of their populations, who fled the
insecurity and now live in a situation of unprecedented
precariousness. Like internally displaced persons in
makeshift shelters, thousands today depend on the
generosity of international institutions, organizations
and charitable humanitarian groups, both national and
international. It would not be going too far to point out
that to that we must add the thousands of Congolese
refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
spread out over the two towns of Zemio and Obo.
The insecurity created in the area, which is quite
far from Bangui, accentuates poverty, which is already
a source of concern in a country facing great
difficulties. For three years now, the Central African
Republic, a fragile, post-conflict State whose defence
and security forces are undergoing restructuring with
limited resources, while also fighting internal
rebellions and highwaymen, has deployed three
platoons to the area to track those bandits. However,
we have not been able to completely neutralize those
criminals, who are spread out in the prefectures of
Upper Mbomou, Mbomou and Upper Kotto, in the far
eastern part of the Central African Republic.
Exercising its right of pursuit, with the agreement
of the Government of the Central African Republic, a
unit from the Ugandan defence forces has been
deployed and is carrying out joint patrols with Central
African Republic forces in that eastern part of our vast
territory.
For some time now, the African Union, the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and, recently, the United Nations through UNOCA,
have been holding increasing numbers of meetings to
jointly consider what collective and coordinated efforts
could be undertaken to find a comprehensive solution.
We very much welcome that and thank those partners
for all of their initiatives. I would like to take this
opportunity to express to France the gratitude of the
people and the Government of the Central African
Republic for the many forms of support it has provided

11-59157

the Forces armées centrafricainesus in our struggle for
peace in this corner of our country.
The Central African Republic very much
welcomes and appreciates the recent involvement of
the United States of America through its President,
Mr. Barack Obama, who, through a courageous
decision on 21 October, fully committed himself to this
cause by sending 100 personnel to strengthen the
operational capacity of the soldiers of the four States of
the subregion in order to provide greater effectiveness
in the fight against one of the most cruel barbarities of
our time. I can say that this is already producing
positive effects in the subregion. We would be all the
more pleased if that commitment could inspire other
partners that have until now been silent — indeed
sceptical — to join our ranks in this just fight.
Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
point out that my fellow citizens — men, women and
children — face many challenges, including threats to
peace and stability and the daily and ongoing fight
against poverty. Mr. Kony, his movement and his horde
of criminals are hampering our progress in this just and
legitimate battle. The Central African Republic
reaffirms its commitment, here as elsewhere, to
ensuring that as long as that rebellion exists on our
territory, we will not let down our guard, much less
spare any effort in this battle.
However, the regional nature of this scourge
makes all isolated action complex and ineffective. That
is why we must mobilize commitment, forces and
resources in order to act together to once and for all
prevent the LRA from carrying out these crimes and
atrocities with impunity against innocent people who
only aspire to live in peace, security and dignity
through the fruits of their labours.
The President: Following consultations among
Council members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council strongly condemns
the ongoing attacks carried out by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) in parts of Central
Africa, which pose a continuing threat to regional
security. The Council reiterates its grave concern
at the atrocities committed by the LRA, which
have serious humanitarian and human rights
consequences, including the displacement of over
440,000 people across the region. The Council
remains deeply concerned that its previous calls

25

S/PV.6657

for the LRA to cease its attacks have not been
heeded.
“The Security Council strongly condemns
the continued violations of international
humanitarian law and the abuses of human rights
by the LRA. The Security Council condemns
further the recruitment and use of children,
killing and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and
other sexual violence, and abductions. The
Council demands an immediate end to all attacks
by the LRA, particularly those on civilians, urges
LRA leaders to release all those abducted, and
insists that all LRA elements put an end to such
practices, and surrender and disarm.
“The Security Council encourages the
remaining LRA fighters to leave the group’s
ranks and take advantage of offers of
reintegration support. Over the course of the
LRA’s existence, more than 12,000 combatants
and abductees have left the LRA’s ranks and have
been integrated and reunited with their families
through Uganda’s Amnesty Commission. The
Security Council emphasizes its support for
continued efforts across the affected countries to
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate former LRA
fighters back into normal life, and notes the
recent successful escape of 30 women and
children from two LRA groups on the border
between the Republic of South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
acknowledges the important ongoing efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO)
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement office
to encourage and facilitate further LRA
defections, and requests that the United Nations
work with regional Governments to expand these
efforts across the LRA-affected region.
“The Security Council commends the
important efforts undertaken by the militaries of
the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South
Sudan and Uganda to address the threat posed by
the LRA, and urges those militaries to coordinate
and concert their efforts to apprehend Joseph
Kony and LRA top commanders in the coming
months and bring them to justice. The Council
recognizes the challenges the Governments in the

26

region face, and welcomes efforts by the
international community, in coordination with the
African Union and United Nations, to enhance
the capacity of regional militaries to conduct
effective operations against LRA top commanders
and better protect civilians; it notes, for example,
the efforts by the United States to work with
regional militaries. The Council underlines the
need for all action against the LRA to be
conducted in compliance with applicable
international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law.
“The Security Council commends the
enhanced engagement of the African Union (AU)
on this issue through its regional cooperation
initiative for the elimination of the LRA, and its
efforts to establish a regional intervention force, a
joint operations centre and a joint coordination
mechanism. The Security Council further
commends the support provided by the United
Nations Secretary-General to the AU Commission
through the planning process and encourages the
AU to promote coordination on LRA issues by
sharing its counter-LRA plans at the earliest
opportunity. The Council urges the prompt
appointment of the proposed African Union
Special Envoy for the LRA-affected areas, and
expresses hope that this official will work quickly
to solidify cooperation between regional
Governments and promote a regional framework
for the defection, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of LRA fighters.
“The Security Council underlines the
primary responsibility of States in the LRAaffected region to protect civilians and calls upon
them to take all appropriate measures in this
regard. The Council notes at the same time the
important role being played by United Nations
missions in the region, particularly through the
adoption of protection measures such as
community liaison, and stresses the need for them
to play a major role in the coordination among all
those engaged in addressing the threat posed by
the LRA. The Council requests that MONUSCO
and the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS) seek, within their
mandates and capabilities, to increase protection
activities in LRA-affected areas over coming
months, with a particular focus on the

11-59157

S/PV.6657

communities that are most vulnerable. The
Council also welcomes the increased focus of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic on LRA issues in
the Central African Republic and encourages
further action by the United Nations to address
the needs of LRA-affected communities in the
Central African Republic. The Security Council
encourages all United Nations offices and
missions in the LRA-affected region to continue
to enhance information-sharing and coordination
with all relevant actors, and welcomes the
preparation of a regional human rights report on
the LRA.
“The Council commends efforts by the
European Union, the United States and other
donors to provide humanitarian assistance to
LRA-affected populations in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council
stresses the need for an enhanced, comprehensive
and more regional approach to the humanitarian
situation, including assistance to victims of
sexual violence and other attacks, and reiterates
the requirement for all parties to promote and
ensure safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations to the civilian
population. The Council calls upon the
international community to provide support to
capacity-building,
good
governance
and
humanitarian efforts in LRA-affected areas.
“The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report on the LRA and
commends the efforts made by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), in coordination with United Nations
Office to the African Union, to engage with the
United Nations missions in the LRA-affected
region, the AU and affected Central African
States to facilitate cooperation on issues related
to countering the threat posed by the LRA. The
Security Council encourages UNOCA to work
with the United Nations missions and the AU to
develop a regional strategy for international
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
assistance in the LRA-affected area, enhanced
cross-border mechanisms to improve civilian
protection, early warning capacity, humanitarian
access
and
response,
and
appropriate

11-59157

reintegration support for those returning from
displacement, abductees and ex-combatants, as
well as strengthening the overall capacity of
affected States to extend their authority
throughout their respective territories.
“The
Security
Council
recalls
the
International Criminal Court’s arrest warrants for
three remaining LRA leaders on charges of,
among other things, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including murder, rape and the
enlistment of children through abduction, and
encourages all States to cooperate with the
Ugandan authorities and the International
Criminal Court in order to implement those
warrants and to bring to justice those responsible
for the atrocities. The Council recalls its
statement of June 2006 (S/PRST/2006/28) and
reaffirms the vital importance of promoting
justice and the rule of law, including respect for
human rights, as an indispensible element for
lasting peace.
“The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General
keep
it
informed
on
developments in relation to the LRA, including
through a single report on both UNOCA and the
LRA to be submitted before 31 May 2012,
identifying
opportunities
for
improved
information-sharing between the AU, LRAaffected States and United Nations missions, and
outlining the role of UNOCA in coordinating
activity against the LRA.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2011/21.
I now give the floor to Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): As I stated
in my introductory comments, I have reserved the right
to take the floor on the question of working relations,
cooperation and partnership with the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), which
has just opened in Libreville.
We have all read the report (S/2011/704) and
followed the questions to which it has given rise. I will
not address all of those issues, which include the

27

S/PV.6657

Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), small arms and light
weapons under the Kinshasa Convention, drug
trafficking,
maritime
security,
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, elections, and general
capacity-building. The Office has effected productive
changes in those areas. I note that the secretariat of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) welcomes Mr. Moussa’s enthusiasm in
addressing those matters with the main actors from
ECCAS.
Clearly the issues are numerous. We agree that
change is necessary in order to define our priorities and
to consolidate our efforts in order to enable successful
implementation of the measures available. In
particular, I wish to emphasize one issue which is as
important as the LRA file, and which has been
addressed by the Council in resolution 2018 (2011).
The Gulf of Guinea deserves the full, sustained
attention that the Council can provide to it in the
months and years ahead. It is important that
information on this matter be provided on an updated
basis from ECCAS on how it is being addressed.
In December 2009, our Heads of States signed a
protocol to protect vital maritime interests of ECCAS
members in the Gulf of Guinea. The strategic approach
of our Heads of States emphasizes that security must
involve the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa (COPAX) and promote synergy with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and the Economic Community of
West African States. I welcome the fact that resolution
2018 (2011) is perfectly aligned with the concerns I
have mentioned and thus bodes well for the future.
I will not reiterate our objectives; I simply wished
to make a few comments on how we have set up our
machinery. We have three zones: in Zone A we have
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with Angola as the pilot State; in Zone B, we have the
Republic of the Congo and the Cabinda area of Angola,
with the Republic of the Congo as the pilot; and then
we have Zone D, with Cameroun, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, São Tomé and Principe, with Cameroun as the
pilot State.
Within that structure, a centre will be established
in Pointe-Noire in the Republic of the Congo, called

28

the Centre for the Maintenance of Maritime Security,
which will have links with the most important strategic
agencies. We will place a coordinating maritime centre
in each pilot State. Of course, concerns regarding the
financing and operation of this machinery have been
addressed. Without imposing new taxes, we will rely
on levies collected through maritime operators, above
all via the Maritime Organization of West and Central
Africa. I should add that, in terms of implementation,
we have activated the space of zone D, which consists,
as I said, of Cameroun, Gabon, São Tomé and Principe
and Equatorial Guinea. That will subsequently pave the
way for the plan adopted by the four military chiefs of
staff of those four States and, of course, approved by
their respective higher authorities, and for assessing
the results of the first phase of the maritime security
plan and then for implementing phase two. We are
encouraged by the results to date. I wish therefore to
say that the timing of resolution 2018 (2011) gives us
further impetus to build on the initiatives of the East
African Community (EAC), so much so that phase two
has already begun, namely, by building synergy with
the Economic Community of Western African States
(ECOWAS). We thank the United States for making
their facilities at Garmisch, Germany, available, which
enabled the chiefs of staff, their representatives, the
heads of the communities and the two parties to come
together to craft a model for the kind of synergy that
should exist between ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States. I believe that
their observations were useful once certain initiatives
had been launched to ensure that the safety of roads
and of the Gulf of Guinea could be guaranteed, lest the
situation sink into the sort of case we know all too well
and might call “Somalization”. I would like to thank all
States for their support, along with all the institutions
such as the European Union and the United Nations
system that have responded to our concerns.
The President: I thank Mr. Sylvain-Goma for the
clarifications he has provided. There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The meeting is
adjourned.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

11-59157
