S/2012/954

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2012
English
Original: French

Letter dated 19 December 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 9 January 2012 (S/2012/28) informing the President
of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission, and his reply dated 11 January 2012 (S/2012/29), in which he took
note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support team to
the Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the same spirit, by
the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the 10 October 2002 ruling of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial disputes.
Through my good offices, and with the support of the United Nations Secretariat, I
have continued to facilitate the implementation of the ruling of the International
Court of Justice.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected populations
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to
date in the implementation of the ruling of the Court include withdrawal and
transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the land
boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi Peninsula (a process which began in June
2006 and was compiled in August 2008), as well as delineation of the maritime
boundary (May 2007). The Mixed Commission also approved all of the
recommendations of the Working Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the
provisions for cross-border cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the
maritime boundary (March 2011).
In the course of 2012, the Mixed Commission continued to facilitate the
process peacefully, including by helping to maintain dialogue and communication
between the two countries. The most significant development was the course of
events in Nigeria in the weeks prior to the 10 October 2012 deadline for the
submission of an application for a revision of the ICJ judgment. Although the
judgment is final and not subject to appeal, Article 61 of the Statute of the Court
provides for circumstances under which a revision can be considered within a tenyear period from the ruling. Following intensive consultation with legal experts, and
in spite of a motion voted in both legislative assemblies of Nigeria urging the

12-66305 (E) 241212 241212

*1266305*

S/2012/954

Executive to invoke Article 61 of the Statute, the Federal Government of Nigeria
decided not to pursue the revision of the 2002 judgment.
During its twenty-ninth session, which took place in Yaoundé on 30 and
31 August 2012, the Mixed Commission endorsed the latest outcome of the field
assessment performed by the joint technical team of surveyors. To date, the parties
have agreed on the demarcation of 1,845 kilometres of an estimated total of 2,000
kilometres of land boundary. The Mixed Commission also adopted the conclusions
of the report of 6 December 2011 of the Independent Expert Team appointed to
resolve the disagreement concerning determination of the boundary area of Mount
Tosso, but agreed to defer the implementation of those conclusions so that the
experts could appraise other areas of disagreement so as to provide a holistic
approach to their resolution. Moreover, the Nigerian delegation undertook to
expedite consideration of the draft framework agreement on cross-border
cooperation on hydrocarbons straddling the maritime boundary.
It is expected that the field assessment of the areas of the boundary not yet
assessed would be completed by the end of 2013, while the outstanding areas of
disagreement would be settled by the end of 2014. This, in turn, would allow the
finalization of the demarcation process, the final maps and the pillar emplacement
work by the end of 2015. However, completion of the bulk of the demarcation work
will depend on the ability of the two parties to reach an agreement on the remaining
areas of disagreement in a timely manner.
The Mixed Commission reiterated its determination to initiate the work of
final mapping during the first semester of 2013 and stressed the need for
comprehensive planning to complete the outstanding tasks, including assessment of
the remaining segments of the boundary line and the extraction of coordinates from
the points of the watershed line. For this purpose, it was agreed that the demarcation
work would be formally concluded in 2015 with a boundary statement to which a
series of maps, elevated to the status of “legally-agreed maps” depicting the
boundary line, would be appended. The statement, which will include an index of
geographic coordinates of the agreed boundary points resulting from the field
assessment, will be the “binding source” for the demarcation of the CameroonNigeria boundary.
Reports by United Nations civilian observers monitoring the situation along
the land boundary and in the Bakassi Peninsula have concluded that the prevailing
situation continues to be peaceful.
Meanwhile, the Follow-up Committee established by the 12 June 2006
Greentree Agreement continued its work following the final transfer of authority in
the “zone” in the Bakassi Peninsula from Nigeria to Cameroon on 14 August 2008.
In 2012, three meetings of the Follow-up Committee were preceded by observers’
visits to the above-mentioned “zone”. The Committee noted improvement in the
situation in the Peninsula as evidenced by the significant increase of the population
and the good relations between the community and the authorities. A road
connecting three subdivisions of Bakassi has been rehabilitated, facilitating
commercial activities and the establishment of permanent residences for civil
servants in the area.
Despite these positive developments, the local population continued to object
to the restrictions imposed on fishing activities and the deterioration of the security

2

12-66305

S/2012/954

situation in the “zone” as a result of criminal activities, including acts of piracy. On
26 February 2012, the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria signed a cross-border
security cooperation agreement providing, inter alia, for joint border patrols and
reaffirming their commitment to address law enforcement-related issues raised by
the local population.
Throughout 2012, the Mixed Commission continued to support the formulation
of confidence-building measures to guarantee the security and well-being of those
populations affected by the demarcation. It also continued to promote initiatives
aimed at enhancing trust between the two Governments and the affected
populations. In that context, a road map has been established as an outcome of
interactions between the two Governments and the United Nations country teams in
Cameroon and Nigeria. In line with this road map, the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for each of the two countries has been revised to include the
needs of the affected populations. In Cameroon, the programme document includes
projects related to food security, water, health, energy, environment, micro-finance
projects for income generation and vocational training.
In Nigeria, the projects are focused on livelihoods, water, education, energy,
resettlement and infrastructure. The Mixed Commission intends to call upon
partners, once the feasibility studies and cost estimates are completed, to sponsor
projects aimed at strengthening cross-border, socioeconomic cooperation and the
development of the border communities. In addition, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission met at the ministerial level in N’Djamena on 25 April 2012 to discuss
an investment plan for the revitalization of the basin area. This was followed, on
30 April 2012, by the Fourteenth Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
Commission, who agreed to extend the mandate of its joint task force addressing
security issues involving the border areas, to include the security challenges posed
by the militant group, Boko Haram, north of the Cameroon-Nigeria land boundary.
In accordance with article 6 of the Greentree Agreement, and paragraph 4 of
annex 1 to that Agreement, the activities of the Follow-up Committee shall cease on
14 August 2013, when the five-year period of the special transitional regime
following the transfer of authority over the “zone” will expire.
After 31 December 2013, the following activities will be required to conclude
the work of the Mixed Commission:
(a)

Finalization of demarcation activities and the final maps;

(b) Facilitation of boundary pillar emplacement, financed by the trust fund
for the demarcation activities;
(c) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and joint security monitoring along the land boundary; and
(d) Implementation of the exit strategy by handing over the activities of the
Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional
structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2012, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway,
Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind contributions for the

12-66305

3

S/2012/954

substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in
addition to the logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and
Nigeria, and the voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of
Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the
European Union, to the trust fund for the demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effectiveness of the mission and the important tasks remaining
at this juncture to help advance the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, it is my intention to ask for resources from the regular
budget for the Mixed Commission for the period 1 January to 31 December 2013.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

4

12-66305
