United Nations

S/PV.9274

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9274th meeting
Monday, 6 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2023/135)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06669 (E)
*2306669*

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency
Mrs. Vanessa Frazier, Permanent Representative of
Malta, for her service as President of the Security
Council for the month of February. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Frazier and her team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2023/135)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, and Mr. Tareq Talahma, Acting
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/135, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the situation in South Sudan. Today
I want to focus on the priorities for this critical phase
of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and to share progress and reflections on
the implementation of the mandated objectives of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
2/18

06/03/2023

In a recent press briefing, the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity confirmed
its commitment to implementing the peace agreement
in accordance with the timelines in the agreed road
map. In the same briefing, the Government stated
clearly that there would be no more extensions of the
timelines. UNMISS welcomes that public commitment
and acknowledges the limited progress achieved during
the reporting period, but we also note the slippage in
meeting the timelines set out in the road map. Neither
the stakeholders nor the international community are of
a mind to contemplate further extensions. Accordingly,
we see 2023 as a make-or-break year and as a test
for all parties to the Agreement. We believe there are
some key hurdles that the parties must clear in order to
successfully position South Sudan to complete the final
leg of the transitional phase next year.
The first is the drafting of a new constitution,
which is a critical opportunity for the South Sudanese
to agree on the arrangements by which they can live
together harmoniously, avoiding a repeat of the two
civil wars that have defined the past decade. It will
allow them South to consolidate their identity and
establish how they want to be governed. It is intended
to be an inclusive process that gives a voice to all
South Sudanese, including the holdout groups, but
especially internally displaced persons and refugees,
women, young people, persons with disabilities and
other marginalized communities. We therefore call on
the Government to immediately reconstitute and fund
the National Constitutional Review Commission and to
fast-track the establishment of the Constitution Drafting
Committee and for Parliament to end its lengthy recess.
That sets the foundation for the second challenge — the
preparations for inclusive and credible elections, which
are due to be held next year. I can confirm that the
United Nations has received a Government request to
assist the South Sudanese-owned and -administered
elections. Of particular note is the request to support
an enabling environment for elections, working with
civil society, political parties and the media. There
is a need to fast-track all preparatory work now,
including with respect to the immediate constitution
and operationalization of the Political Parties Council.
Most critically, UNMISS urges the finalization of the
legal framework and the reconstitution of the National
Elections Commission, which has been a largely defunct
body for nearly 10 years, lacking human resources and
material infrastructure. Key electoral choices must
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

be determined soon. Those steps cannot be shelved
until 2024. Following the recommendations of the
United Nations needs-assessment mission in 2021, such
United Nations electoral support will first focus on
creating the appropriate architecture and environment
in which elections can take place. It will only then
be able to decide on the modalities for further and
concrete electoral assistance in managing the elections
process itself.
The third priority is the expansion of civic and
political space, which will be a defining legacy of
the transitional period as it constitutes the finishing
line — the ultimate criteria — by which the credibility
of the electoral process will be judged. More important,
it will set the foundation for a stable democracy that
can avert further conflict. In support of that expansion
of civic and political space, UNMISS is engaging
non-governmental organizations and political parties
to ask the critical questions that must be expected of an
appropriate political environment. We have taken note
of the sentiments expressed at the recent International
Conference on Women’s Transformative Leadership,
held in Juba, which insisted on ensuring the space
for women and girls to embrace their role as change
agents. We believe that the visit of the Ecumenical
Pilgrimage for Peace, led by His Holiness the Pope,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Moderator of the
Church of Scotland have served to echo the message of
peace, tolerance, reconciliation and civic participation
so often called for by the South Sudanese themselves.
The fourth hurdle is the consolidation,
strengthening and deployment of the necessary unified
forces. I welcome the completion of the first phase of
the graduations and encourage the parties to finalize
a formula for rank structures and harmonization,
proper equipment, welfare and the deployment of the
graduated troops. That will enable those forces to meet
their responsibility to protect civilians, humanitarian
personnel and their assets. The necessary unified forces
can be either an asset or a liability during the transition.
We appeal for the urgent commencement of the second
phase of that process.
The fifth challenge is to tackle the subnational
violence that manifests itself in hotspots across the
country, such as the Upper Nile, Jonglei and the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area, and the areas adjacent to
Abyei, as well as through the legacy of the conflict
in Tambura and the cattle-related violence in the
Equatorias. All those conflicts increasingly present

S/PV.9274

an ethnic or tribal dimension, and as President Kiir
Mayardit noted in his New Year’s address, they threaten
to unravel the hard-won peace gains achieved to date.
We have been shocked at the recent cycle of revenge
killings in Kajo Keij and elsewhere, the unacceptable
practice of the abduction of women and children, and
the use of gender-based violence as a weapon of war.
The sixth challenge that South Sudan must face
down is the economic and humanitarian situation
in South Sudan caused primarily by climate shocks
and conflict. This year, it is estimated that more than
two thirds of the population, including refugees, will
need humanitarian and protection assistance — an
increase of half a million people compared to last year.
In December 2022, the humanitarian community in
South Sudan released the humanitarian response plan
for 2023, which requires funding in the amount of
$1.7 billion dollars in order to reach 6.8 million of the
most vulnerable people with urgent, vital support. Sadly,
the plan is only 3 per cent supported, as our colleagues
in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs will confirm in their briefing. The efforts of
humanitarians to reach affected people with life-saving
support are continuously hampered by insecurity,
criminality, operational interference and attacks against
humanitarian personnel and assets. From our vantage
point, all those priorities are mutually reinforcing.
Undoubtedly, South Sudan is challenged by the need
to secure the necessary financing for implementing the
peace agreement. I have conveyed to senior Government
officials that the international community would
likely be more forthcoming in assisting South Sudan
were it to demonstrate political will, demonstrable
progress in the implementation of the Agreement and
a visible contribution of its own resources to that task.
Against that backdrop, UNMISS is following the recent
developments relating to the removal of the Minister of
Defence and Veterans’ Affairs. We call on the parties
to exercise restraint and engage in a collegial spirit in
order to resolve such sensitive national issues.
In the most recent mandate cycle, UNMISS
released seven public human rights reports, including a
special report on Tambura and southern Unity prepared
jointly with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Those reports provide
recommendations to the parties, authorities and other
stakeholders for improving the overall environment
of justice, accountability and reconciliation. In that
context, UNMISS is of the view that the four pillars

23-066693/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of our mandate remain valid and that the three-year
strategic vision has given us a solid foundation to move
ahead. I affirm that the protection of civilians is the
heartbeat of that Mission, alongside the women and peace
and security agenda. Those two priorities constitute
the common cross-cutting elements of all our tasks.
We take seriously our responsibility to continuously
interrogate whether we are fit for purpose. With the
upcoming electoral cycle and the heightened political
and security tensions that will accompany it, we are
considering whether there is a case for strengthening
our uniformed deployment, although it is well within
our authorized ceiling. After conducting an internal
review, I have now requested Headquarters to carry out
a capability study to assess our capacity to adequately
protect civilians and support the implementation of
the peace agreement. The principle of partnerships
underpins our strategic vision to prevent a return
to civil war and build durable peace. We value the
support and engagement of the troika, the European
Union, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, as well as the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
UNMISS engages continuously with the neighbours
of South Sudan, most recently Kenya, with regard
to the obligation to support the South Sudanese in
their transition. The recent visit of the African Union
Peace and Security Council is a demonstration of its
consistent effort to deepen the continent’s capacity to
leverage helpful outcomes in South Sudan.
The leaders of South Sudan now face a stark choice:
they can embark upon a road of mutual cooperation and
reconciliation in the urgent implementation of their peace
agreement, or they can take a low road that privileges
self-interest and conflict over nation-building. There
is still sufficient time to achieve the ideals, goals and
timelines as set out in the peace agreement. We would
want to believe that the South Sudanese would make the
most of this fast-closing opportunity.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Talahma.
Mr. Talahma: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
Since we briefed the Council in June last year (see
S/PV.9067), the humanitarian situation has worsened.
Violence, displacement, hunger, climate-related
4/18

06/03/2023

shocks and public-health challenges continue to drive
humanitarian needs, as already highlighted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. This
year, a record 9.4 million people, which is actually
76 per cent of the country’s population, including
350,000 refugees, may need humanitarian assistance,
which is an increase of 5 per cent since last year.
The latest food-security assessment projects that
an estimated 7.8 million people will face crisis levels
of acute food insecurity during the April to July lean
season, with 43,000 people in Jonglei and Unity states
likely to be in catastrophic or famine conditions known
as Integrated Phase Classification level 5. An estimated
1.4 million children under the age of five are expected
to suffer from acute malnutrition. More than 675,000
pregnant and lactating women are expected to be at risk
of acute malnutrition. These numbers of malnourished
and severely food-insecure people have reached a record
high, surpassing what was seen during the conflict in
2013 and 2016.
Violence continued to be one of the many drivers
of displacement and food insecurity, with incidents of
armed conflict and intercommunal violence recorded
across the country. In 2022, thousands of people were
newly displaced, of whom 70 per cent were children and
women, as highlighted by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. During the last quarter of
2022, conflict in northern Jonglei and Upper Nile states
caused major displacement, cutting people off from
essential services and resulting in serious violations
against women and children, in particular violations
linked to gender-based violence.
Climate change has further driven humanitarian
needs. Last year, the country experienced a fourth
consecutive year of intense flooding. Over a million
people were affected as water swept homes and
livestock away, flooded farmlands and submerged
water resources, all of which further exaggerated the
already dire food-insecurity situation. Early action
is vital to intervene ahead of predicted shocks to
safeguard lives and assets. For example, in the capital
of Unity state, flood waters did not recede, leaving
its population, including people in the largest camp
for internal displaced persons, on an island protected
only by dikes. Severe flooding impacts were lessened
by humanitarians collaborating with the Government
and other actors to reinforce fragile dikes, averting a
humanitarian catastrophe.
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9274

The early release of funds from the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and the South Sudan
Humanitarian Fund in May 2022 further supported
early action. As a humanitarian community, we commit
to protecting more lives and livelihoods throughout by
expanding early-action measures.

Let me conclude by reiterating three key messages.
First and foremost, we urge all actors to ensure the
de-escalation of violence and uphold their commitment
to protecting civilian and civilian assets. We emphasize
the importance of providing safe and unhindered access
so that people in need can be reached and helped.

Extended and repeated displacement is deepening
vulnerability. Over 2.2 million people remain internally
displaced — some since 2013, that is, for almost 10
years. Over 2.3 million South Sudanese refugees live in
neighbouring countries.

Secondly, international support for South
Sudan needs a strong peace and humanitarian and
development cooperation if it is to address the
drivers of the protracted crisis and the multiplicity of
people’s needs. To this end, I am pleased to note the
recent strengthening of the Office of the Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator through the establishment
of the integrated office to support the role of the triple
hat in cross-pillar cooperation and advancing joint
peace, development and humanitarian outcomes. That
will bring greater alignment and avoid more silos.

Sustainable solutions are needed for affected people
to return, integrate or move to another location, which
is a determination they make for themselves. There are
already many good examples of places to go, such as
the Western Bahr El Ghazal, where the governor and
her team devised a four-year strategic development plan
to support conflict- and disaster-affected communities,
in alignment with the Government’s strategic
development plan.
The launch of the Secretary-General’s Action
Agenda on Internal Displacement and the selection
of South Sudan as a pilot country also presents
an opportunity to reinforce sustainable-solution
mechanisms for displaced people. Allow me to extend
my deep appreciation to the humanitarian partners
who are working in extremely difficult environments
and who have shown an unwavering commitment
to staying and delivering, as pointed out by the
Special Representative.
South Sudan remains one of the most dangerous
places for aid workers. Sadly, in January this year, three
aid workers were killed in the line of duty. Nine lost their
lives in 2022, during the escalation of intercommunal
violence in different areas; these casualties came mostly
from the non-governmental organizations. Yet despite
these challenges, humanitarian partners reached nearly
5 million people with assistance and services in 2022.
Over 4 million people received food assistance and
livelihood support.
Together we need to do more in 2023. This year,
the humanitarian response plan requires the number of
people being assisted to go from 1.7 million of the most
vulnerable people to 6.8 million. To date, the response,
as indicated by the Special Representative, is only
3.5 per cent funded.

Thirdly, the CERF and the South Sudan
Humanitarian Fund continue to play an important role.
In 2022, the Emergency Relief Coordinator approved
$54 million through the CERF for South Sudan, which
makes it the second-largest recipient globally. We would
like to reiterate our call for the Council’s continuing
general support for the humanitarian operation in South
Sudan through the provision of flexible, unearmarked
and early funding to scale.
The President: I thank Mr. Talahma for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): First, I
would like to congratulate Malta on its successful
presidency last month, and we wish Mozambique the
best of luck with the beginning of their presidency of
the Council this month.
Secondly, we thank Special Representative Haysom
for his thoughtful briefing today. I would also like to
thank Mr. Talahma for his insights on the evolving
situation in South Sudan.
The United States remains greatly appreciative of
the leadership of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the people of UNMISS, the troopand police-contributing countries and humanitarian
partners who serve to protect civilians in South Sudan
and mitigate conflict in many volatile areas.

23-066695/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We are gravely alarmed at the rise, during the
reporting period, of violence against civilians in
South Sudan, where killings of civilians increased by
79 per cent, civilians harmed increased by 87 per cent,
abductions of women and children increased by 464 per
cent and conflict-related sexual violence increased
by 360 per cent, compared to last year, according to
a recent UNMISS report. We reiterate our view that
South Sudan’s transitional leaders bear responsibility
to end subnational violence against its people and hold
perpetrators accountable. We remind the transitional
Government of South Sudan that it has not upheld its
primary responsibility to protect the civilians of South
Sudan. If the transitional Government wishes to achieve
a successful transition to a permanent Government,
then it is imperative that it take responsibility to
protect civilians and create a secure and stable
electoral environment.
We are encouraged to hear that impediments to the
Mission’s freedom of movement have been reduced. We
note that the freedom of movement of UNMISS, in line
with its mandate, is critical for the Mission to implement
its mandated tasks. We urge UNMISS to become
more proactive in implementing its protection-ofcivilians mandate and deploy peacekeepers to areas of
heightened violence — irrespective of approval of the
local or national authorities — where civilians are at the
greatest risk of physical violence, now that movement
restrictions have improved. We also stress that South
Sudan’s transitional leaders must deliver the results to
which they committed in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and address immediate issues such as
the ongoing violence in Upper Nile state and the dire
humanitarian situation.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we strongly
call on the transitional Government of South Sudan to
facilitate unhindered access throughout the country,
including access along the Nile River corridor to
UNMISS peacekeepers, personnel and humanitarian
partners, to adequately respond to outbreaks of
subnational violence and provide life-saving aid to the
South Sudanese people.
This will be a critical year for South Sudanese
leaders to uphold their commitments on implementing
key benchmarks of the peace agreement. We recognize
the Government’s request for Mission support for
elections, but underscore that for elections to be free
and fair, transitional leaders must first expand civic
6/18

06/03/2023

space and create conditions under which all political
parties, civil society, internally displaced persons and
South Sudanese citizens, including women, youth and
displaced persons, will have full, equal and meaningful
inclusion in the peace process that will shape
South Sudan’s future. We call upon the transitional
Government to act now to show the political will to
create such conditions, including by ensuring that
South Sudanese men and women can freely express
their political views without fear of arrest.
The last point I would like to express is our deep
concern about the humanitarian crisis. The transitional
Government reported $1.6 billion in oil revenue last
year, yet continues to fail to allocate those resources to
address the humanitarian needs of its population. We
urgently call on South Sudanese officials to dedicate
more of its oil revenue to addressing the crisis and
to allow and facilitate the safe access and delivery of
humanitarian assistance in South Sudan.
We also condemn the killings of five humanitarian
aid workers since the beginning of the year and call
on the Government to fully support humanitarian
access and protect humanitarian aid personnel working
tirelessly to deliver aid to South Sudanese people. The
United States remains committed to the cause of peace
and to the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, wish to begin by thanking Malta for its excellent
work last month and wishing Mozambique every
success this month.
I thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), and Mr. Tareq Talahma, Acting
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings. I also acknowledge the presence of
the Permanent Representative of the Permanent Mission
of South Sudan to the United Nations at this meeting.
I would like to start by highlighting the work
of UNMISS in supporting the transitional national
authorities in the implementation of the peace process
and the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We
encourage the Government to continue those efforts
in the next phase of political transition towards
national reconciliation.
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ecuador hopes that these, the first elections in the
history of South Sudan, will take place freely, peacefully
and without further delays. It is a critical phase that
requires a process with broad participation, especially
of women and youth, whose contribution is and will
be essential in strengthening the social fabric of the
country. In that regard, we encourage the Government
to intensify its efforts to reach the minimum quota of
35 per cent of women in the transitional institutions and
executive bodies.
The holding in Juba of the first International
Conference on Women’s Transformational Leadership
two weeks ago should be a point of reflection and
analysis. The recommendations emanating from that
important event should be internalized in a crosscutting manner in the peace and development agenda
of South Sudan.
My delegation is concerned about the complexity of
the political, humanitarian, security and development
challenges facing the nation.
On the political front, we must recognize the
progress made by the Government towards a rule
of law that will allow the electoral process to take
place. However, there are concerns about harassment,
intimidation and obstacles to freedom of expression and
journalistic practice, as well as the intimidation of civil
society. It is paramount that the Government create a
safe and enabling environment free from reprisals.
My delegation condemns sexual violence and abuse,
abductions, extrajudicial killings, the recruitment
of children and young people, killings and maiming,
which, according to the most recent reports of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2023/135) and
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493), are even
committed by security forces. Those crimes, which
mainly affect women, youth and children, cannot go
unpunished. Addressing the outstanding issues, in
particular the establishment of the Hybrid Court for
South Sudan, will advance the fight against impunity
in the country.
The Council should expand its efforts to call on
the Government of South Sudan to comply with its
obligations under international law, including those
relating to the protection of children. That country must
comply with the United Nations 2020 Comprehensive
Action Plan to End and Prevent all Grave Violations
against Children in order to strengthen the legal
framework for the protection of children’s rights.

S/PV.9274

We are pleased to learn about the involvement of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the process of peacebuilding in South Sudan through institution-building and
governance. We are convinced that it is the correct tool for
strengthening such initiatives, with a view to supporting
internal processes that will sustain peace in the long term.
In addition, we express our solidarity with the people
of South Sudan for the grave humanitarian situation they
are facing. The Government must provide and facilitate
safe access and protection for humanitarian workers.
Finally, I would also like to reiterate Ecuador’s
commitment to UNMISS, to which it contributes personnel
as part of its support to the Organization in pursuit of
sustainable and lasting peace process solutions. That is
why I also call on the Organization to provide sufficient
resources for the fulfilment of the UNMISS mandate.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I congratulate the Republic of
Mozambique on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and wish His Excellency the
Ambassador and his team success in leading the work of
the Council. The United Arab Emirates will provide them
with full support. I also thank Malta for its outstanding
presidency of the Council’s work last month and Special
Representative Haysom and Mr. Talahma for their
comprehensive briefings and welcome the participation of
the representative of South Sudan in our meeting today.
During the recent visit to South Sudan, His Holiness
Pope Francis delivered a message of hope and optimism
to the South Sudanese people about the prospect of
peacebuilding and putting the country on the path of
security and stability. He called on all actors to achieve
reconciliation, turn the page on disagreement and
reject hatred. The Council’s meeting today represents
an important opportunity to build on that momentum
by sending a similar message emphasizing the need to
continue to work towards implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan.
For those peace endeavours to be successful, the
concerning security situation in the country and its
implications for the humanitarian situation must be
addressed. In that regard, we condemn acts of violence
such as the kidnapping of women, children and other
civilians, and the acts of violence committed against
humanitarian workers.

23-066697/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The level of violence has decreased since the
beginning of this year, compared to the last quarter
of the past year, owing to strengthened security
procedures undertaken by South Sudan and an increase
in patrols by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). However, the main challenge today
is to find ways to end the vicious cycle of violence and
address its root causes. That requires a comprehensive
approach and prioritizing peaceful solutions and
dialogue, coupled with serious steps in the area of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In
that regard, we commend the efforts and initiatives of
UNMISS to encourage inter-communal dialogue and
stress the importance of taking actual steps to preserve
the results of those initiatives. We also stress that
peace, stability and development cannot be maintained
in an environment of violence stemming from ethnic
affiliation and competition for resources. The national
interest must be placed above any other considerations.
We also encourage building on what has been
achieved in the first phase of the unification of forces
by undertaking the necessary security reforms and
building the security capacity of South Sudan to enable
it to play its role in building peace in the country.
On the political front, we hope that South Sudan
takes practical steps to implement recently adopted
legislation, including the constitution-making process
bill, which will contribute to building on recent hardwon gains. We hope that the recently resumed Rome
peace talks will help to find solutions to the existing
challenges by aligning the views of — and building
trust among — the various stakeholders.
We emphasize in that regard the important
role of regional and international organizations in
developing appropriate mechanisms to support South
Sudan, including by providing support to the electoral
preparations process, as South Sudan recently requested.
In the light of the recent visit of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to South Sudan, we hope
that the results of that visit and the continued support
of regional leadership to the country will help South
Sudan to complete its transition period.
We also affirm the importance of involving the
youth and ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in political discussion, as it is important
for the success of the transitional period. In that
regard, we welcome the Peacebuilding Commission’s
recent recommendations on that matter, as well as
8/18

06/03/2023

the convening of the first International Conference
on Women’s Transformational Leadership in Juba last
month, with the participation of a number of women
leaders. It is essential to fully invest in women’s
expertise for achieving peace.
In conclusion, we need to improve our understanding
of the linkages between climate and security and to
identify the tools available to address them. My country
is keen to discuss that in the various relevant forums,
whether as co-Chair of the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security, as the incoming
President of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, or in the context of the ongoing
negotiations to renew the mandate of UNMISS. We
also need to work on ways to mitigate the damage of
climate change and find suitable energy solutions,
including through the work of UNMISS, which has
made commendable progress in the transition to
renewable energy sources. The Mission will therefore
leave an important legacy for those communities after
its eventual exit from the country.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate Malta on its successful presidency
of the Security Council in February. I express our full
support to you, Mr. President, during your presidency
this month.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Haysom, and the Acting Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Talahma,
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
representative of South Sudan at this meeting.
We thank the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and its staff for their tireless efforts
for lasting peace in the country.
With the start of the implementation of the road
map, South Sudan has entered a decisive phase of the
transition. The expectations of the population must
not be disappointed. Two key milestones must be
reached: the drafting of the constitution and the first
electoral process since the country’s independence.
Switzerland reiterates its full support for the people and
the transitional Government of South Sudan in those
important efforts.
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to highlight three aspects that are
essential for the peace process to move forward in this
critical phase.
First, the adoption of several important laws,
including the law on the constitution-making process,
paves the way for the next steps in the constitutional
process. We congratulate the Government on that,
and we welcome its request for UNMISS to support
the electoral process. Nevertheless, in order to move
forward politically, we encourage the parties to adhere
to the deadlines set out in the road map, establish
the institutions for which it provides and protect a
free political and civic space by ensuring freedom of
expression, of assembly and of the press. Developing
a new constitution means a transformation of the
South Sudanese social contract. It must be done in an
inclusive manner by taking into account the voices
of all, in particular women, as recently reaffirmed
in Juba at the International Conference on Women’s
Transformational Leadership.
Secondly, the resumption of armed conflict and
the escalation of violence at the subnational level in the
Upper Nile, Jonglei and Equatoria states and the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area are alarming. We call on all
parties to respect international humanitarian law. We
condemn all human rights violations and abuses, in
particular sexual violence and those committed against
children, which are unacceptable. We reiterate that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with the Government. In order to reduce violence
and strengthen peaceful coexistence, intercommunal
dialogues, supported by UNMISS, are essential. In
recent years, Switzerland has worked with the South
Sudan Council of Churches to support such dialogues,
in particular in Tambura, Western Equatoria.
Thirdly, the country is facing the worst
humanitarian crisis since independence. We are deeply
concerned about the level of human suffering. The
crisis is compounded by the effects of climate change,
which exacerbate the consequences of the conflict.
Ninety-five per cent of the population depends on
climate-sensitive livelihoods. Massive flooding in much
of the country — the situation in Bentiu being a case in
point — is exacerbating food insecurity and fuelling
subnational violence, particularly in view of prolonged
displacement and transhumance. We encourage
the Government, with the support of UNMISS, to
address those challenges, including through joint
climate-sensitive assessments and projects.

S/PV.9274

The next few months will require all actors at the
local, national, regional and international levels to work
together to move the transition forward. We therefore
call for supporting South Sudan in its efforts to carry
out those measures and include the whole civilian
population in all its diversity. The renewal of the
UNMISS mandate is under way. The strategic vision
and the four pillars of the mandate remain relevant.
Switzerland is committed to supporting a mandate
that is up to the task of overcoming the challenges that
the peace process entails. I want to reiterate our full
support to the Special Representative and the Mission
in carrying out its mandate.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I would like to begin by
congratulating Mozambique on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I thank Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
and Mr. Talahma, Acting Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of South Sudan
to this meeting.
The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and the peace process remains central to
South Sudan’s trajectory. Malta is strongly committed
to ensuring that the road map leads towards the
conclusion of the transitional period without any
additional delays. We welcome the progress made on
the constitutional process bill and on the preparations
for holding national elections in 2024, as well as the
recent graduation of the unified forces, for which we
encourage the further harmonization of ranks. In order
to ensure the most effective and sustained form of
lasting peace, we need consolidated political will and
commitment, which should be demonstrated as quickly
as possible by ensuring that all of the parties to the
peace agreement, along with South Sudan’s leadership,
come together to address any deficiencies that might
jeopardize its implementation. We call for accelerating
that process so that it can meet its intended deadline.
Over the past two years, the Council has been
briefed by women from civil society in South Sudan
six times. We share their frustration with the pace
of reform, the unmet quotas for women’s political
participation and the high level of conflict- related
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge South Sudan

23-066699/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to ensure that civil-society organizations, including
those for women and young people, are safe and
respected and that their freedom remains unhindered.
In that context, we welcomed the holding in Juba last
month of the International Conference on Women’s
Transformational Leadership.
Malta is deeply alarmed by the security situation,
as civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence.
Three humanitarian workers have also been killed on
duty this year alone. We emphasize that humanitarian
aid workers provide essential assistance to those who
need it most, and their safety and security must be
ensured at all times. We strongly condemn all killings,
the destruction of livelihoods, the abduction of women
and children and sexual and gender-based violence, and
we call for justice and accountability in that regard. We
welcomed the creation in 2020 of the country’s first
Gender-Based Violence and Juvenile Court in an effort
to end impunity for such crimes. We also call for the
immediate implementation of the joint Action Plan for
the Armed Forces and Police on Addressing Conflictrelated Sexual Violence in South Sudan.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that many
acts of violence are committed by young people. We
welcome the ongoing efforts supported by UNMISS
aimed at fostering a transformative, cohesive social
approach to the youth of South Sudan and fostering
dialogue with them. We are very disturbed about the
possibility that as many as 77 verified grave violations
have been committed against children. We commend
UNMISS for raising awareness about child protection
and the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, for her
invaluable work in the area.
The worsening effects of climate change in
South Sudan are clear. An unprecedented four-year
period of flooding has submerged large swathes of
the country, destroying crops, displacing hundreds of
thousands of people and affecting millions, especially
women and girls. We are concerned about the fact
that the climate-induced loss and forced migration of
livestock have become major drivers of intercommunal
conflict, and we support UNMISS’s call for facilitating
dialogue and peaceful coexistence between farmers
and pastoralists. With 90 per cent of the population
dependent on climate-sensitive livelihoods and a
staggering eight of 10 states suffering from the ongoing
flooding, the South Sudanese people are acutely
vulnerable to climate- and conflict-induced food and
10/18

06/03/2023

water insecurity. We will continue to support key
European Union-funded humanitarian projects in order
to respond to the situation.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its continued support
for South Sudan and its people, and we look forward to
the renewal of the UNMISS mandate later this month.
A peaceful and prosperous future requires a committed
presence at all levels, without which the transition will
falter. By building trust and consolidating the progress
made, the people of South Sudan will be one step closer
to realizing their aspirations.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking Malta for its work as President of the
Security Council during February and congratulating
Mozambique on its assumption of the presidency for the
month of March. Brazil knows that we are in firm and
good hands. I thank Special Representative Haysom
and Acting Director Talahma for their informative
briefings and welcome the delegation of South Sudan
to this meeting. I also want to express our appreciation
for the work of all the military, police and civilian
personnel who make up the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), and especially of the troopand police-contributing countries.
Brazil is proud to be part of UNMISS, a
peacekeeping operation that has made critical
contributions to South Sudan for almost as long as the
country has been independent. We acknowledge the
significant challenges that UNMISS and particularly
South Sudan face. We have noted South Sudan’s request
to the United Nations for assistance in preparing
and conducting the 2024 elections. Considering the
considerable experience of the personnel who serve
within the United Nations, we are confident that
UNMISS will be able to provide valuable skills and
technical support that will meet the country’s logistical
needs. At the same time, we acknowledge that it is the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
and all the major South Sudanese stakeholders who
should be taking the most important steps to ensure an
environment conducive to the smooth progress of the
electoral process.
We appreciate South Sudan’s growing cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We
believe that a myriad of local South Sudanese projects,
initiatives and leaders will benefit from a deeper
connection with the PBC. The Peacebuilding Fund
already supports essential projects in the country. In
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

making use of the unique convening power that the
PBC has to offer, it will be critical for the transitional
Government and the representatives of civil society
to engage with peacebuilding principles on a larger
scale. South Sudan can count on Brazil’s support for its
increasing involvement with the PBC.
We cannot ignore the severe humanitarian crisis
that millions of South Sudanese people are facing.
We have heard those awful statistics again today, and
we call on the international community to step up its
efforts to assist the country. Food insecurity should not
be a challenge anywhere for anyone, let alone for one of
the world’s youngest populations.
We regret that South Sudan remains among the
most dangerous places to be a humanitarian worker.
We deplore the attacks that have killed humanitarian
workers in the line of duty and express our condolences
to their families and loved ones. Creating conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance is
one of the priorities of the UNMISS mandate. We expect
that pillar of the UNMISS mandate to be implemented
in safer conditions, especially if local authorities bring
to justice the perpetrators of acts against humanitarian
agents. We also hope that humanitarian agencies and
workers can soon enjoy unhindered access, within the
Nile corridor, in order to provide goods and services to
the most vulnerable people in South Sudan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): We join other colleagues
in commending the successful presidency of Malta
and congratulate Mozambique on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and Acting
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Tareq Talahma, for their insightful briefings.
Japan takes note of the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/135) on the situation in South Sudan,
which describes the progress and challenges of South
Sudan and highlights the relevance of the UNMISS
mandate. Japan would like to thank all UNMISS
personnel for their service in protecting civilians and
mitigating violence in challenging environments.
As one of the troop-contributing countries, we are
committed to continuing the deployment of UNMISS.

S/PV.9274

I would like to make the following points concerning
the long-term stability and security of South Sudan,
which is closely linked to the UNMISS mandate.
First, it remains crucial to implement the
outstanding elements of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. In particular, they should be implemented in
line with the timelines established in its road map,
as the basis for sustained peace in South Sudan. We
commend the progress made in the implementation
of a number of aspects of the Revitalized Agreement,
including the building of the necessary unified forces
and the preparations under way on key draft legislation,
in particular with respect to the constitution-making
process. We encourage the transitional Government of
South Sudan to implement the road map inclusively and
ensure the full participation of women and young people
in the process. We would like to note that freedom of
speech is one of the key ingredients to ensure that the
process can be truly successful. We also urge UNMISS
to prioritize its efforts in that regard.
On the other hand, the level of violence and the
human rights violations and abuses are matters of grave
concern, in particular the widespread availability of
arms in the country. We need to ensure that the arms
embargo in place is properly observed. We urge the
South Sudanese authorities to make further efforts to
meet the benchmarks so that the embargo can be lifted as
soon as possible. All sexual and gender-based violence
and the recruitment and use of children by armed forces
must be stopped. The South Sudanese authorities need
to take the necessary steps to combat the drivers of
conflict and insecurity. In that regard, we commend
the humanitarian players, who are doing a remarkable
job. We call on all actors to ensure full and unimpeded
humanitarian access and to protect humanitarian
workers and resources from attacks, threats and looting.
South Sudan faces complex political, security,
humanitarian and development challenges. The Council
needs to pay close attention to the effects of climate
change, food insecurity and the related displacement, to
name only a few of those challenges. Japan emphasizes
the need to adopt a cross-pillar peacebuilding
approach to address the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus, which requires partnership with a
variety of stakeholders, such as civil society, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
international partners, while ensuring full respect for
national ownership.

23-0666911/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In addition, continued efforts are important for
building effective, accountable, inclusive and resilient
institutions at all levels. It is critical for institutions
to be able to provide security for civilians and deliver
basic public services so that they can foster trust with
the authorities. For the success of the democratic
transition, the protection of civic space for every South
Sudanese citizen is also crucial. South Sudan needs
international support more than ever before. Japan
welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission’s increasing
engagement with the country, as demonstrated by the
two meetings held by the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in the past six months. Japan also thanks the
PBC for its written advice. Interaction between the
Security Council and the PBC on issues of common
interest should be further enhanced.
In conclusion, Japan stands by the Government
and the people of South Sudan in their efforts to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous nation through the
steady implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
and it strongly supports UNMISS and humanitarian
players in that regard. Japan expresses its readiness
to work constructively towards the renewal of the
UNMISS mandate.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the start of Mozambique’s presidency
of the Security Council and wish your delegation every
success. I would also like to thank Malta for leading the
Council’s work in February.
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Nicholas Haysom, and the representative
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Tareq Talahma, for their briefings. We have
taken a close look at the most recent quarterly report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan
(S/2023/135), and we also welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in
today’s meeting.
We are closely following developments in South
Sudan. In recent months, the authorities of that young
African State have made progress in implementing
their commitments under the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. The Parliament is fully operational,
and the National Human Rights Council has been
established. Several important laws have been enacted,
including a constitution-making law. Preparations for
12/18

06/03/2023

general elections to be held in December 2024 are
under way. However, it is a matter of concern that
the above-mentioned activities are lagging behind the
previously agreed timetable. We believe that the decision
to extend the transitional period until February 2025
is the right one under the current circumstances. The
road map adopted in that connection must be rigorously
implemented, and all the structures operating within
the framework of the peace agreement must be provided
with the necessary financing.
We continue to view as a priority the targeted
work of the South Sudanese authorities to form a
unified armed force of South Sudan as a guarantor for
the further advancement of the peace process and the
successful holding of the general elections planned for
the end of 2024. We note the completion of the first
phase of establishing the unified army. However, owing
to several unresolved differences, including with respect
to the deployment plan and the command structure, the
launch of the second phase remains stalled. Against the
background of a general improvement in the country’s
macroeconomic indicators, we are concerned about the
reports of continuing outbreaks of violence in some
peripheral areas of the country, localized fighting and
intercommunal armed conflicts, which lead to new
flows of refugees and displaced civilians. We firmly
condemn all violations of the peace agreement and acts
of violence against civilians, including humanitarian
workers. We note the steps taken by the Government
in response.
We commend the mediation efforts of the African
Union and the member States of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. We welcome the resumption
of work by the Community of Sant’Egidio. We note
in particular the effective work of the peacekeeping
mission, headed by Mr. Haysom. We call on all
non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement to join
the peace process.
At the end of January, the United Nations received
a request from South Sudan for assistance in holding
elections. We hope that the Blue Helmets will provide
the necessary assistance without any preconditions,
in accordance with previous decisions of the Security
Council. In general, we urge UNMISS to pay more
attention to stabilizing the security situation and
assisting the South Sudanese authorities in the timely
implementation of the peace agreement and the road
map adopted in August 2022.
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9274

In terms of the process of reaching agreement
on a draft resolution on the annual extension of the
Mission’s mandate, we believe it is important to
develop a balanced text that reflects the positions of all
members of the Council and, most important, meets the
aspirations of the South Sudanese people.

Thirdly, we reiterate our call for the South Sudanese
Government to remove all constraints on humanitarian
access and to act immediately to address the ongoing
theft of humanitarian resources. It is imperative to
ensure that safe, unimpeded help can reach the most
vulnerable, including those along the River Nile.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in congratulating Malta on its successful presidency in
February and wishing you, Sir, the best for yours in
March. My thanks also go to Special Representative
Haysom and Mr. Talahma for their briefings, as well
as to the Peacebuilding Commission for the additional
material provided. I welcome the presence of the
representative of South Sudan at our meeting today.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the South Sudanese people’s request for
peace, prosperity and democracy. The leadership must
now deliver real change to that end.

First, I would like to echo the messages delivered
by the Pope, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Moderator of the Church of Scotland during their historic
visit to South Sudan. The United Kingdom endorses
their calls to the Government of South Sudan to end
the violence and corruption and deliver basic services
for the South Sudanese people. Recent legislative steps,
such as the progress on the constitution-making process
bill and the public procurement and disposal of assets
authority, are welcome. The key is now to implement
such laws. We also call on the Government to take
immediate steps to reconstitute the Political Parties
Council and adopt the National Elections Act, among
other urgent tasks. We echo Special Representative
Haysom’s message that 2023 has to be the year in which
the South Sudanese Government delivers for its people.
Secondly, I would like to note our concerns about
the escalation of subnational conflict across South
Sudan. The church leaders were clear that the failure
to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is driving subnational conflict and humanitarian
suffering. Violence has caused significant loss of life,
displaced thousands of civilians and led to large-scale
abductions of women and children. The United
Kingdom commends the continued efforts of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
protect civilians in such challenging circumstances.
We are therefore deeply concerned about the reports
of the intimidation of United Nations peacekeepers
and UNMISS personnel by armed groups across the
country. We call on the South Sudanese authorities
to respect the status of forces agreement, and where
necessary to see that thorough investigations take place
to ensure accountability.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I would like to join my colleagues in
congratulating Malta on its successful presidency
in February and in wishing you, Sir, every success
in your presidency this month. You can count on our
full support. I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and
Mr. Tareq Talahma for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of South Sudan
in this meeting. I would like to highlight four points.
First, we recognize that progress has been achieved in
the implementation of the peace process over the course
of the past year. The launch of the constitution-making
process, the agreement on the unified command of the
armed forces and the graduation of the first batch of the
necessary unified forces are significant steps forward.
We welcome in particular the recent signing of several
equally important conventions related to human rights
and disarmament.
Secondly, it will be essential to accelerate the
implementation of the road map in order to make the
prospect of holding elections in December 2024 a
credible one. The South Sudanese authorities have
now requested assistance from the United Nations
in preparing for the elections, which is a useful
clarification. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan is mandated to provide such assistance, but as
we know, the impetus must come from the leadership.
We encourage them to earmark the necessary
budgetary resources for holding the elections, defining
their legislative and constitutional framework and
establishing the National Elections Commission and
the Political Parties Council. It is also vital to create
conditions that promote the full participation of civil
society, especially women and young people.
There is also an urgent need to stabilize the security
situation in the country, given that the electoral context
risks stoking new tensions. The priority here is to

23-0666913/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continue the integration of combatants and to properly
equip, pay and deploy those forces. Ongoing efforts
must be accelerated both to narrow the remit of the
various security forces and to reduce their numbers.
We also call on the authorities and other actors in the
region to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the violence
proliferating in several areas of South Sudan.
The end of the transition cannot be an end in
itself. The elections will restore peace and stability
in South Sudan only if they are preceded by efforts
to guarantee their legitimacy, strengthen institutions
and the rule of law and reduce violence. Any further
delay in undertaking those tasks will run the risk of
fuelling disillusionment.
Finally, we are counting on the support of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the countries of the region to bolster
the efforts of the United Nations during such a critical
time for South Sudan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by congratulating Mozambique on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for March. I am
confident that under your leadership, Sir, the work of
the Security Council this month will be a success. I also
congratulate Malta on its excellent work last month.
I thank Special Representative Haysom and Acting
Director Talahma for their briefings and welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan at today’s meeting.
This year will be a crucial one for South Sudan
as it implements the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and advances the political transition. We
welcome its enactment of key legislation, including
the constitution-making process bill, as well as the
graduation of the first batch of the necessary unified
forces and the steady progress achieved in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. We also
welcome South Sudan’s ratification of four international
conventions, including the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
which testifies to the Government’s commitment to
civil rights. These efforts are vital to improving South
Sudan’s national governance structure and to ensuring
a smooth electoral process. We encourage all parties in
South Sudan to continue to remain politically engaged
and to maintain a greater sense of urgency in the
14/18

06/03/2023

implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and the
benchmarks set out in the road map, in order to ensure
that the country is fully prepared for a smooth political
transition, including the holding of elections.
At this critical juncture, the international community
should remain patient, provide South Sudan with greater
support and encouragement, and take practical action
to assist the country in resolving any difficulties related
to the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
and the preparations for elections. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the countries of the region have played an
important role in the South Sudanese peace process.
We note that the South Sudanese Government has
submitted a request to the United Nations for electoral
assistance, and we look forward to a clearer and more
targeted electoral support programme to be agreed on
between UNMISS and the Government of South Sudan.
We also call on the international community to provide
political, technical and logistical support to the IGADsupported reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
in order to ensure their continued smooth functioning.
Recently, we have seen an escalation of violence
across many regions in South Sudan, including in
Upper Nile, Jonglei and Equatoria states. The security
and humanitarian situation there is worrisome. We call
on all the parties concerned to immediately cease the
hostilities and settle their differences through dialogue
and negotiations. The Government’s deployment of
security forces in the Nile corridor has helped to stabilize
the local situation, fully demonstrating that the country’s
security must be maintained by its Government. The
international community should focus on assisting
South Sudan in its efforts to accelerate security sector
reform, advance the deployment of the unified forces
and implement the mandate on security arrangements
pursuant to chapter II of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, among other things.
The Council’s sanctions on South Sudan have
restricted the Government’s security capacity to protect
civilians and must be lifted immediately.
UNMISS has made important contributions to
peace and stability in South Sudan. As one of the main
troop-contributing countries to UNMISS, China stands
23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ready to work with fellow troop- and police-contributing
countries to continue our unremitting efforts to advance
the peace process in South Sudan. It is worth noting that,
in recent years, some aspects of the UMMISS mandate
have expanded to an extent that clearly goes beyond the
competence of a peacekeeping mission, which could
undermine the trust between the Mission and the host
Government. We hope that the Security Council will
concentrate on the core mandates of peacekeeping
operations when discussing the draft resolution on
the renewal of the UNMISS mandate, abide by the
three principles of peacekeeping and set out realistic
arrangements in the face of the most pressing tasks in
South Sudan.
China is a steadfast supporter of the peace
process in South Sudan. We attach great importance
to addressing the economic, social and humanitarian
situation in the country. In providing assistance to
and cooperating with South Sudan, we have always
adhered to a people-oriented approach and set great
store in livelihood-related projects that benefit the local
people. We have just signed a new round of agreements
with South Sudan on a number of well-drilling and
water-supply projects, which we expect will provide
improved water-supply facilities for local residents,
leading to a better quality of life and increased
agricultural production.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by joining
others in congratulating Malta on its successful
presidency of the Security Council in February and by
wishing you, Mr. President, all the best in the month
of March.
Returning to the topic of discussion, I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom and
Mr. Talahma for their updates. My thanks also go to the
Peacebuilding Commission for its information. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
As we heard, the situation in South Sudan remains
complex and is challenged by humanitarian needs,
insecurity, climate change and forced displacement. I
will briefly touch on those issues.
First, the timely implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and the road map remains
crucial during the extension of the transition period. It
is therefore imperative that South Sudan leaders respect
the Agreement, signed with all parties, and redouble

S/PV.9274

their efforts to implement the outstanding benchmarks,
which are long overdue. The Government’s request for
assistance from the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) for the preparation of elections is
welcome, but the parties must create conditions that
are conducive to inclusive and credible elections, with
broad political consensus and the inclusion of women,
young people and civil society.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
security situation and the increased subnational
violence, which have provoked the displacement of
thousands of civilians, and we urge the Government
to guarantee unhindered access for UNMISS. The
alarming increase of conflict-related sexual violence
and the large-scale abductions of women and children
clearly indicate a need for the protection of civilians
to remain a key priority for the Government and the
Mission. Albania strongly condemns the violence and
calls on the Government to take all action necessary
to tackle human rights violations and hold the
perpetrators to account. We welcome the Government’s
deployment of troops to de-escalate tensions. However,
further efforts must be taken to prevent an escalation
of violence and enhance the protection of women and
girls, including by making gains on implementing the
security arrangements by initiating the second phase of
the process and deploying the necessary unified forces,
with adequate budgetary and logistical support.
Thirdly, approximately 9.4 million people will
require humanitarian or protection needs this year,
while at the same time struggling with climate-induced
insecurity — that is alarming for a population of
11.5 million people. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to fulfil its responsibilities, respond
to the situation and ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian workers as they deliver on those
critical needs.
In conclusion, as South Sudan prepares to hold
elections, it is clear that much more work lies ahead to
ensure the holding of free, fair and credible elections.
We look forward to continuing engagement with the
Council to ensure that UNMISS is provided with a
robust mandate in order to respond to the challenges
it faces and ensure the critical protection of civilians.
Albania reaffirms its support for the people of South
Sudan in their efforts to find lasting peace and develop
their country.

23-0666915/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
(spoke in French)
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and my country,
Mozambique.
The A3 commends the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the most recent developments
on the ground in South Sudan (S/2023/135). We thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), and Mr. Tareq
Talahma, Acting Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings on
the situation on the ground. We also welcome the
participation of our brother, His Excellency Mr. Akuei
Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative of South
Sudan, in today’s meeting.

06/03/2023

Commission, in enhancing awareness of the road map
and the Revitalized Agreement for peace and political
stability in South Sudan.
The A3 welcomes and is deeply encouraged by
President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s appeal to the people of
South Sudan to refrain from engaging in violent actions
and embrace joint synergies to overcome the country’s
challenges. We very much welcome the adoption of
relevant legislation on the Transitional Constitution
and of bills establishing the National Police Service Act
and National Prison Service Act. We believe that those
important tools will not only consolidate peace and
State institutions but will also pave the way for further
accelerating steps towards political stability, as well as
tackling localized conflicts within communities.

The A3 wishes to reiterate its solidarity with the
people of South Sudan, whose patience and resilience
have been tested and overstretched by political
uncertainty, conflict and economic hardship. We
remain fully cognizant of their sobering history and
unrelenting quest to overcome the formidable security,
political and socioeconomic challenges they face. In
that regard, our statement will focus on four issues:
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan; the transitional security arrangements; the
humanitarian and economic situation; and the activities
of UNMISS.

Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique firmly believe
that political stability in South Sudan is urgently
needed. In that regard, the A3 expresses concern
about the deterioration of the current security situation
in the country, as it will not contribute to the aim of
consolidating the national reconciliation process but
will rather only aggravate the current economic and
humanitarian challenges confronting South Sudan,
the youngest in our community of nations. In that
regard, the A3 would like to take this opportunity to
urge the South Sudanese people to remain committed
to the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
We encourage the political actors to continue showing
leadership and patriotism. They must build on the
benefits of Pope Francis’s visit to the country from
3 to 5 February, which was aimed at reviving the peace
process. We also commend the statements made by the
international partners of South Sudan calling for the
parties’ greater engagement in ending the conflict and
restoring peace.

On the political front, we take note of the
important progress made by the Government and the
people of South Sudan in their efforts to consolidate
the State-building process since the country became
independent on 9 July 2011. In recognizing those
efforts, the A3 is cognizant of the complexities resulting
from the process and commends the Government’s
determination to maintain the Revitalized Agreement.
In that context, the A3 welcomes the role played by the
trilateral task force, composed of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation

On the humanitarian track, the A3 underlines that
South Sudan is facing the worst humanitarian crisis
since its independence. Among other factors, the
situation is the result of intercommunal clashes and
the effects of climate change, particularly four years
of unprecedented floods, which have caused massive
displacements and crop destruction. The extreme
weather conditions are wearing down the resilience
of the displaced communities, which have been hit
by repeated disasters. We reiterate that the Horn of
Africa is bearing the brunt of the consequences of
climate change. In our view, South Sudan is a perfect

(spoke in English)

16/18

23-06669

06/03/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

illustration of the link between security issues and
climate change. We therefore call for the enhanced
support of the international community.
We commend the efforts of humanitarian workers,
especially those working under enormous challenges
to bring relief to women, children and other internally
displaced people. We therefore strongly condemn
attacks on humanitarian workers. We welcome their
commitment, despite the security situation in South
Sudan, and call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and allow unhindered access
for humanitarian organizations. Gabon, Ghana
and Mozambique welcome all initiatives from the
various sources willing to provide assistance to the
people affected, and we urge the competent South
Sudanese authorities to maintain their commitment by
collaborating with humanitarian workers and securing
their working environment.
The A3 believes that the effective implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement is a crucial pathway to
lasting peace in South Sudan. Most important, the
root causes of conflict should be addressed. As the
most vulnerable groups in societies facing protracted
conflict, women and young people should be a focus of
the decision-making process. From the A3’s perspective,
addressing the need to include young people and women
in the peace processes would yield the desired results
and improve the cohesion among communities, owing
to their influential role in those communities, which can
contribute to strengthening the collective responsibility
to preserve peace. In that context, the A3 encourages
the Government and political and civil-society leaders
to promote their participation and build consensus
in order to better achieve full implementation of the
agreed benchmarks in the political process.
The A3 believes that sustaining the peace process
requires paying attention to critical issues. In that
connection, we would like to draw the Council’s attention
to and express serious concern about the limitations
and technical, financial and resource challenges facing
South Sudan. In a difficult economic context, the
financial support of the international community is
crucial to the effective implementation of the road map
and the Revitalized Agreement. The continued support
of the international community will allow South Sudan
to carry out the implementation of pending initiatives

S/PV.9274

related to the creation of the command-and-control
structure of the army, redeployment and logistics, and
for the country to adequately address the challenges
and root causes of the conflict.
The A3 values the training of the necessary unified
forces for phase I, which involved about 50,000 trainees.
We hope that the process will move to phase II with
financial support from the international community.
The A3 once again calls on the South Sudanese
parties and the Government to commit the necessary
political capital and resources, which they can harness
internally, to expediting the implementation of all pending
tasks within the agreed timelines. The implementation
process must continue to fully represent the spectrum
of all South Sudanese populations including all regions
of the country, political affiliations, and women, youth
and civil society.
Before we conclude, the A3 wishes to convey its
deep appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing
countries and to UNMISS for their work in South Sudan.
(spoke in French)
We encourage UNMISS to continue to engage in
the coordination and implementation of the partnership
with all relevant actors, such as the African Union,
IGAD, the European Union and the troika — the United
States, the United Kingdom and Norway — in support
of the Government and the people of South Sudan for
a lasting peace. Accordingly, we strongly hope that
we, the members of the Security Council, will be able
during the negotiations on the renewal of the UNMISS
mandate to agree on ways to support the strengthening
of South Sudan’s logistical, material, financial
and judicial capacities for the enhanced protection
of civilians.
(spoke in English)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for winning the trust of the continent to serve for the
next two years on the Security Council and for your
presidency of the Council during this month of March.
My delegation stands ready to work closely with you,
Sir, and to offer its support to you and your team. In
addition, allow me to take this opportunity to sincerely

23-0666917/18

S/PV.9274

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

thank the outgoing delegations of Kenya and India
for the support and valuable advice they offered my
country and our mission over the last two years when
they were serving on the Council. We will be forever
grateful for the friendship they have extended to the
people of South Sudan.
My delegation would like to welcome the briefers
before us today. In particular, my delegation appreciates
the presence of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom and his delegation, as well as
Mr. Talahma from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 2625 (2022) (S/2023/135).
As we stressed in our previous statement to the
Council (see S/PV.9219), it is imperative to note that
climate change has resulted in severe implications
for many South Sudanese, with livelihoods gravely
affected. The nation is currently grappling with an
unprecedented combination of floods and droughts, the
devastation of fields of crops and of animal husbandry
in rural areas. Without prompt action from both the
Government and the global community in the coming

18/18

06/03/2023

months, some regions may face a famine crisis. The
indicators show that impending starvation is already
visible across the countryside.
Allow me now to address what I would call the
elephant in the room. The 24-month extension of the
transition period began 10 days ago, marking a new
chapter in South Sudan’s journey towards lasting peace
and stability. However, recent reports indicate that
differences have emerged between the signatories of
the peace agreement with regard to changes made to
the Ministries for Defence and Interior. While this is a
concerning development, we believe that it is important
to address these issues early on so that the signatories
of the agreement are prevented from escalating their
differences. We therefore call upon our regional and
international partners to step in and help find a swift
resolution. We remain hopeful that South Sudan can
move forward towards a brighter future and build
upon the progress already made towards achieving
lasting peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-06669
