S/2006/1042

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 December 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 28 December 2006 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 1725 (2006), I hereby
submit my first report to the Security Council on the implementation of the mandate
of a Peacekeeping Mission of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
Somalia (IGASOM). As you will recall, the above-mentioned resolution requested
me to report, in consultation with the Commission of the African Union (AU) and
the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), to the
Council on the implementation of the IGASOM mandate within 30 days, and every
60 days thereafter.
To that end, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Ibrahim Gambari
wrote to the Chairman of the AU Commission, Alpha Oumar Konaré, and the
Executive Secretary of IGAD, Attala Bashir, on 14 December 2006 to draw their
attention to the reporting obligation specified in resolution 1725 (2006).
Mr. Gambari requested the two organizations to provide my Special Representative
for Somalia, François Lonseny Fall, with all relevant information on the
implementation of the IGASOM mandate as soon as possible to enable him to put
together the elements of the reports requested by the Council, in accordance with the
time frame set out in paragraph 7 of the resolution.
Pending receipt of the requested information from the AU Commission and the
IGAD secretariat, my Special Representative has been consulting informally with
officials from both organizations on the issue of the implementation of the IGASOM
mandate. From those consultations, it appears that, while Uganda and the Sudan had
initially indicated their willingness to provide the first two battalions for IGASOM,
the Sudan has recently voiced its opposition to the intervention of foreign troops in
Somalia, while Uganda has expressed reluctance to deploy its troops in Somalia in
the absence of a secure environment. From the information currently at our disposal,
no other troop-contributing countries for IGASOM have been identified at this
point. We also have no information at this stage on whether the necessary financial
resources and logistical support have been secured for the deployment of IGASOM.
My Special Representative intends to make further contacts with AU and
IGAD in order to provide the Council with all relevant information on the
implementation of the IGASOM mandate in accordance with resolution 1725
(2006). I Invite the AU Commission and the IGAD secretariat to provide him with
their fullest cooperation in this regard.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan
07-20031 (E) 020107

*0720031*
