rd

MEE’ TING: 7 JANI JARY 1982
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2323)

. ... ,. ... .. ... .. .. .. ..,. .. .... . ... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(cl) Resolution 497 (1981);
(17) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV 02323

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ +. .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplemcrzts of the QjJcniul Rec.ords of the Security Counbl. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisiom of the Sem*ity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2323rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Prcsident:Mr.
Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2323)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/14821)

7 January

1982, at 3.30 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interprciotion
,fiorn Russim):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Bangladesh,
the German
Democl-dtic Republic, India, the Libynn Arab Jamahiriya, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the Sudan in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives
to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT
(irztop~Ptrrtiolz
.fiwn
Rmsian): The first speaker is the representative
of DemoThe situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(6) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

cratic Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(intcJrprctc/tion
fiwn
Rus.sirrn): In accordance with decisions taken at the
2322nd meeting, I invite the representative of Israel
and the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to take places at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Morocco, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the CounciI
chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber,

4. Mr. ASHTAL
(Democratic
Yemen): Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to address the Council
under your eminent and distinguished
leadership. We
salute you as a refined and tactful diplomat hailing
from the Soviet Union, a friendly country whose
support for the just Arab cause has been both consistent and firm. We are bound together in our common struggle for genuine peace and progress. To YOUI
predecessor, Mr. Otunnu, I pay a special tribute fol
his outstanding performance last month. Thanks to his
prudence and wisdom, we now have a new SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Javier PCrez de CuCllar, to whom I am
happy to extend a warm welcome and sincere wishes
for a successful tenure of office.
5. The Council has before it an unequivocal
case.
In many ways it is faced with a challenge and a severe
test-a challenge to its authority and a test of its
credibility.
6. On 14 December 1981, the Israeli Government
committed
yet another act of aggression. In a swift
move, it annexed the occupied Syrian Golan Heights
by imposing there its laws, jurisdiction
and administration. Three days later the Security Council unani-

mously adopted resolution 497 ( 198 11, condemning
the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights and declaring it null and void and without international
legal
effect. The Council also demanded that Israel immediately rescind its decision. Not surprisingly,
the
Israeli reply was abrupt. “Israel cannot and does not
accept the resolution”, Mr. Blum said [2S/Yfh /~~~~~~fi~~~,
prrtr.

371.

On 29 December, Israel addressed a note to the
Secretary-General seeking to justify its annexation of
the Golan Heights on the grounds that, infer rrlirr,
“Syria has regarded itself as being in a state of war
with Israel” [S//4821, ptrrcl. 31 and that Israeli legislation in the Golan Heights sought to normalize the
situation in the area. As to the demand of the Council
that Israel should rescind forthwith its illegal decision,
the letter only expressed regret that the Council should
have adopted a resolution that ignored the background
of the situation.
7.

I I, Yes, Israel is not a “vassal Stntc”, nor is it ;I
Israel is virtually il SUpt?l--StilttJ
“banana republic”:
in the American Republic. In terms of power and
influence, it has more leverage in Washington than
any number of States put together. It is more privileged
than any state in the Union, for it neither pays taxes
to the Federal Government nor repays the American
taxpayer. to whom it owes its very existence. To the
chagrin of American generals, Israel is provided with
the most sophisticated
weapons system, while they
patiently wait in line. To say that Israel is spoilt by the
United States is an understatement. Israel is literally
the political and strategic extension of the United
States in our region: it serves an American purpose
in the Middle East.
12. Apart from the usurpation of Palestine and the
colonization
of its people, the continuing aggression
against Lebanon and Syria and the threat lsl-ael poses
to other Arab countries, Israel is assigned a new
strategic role: to keep the Middle East in a state of
tension and turmoil.
Such a situation would enable
the United States and its allies to increase their military presence in the Arabian Gulf and around the vital
oil fields under the pretext of defending them. It is
interesting to note the correlation between the sharp
increase in Israeli acts of terrorism and aggression last
year and the build-up of United States naval power
in the Arabian Gulf.

8. What arrogance and what contempt for the Security Council and the international community at large.
First, Israel illegally annexed the Golan Heights;
then it refused to abide by the unanimous decision of
the Council that Israel rescind its annexationist legislation. To add insult to injury, Israel offered baseless
arguments which, if taken seriously, would be tantamount to justifying the Israeli annexation of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. Not only that, but since
Israel is technically in a state of war with the Arab
countries, it can claim to have a right to annex any
Arab territory in order to normalize the situation in
the area.

13. The brutal Israeli raid on Beirut and the bombardment of the Iraqi nuclear installation were immediately
followed by American military manoeuvres and WBI
games in the Middle East. The Israeli annexation of
the Golan Heights might be a harbinger of more American military involvement in our region.

9. It is obvious that the Israeli arguments are frivo.lous. They should be dismissed as legal absurdities
intended to rebuff the Council and undermine
its
authority. Israel acted like a bandit who, having
committed armed robbery and snatched his victim’s
wallet, laid claim to it because the lawful owner could
not retrieve it in time. In the United States such a
bandit would be brought to justice, but in the Council
the bandit is let loose, because the United States will
shield the bandit. That is the significance of the United
States promise to the Israeli Ambassador in Washington, a promise to stop the Council from taking
any punitive action against Israel under Article 41 of
the Charter of the United Nations,

14. Should we then expect the United States to vote
for a draft resolution that would impose sanctions on
Israel, within the purview of Article 41 of the Charter?
The answer is obvious: no such draft resolution will
pass, and Israel will not rescind its decision on the
Golan Heights unless it is forced to do so. The Arab
world will once again have to face the Israeli challenge,
and the Arab friends of the United States will have to
reassess their relations with it.
15. In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of
Arab States for this month, let me declare that all the
Arab States, without exception, stand firmly in support of Syria, as well as its demand that the Security
Council apply sanctions to Israel in order to force it
to rescind its decision to annex the Golan Heights.

10. In fact, Israel behaves as if it had a veto powel;
over the United States veto power in the Security
Council, Israel knows only too well that it cannot
withstand international military, economic and diplomatic sanctions imposed by the Council. But it is also
aware that the United States will never allow such
sanctions to be imposed. The United States not only is
committed to safeguarding Israeli security, as defined
by Israel, but is bound to defend Israel’s policies and
even to put up with the political whims of its leaders.
Little wonder that Israel pays little respect to this body.

16. The YRESIDENT
(intoprefation
jhtn
Russit/n): The next speaker is the representative of Sri
Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
17. Mr. DE SILVA (Sri Lanka): Allow me to extend
to you, Sir, my delegation’s congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
2

month of January. The Council is fortunate in having
your valuable experience, your guidance and, not least
of all, your genial disposition to advance its work in
this first month of the new year.

19. I would also extend to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Pirez de Cuillar, who has just assumed his
duties, our felicitations and warmest good wishes fol
success in the tasks that lie ahead, When he was
called to assume the burdens of his office, the Organization and its Member States had already recognized
his worth and his labours, both on behalf of’ his country and in the service of the Organization itself,

23. What my delegation finds rather curious is the
description of the situation in the Golan Heights as
and hence Israel’s decision to install a
“anomalous”
civil administration. There was no anomalous situation
in the Golan Heights, nor were the Golan Heights 01
their inhabitants placed in limbo, as the Israeli representative’s letter claims. The Syrian Golan Heights
remain exactly where they have always been, though
the vast majority of the Syrian citizens have been
compelled to seek-if not intimidated into seekingrefuge beyond the cease-fire lines in Syrian territory.
Since 1967 Israel has unabashedly exploited the plea
of security and of secure boundaries to install settlements which have been, and are, no more than a
prelude to annexation. What Israel has done in the
Golan Heights is what it did in East Jerusalem and
continues to do in the occupied West Bank. The
present Government of Israel has pursued that policy
with a bravado that, to say the least, is an embarrassment to Israel’s most durable friends.

20. The Council meets as a sequel to its resolution
497 (1981) which it adopted following the Syrian Arab
Republic’s complaint over Israel’s decision to impose
its laws, jurisdiction and administration
in the occupied
Golan Heights [S/1479/]. With an unusual demonstration of unanimity in an area which is the frequent
subject of deliberation both in the Security Council
and in the General Assembly, the Council, in that
resolution, categorically
demanded that Israel, the
occupying Power, rescind forthwith its decision to
annex the Golan Heights and decided that Israel’s
decision was null and void and without international
legal effect.

24. Let me briefly recount the Jerusalem story. First,,
there was the holding of a military parade. The Security Council adopted resolution 250 (1968) ignored by
Israel. It then adopted resolution 25 1 (1968), deploring
the holding of the parade. Then came resolutions
252 (1968), 267 (1969) and 298 (1971), all of which
either censured or deplored Israel’s legislative and
administrative
measures and declared or confirmed
them as invalid, Israel just went ahead regardless. The
Security Council and the international
community
notwithstanding,
Israel functions from a Jerusalem
which it has proclaimed as its undivided and eternal
capital.

18. May I also express our appreciation of the services of your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu of
Uganda, who presided over the Council’s deliberations in December. I need hardly say more than that
what he was able to accomplish has been widely
acclaimed.

25. At least in resolution 497 (1981), the Council
decided that in the event of non-compliance it would
consider taking appropriate measures in accordance
with the Charter. In General Assembly resolution
36/226 B, the Security Council was requested to invoke
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, which
provides a range of remedies. It is now for the Council,
which is aware of the outcome of previous resolutions addressed to Israel in similar situations, to
determine how best it could compel a defaulting and
defiant Member State to heed the authority of the
Council. A conclusion that is limited to deploring or
condemning Israel will have the predictable result of
Israel’s again profiting from its policy of presenting
a,fi/it cwotnpli. My delegation would like to share the
expectation of the several members who have spoken
before us that at least on this occasion the Council
will discharge its r&ponsibilities
and ensure compliance with its own decisions so that its authority
will not be casually dismissed.

21. The adoption of resolution 497 (1981) was acclaimed as evidence that the Council had made an
unambiguous decision to call a halt to the continuing
Israeli aggrandizement
through its occupation of
neighbouring
territories
by force. My delegation
refrained from coming before the Council when it was
considering that resolution because we had expressed
our views quite clearly when we co-sponsored
GenFral Assembly resolution 36/226 B, which was
overwhelmingly adopted on 16 December.
22. The Council is now meeting again, in pursuance
of paragraph 4 of resolution 497 (1981), to considel
taking appropriate measures in the event of Israel’s
non-compliance with the Council resolution. That noncompliance was heralded by a vituperative outburst
by the Israeli leadership directed at Israel’s allies and
friends, among others. It has now been conveyed in
the note addressed on 29 December from the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General [S//482/,
pa,rr. 31 and repeated in his statement to the Council
yesterday [2322nd jneeting]. Israel’s reply is a recital
of a garnished record of 30 years in the history of the
Middle East problem, including a holier-than-thou
reference to Article 2, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
which speaks of fulfilling in good faith the obligations
assumed by Members in accordance with the Charter,

26. The PRESIDENT
(inte~plPt(rtion~~o,n Rnssirrn):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure at the 2322nd meeting.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
3

body. Thus, clearly, Israel’s response is Israel’s
indictment.
It provides sufficient reason to condemn
and penalize Israel.

27. Mr. MAKSOUD:
MI. President, I should like
to express to you and, through you, to the members
of the Council the appreciation of the League of Arab
States for allowing us to address the Council on an
issue the gravity of which cannot be overstated. Ii is
regrettable that the year 1982 has to start with the
Council meeting to discuss Israel’s non-compliance
with a previous Security Council resolution.

34. Yet, there are some-in decreasing but still effective numbers-in
the United States who see in the
Israeli response, believe it or not, some *‘positive”
points. You, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council will undoubtedly
agree that it takes a large
degree of intellectual audacity to come to such a mindboggling conclusion.

28. Perhaps the term “non-compliance“
inadequately describes the contemptuous and arrogant
nature of Israel’s rejection of Council resolution 497
(1981).

35. To begin with, the response is wholly extraneous
to what the Council, in resolution 497 (1981), asked
Israel to do. The Council declared Israel’s imposition
of its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
on the
Golan Heights to be “null and void”. The Council
demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, should
rescind its decision forthwith. The Israeli answer is a
brazen and categoric refusal to comply. On the contrary, Israel, as the report clearly shows, sought to
justify the so-called Golan Heights Law. Not only
did Israel seek to deflect attention from the core issue
which led the Council to adopt its resolution 497 (1981),
but it also sought to ignore the resolution, re.ject its
demand and refuse its admonition.
All this obviously
constitutes non-compliance
in its most glaring manifestation.

29. I wonder what this augurs for the future of the
United Nations. Still, Israel’s non-compliance should
not be allowed to determine the mood of the future
and the credibility of the Organization. On the contrary, it is perhaps a timely reminder for all of us who
are in one way or another engaged in the constructive
work of the Organization to renew our commitment
to its ideals and objectives by ensuring the implementation of its resolutions, the applicability of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
reinforcement of its moral, political and diplomatic
authority.
30. Sir, it is from this standpoint that we view yotu
presidency with high expectations. The maturity you
have constantly exhibited in your diplomatic performance, the friendliness you have demonstrated and
the soundness of your judgement reflect not only the
traditional wisdom that is abundant in the history of
your great country but also a keen awareness of the
responsibilities that all of us-particularly
the superPowers-have towards peace, progress and justice.
I should also like to say how much the League of
Arab States and the Arab Member States appreciate
the sustained understanding and support your country,
the Soviet Union, has given to Arab causes-support
which has been functional and consistent.

36. It is needless to point out that Israel instantly
upon the adoption of resolution 497 (1981) informed the
world of its determination
not to comply, and it did
so in the most emphatic terms, when Mr. Begin “lectured” United States Ambassador Lewis in the most
insulting language to be recorded in the annals of
modern diplomacy, thus reminding the world that the
Hitlerite vocabulary is yet with us-and I shall return
to this aspect later.
37. In view of Israel’s non-compliance,
the Council’s anticipation
of the Israeli response was wise,
logical and justified.
Paragraph 4 of resolution 497
(1981) states:

3 1. I wish to point out, too, that the former President
of the Council, Mr. Otunnu, has proved a new theory:
that youth and statesmanship are not necessarily
contradictions in terms.

“the Council would meet urgently, and not later than
5 January 1982, to consider taking appropriate
measures in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.”

32. The Council is meeting for the first time this year
as the new Secretary-General, Mr, PCrez de Cu&llar,
assumes his duties, which entail articulating the world’s
conscience, besides eliciting and expressing world
consensus. It is clear that our people have a stake in
the growing capacity of the SecretarT/-General to
succeed in those ennobling endeavours,

38. The need to take appropriate measures follows
naturally when a determination
of non-compliance
is
ascertained. The issue is: What constitutes “appropriate measures”?
What defines the measures is
inevitably the nature, extent and level of non-compliance. In this case, Israel’s non-compliance is unmistakable, total and categoric. Hence the extent is
sweeping, the level of rejection is the highest and its
nature is one of utter contempt, defiance and a clear
intent to pursue the implementation
of that which the
Council has decided to be null and void. Inasmuch as
this description is considered by the world community as objective and conclusive, there is no way of

33. The report of the Secretary-General submitted
to the Council on 31 December 1981 in document
S/14821 speaks for itself. It is not a detailed analysis
of obvious non-compliance
by Israel with the provisions Of Council resolution 497 (1981). The Israeli
response is allowed in effect to constitute the report,
and judgement has therefore been deferred to this
4

.

avoiding a determination that Israel’s non-compliance
is lawless and reckless and that the administration
Israel is imposing in the Golan Heights is a direct
challenge to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, a violation of international law, a defiance of United Nations
resolutions, a threat to peace and a clear act of aggression. In other words, the act of legislative piracy which
the so-called Golan Heights Law constitutes is a
further attempt on the part of Israel to establish in the
Syrian Arab territory of the Golan Heights counterfeit
legalism to offset and defuse the thrust of international legitimacy and of the Security Council resolution.

“1 Israeli encroachments
were], of course, part
of a premeditated Israeli policy to edge east through
the demilitarized
zone towards the old Palestine
border [with Syria] and to get all the Arabs out of
the way by fair means or foul. In fact, the Israelis
never observed the rules of the Armistice Agreement, which allowed only limited numbers of locally
recruited civilian police in the demilitarized
zone.
Instead, a patrol from the border police of the State
of Israel would arrive, usually in an armoured
vehicle . . . It was hardly surprising that the Arab
farniers should feel . . . threatened . , . [The farmers] drew strength from the knowledge that [their]
activities were watched by [Syrian gunners on the
Golan Heights]. It [was] unlikely that the [Syrian
guns] would ever [have] come into action had it not
been for Israeli provocation.”

39. Even if one is to make an analysis of the content
of Israel’s response as included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, one finds that the audacity with
which Israel distorts facts, falsifies history, asserts
proven lies is unbelievable. The Israeli policy in this
field is again reminiscent of Goebbels’ big-lie doctrine:
when you want to obscure the truth, repeat the big
lie. Israel has repeated the big lie concerning the
Golan Heights prior to its 1967 aggression so often
that the lie is no longer even challenged.

43. Israel attempts to justify its annexation of Syrian
territory by claiming that Syria has repeatedly rejected
Israeli offers to negotiate peace. The question here
is: What sort of peace and negotiations, in what conditions? Under duress, coercion and occupation. Is it
not obvious that ever since its creation Israel’s every
action and policy has been aimed at undermining
peace and preventing negotiations?

40. I should like to refer briefly to the truth about
the Golan Heights, as has been done previously by
my colleague, the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic [ibid.], and its role prior to the 1967 war.
Israel alleges that before that war Syrian guns frequently shelled “without provocation”
Israeli farm
settlements in the Hula plains below [ihid., pcrrvr. 1&l].

44. Israel has not even defined its borders. It keeps
expanding in every direction and hints broadly that its
appetite may require even more territory that it has
already seized. And it has carried out its nefarious
designs against its neighbour secure in the knowledge
that it en.joys unlimited support and protection from its
ally the United States. Yet we have recently witnessed
the gratitude Israel feels for that support and protection in the form of Begin’s astonishing and insulting
diatribe against the United States because it dared to
show its displeasure at his reckless behaviour and
policies.

41. What is the reality? Israel claimed sovereignty
over the entire demilitarized
zone designated by the
1949 Armistice Agreement.’ Not only Syria, but also
the United Nations and particularly the United States
rejected Israel’s claim to that zone and held that
Israel had no right to fortify it with military personnel
and equipment. In summarizing the situation, General
Burns, the former head of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO), wrote:

45. Begin complained that the United States had
taken punitive measures against Israel for its bombing
of Iraq’s peaceful nuclear installations-an
act of
pure aggression against a target hundreds of miles
away from Israel. He moaned that the United States
had admonished
him for destroying the centre of
Beirut, the Lebanese capital, and killing hundreds of
innocent civilians, among them many children. He
raged against the suspension by the United States of
the so-called strategic co-operation agreement with
Israel in the wake of his annexation of the Syrian Arab
territory of the Golan Heights. And he warned that
Israel was not to be treated by the United States as
either a “vassal State” or a “banana republic” [,sc~c
prrra. II &wfJ~.

,‘:Briefly stripped, so far as possible, of technicallties, the question at issue may be put thus: The
Israelis claimed sovereignty over the . . . zone.
They then proceeded, as opportunity
offered, to
encroach on the specific restrictions, and so eventually to free themselves, on various pretexts, from
all of them , , . The Israelis in fact exercised almost
complete control over the major portion of the . . .
zone through their frontier police . . . This was directly contrary to article V of the General Armistice Agreement and the ‘authoritative
interpretation’ of it . . .”
How reminiscent of the procedures constantly followed
by Israel in the West Bank and other places.

46. What is it, one should ask, that makes the United
States so paralysed in the face of Israel’s diplomatic,
political and intellectual terrorism? Why does a superPower seem at times so helpless to curb the intransigence, lawlessness, recklessness and aggression of
an obvious dependant?

42. Furthermore,
Major General van Horn of
Sweden, also a former UNTSO Chief of Staff, concluded:
5

and
again
the
United States WlIlIId
he oPenillS
the door to the kind of chaos thut it has ~tlw~1)‘s Ct>I1demned and abhorred.
again

47. ~~~~~~~~in the past few weeks show, that the
[Jnitcd

Stittes

is

fl()t

:lVerSe

to

imposing

sanct’o’ls

when

it l,clieves that its own standards of behaviour and its
t,wn intel’ehta hilve been undermined. An! Yet Israel
repeiitedly violates the concepts the UnIted States
sti,ntls for and unquestionably harms Amer*can Interest+ without fei\r of effective United States retribution.
Why is the great American Republic such a Prisonel
of in&ci\i()n when it comes to Israel’?

We believe that 21great deal is iIt stake 25 the
Council deliberates on what course to fl)llow. What is
involved is not just the illegal act of annexing the li\Ild
of a sovereign Arab State but also the principles t?f
international law, the sanctity of international
C~ttventions, the respect due to codes of behaviour amone:
nations, the reputation of the United States as a principled protector of world peace and security ilnd, l:lst
of thy’
but by no means least, the very credibility
United Nations and especially of the Security Council.
54,

48, The United States fails in its clear responsitowards the maintenance of world Peace and
3ecurity when it pampers an aggressive Israel, an
expanding Israel, an annexationist Israel. It abdicates
its duty i,s ii major Power when it succumbs to obvious
I\r;leli bliickmail and insults; and it detracts from its
htilture in the eyes of the world when it Permits Israel
not onlY to defy the international community but also
to ignore. with untold harmful consequences, Americ;;** own national interests and global responsibilities.
bility

55. It is imperative that the international
commttnity should come to consider Israel’s behnviour ;I
major threat to peace in the Middle East. Thut is ;I
fact that no Israeli lies can obscure any more. We in
the League of Arab States and in the Arab worl<l
fervently hope that the members of the Council clearly
see, as we do, that their duty-in fact the only courst’
left open-is to impose the sanctions that would make
Israel understand that the world’s putiencc with if\
depredations has run out.

41). The history of the United States proves conclusively that it has hardly ever accepted from others
even ii fraction of the abuse that Begin heaped on the
1Jnittxj States Government and its leaders in his outhurat$. We are astonished that instead of engaging in
firm diplomatic retaliation, the United States appears
trilumatized hy Israel’s brazen assault and even eager
to plitcitte the aggressor.

56. The PRESIDENT firrtL’r’pt.Pttrtic)t?Ji.l)tll Ntrssiurr):
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a place at the Council tnble and
to make his statement.

50. We welcomed the United States action in suspending its strategic co-operation accord with Israel.
WC considered it a punitive step, but hoped that it
would not be a terminal one: that other, more effective mea~urcs, more inhibiting measures, more deterrent measures would be taken when Israel refused to
comply with Security Council and United States
admonitions and demands. Moreover, the United
Stiltejjoined last month with the other members ofthe
%Xurity Council in laying the groundwork for “appro..
pri:ite measures” to be taken against Israel in case of
non-compliance.

57. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): At the outset, Sir.
let me express felicitations on your assumption of the
office of President of the Council for the current
month. We are confident that the deliberations of the
Council will be successfully steered under your ublc
and effective guidance.
58. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
convey my profound appreciation to Mr. Otunnu of
Uganda for his innovative and far-sighted leadership
in solving some of the most crucial problems facing
the Council and the United Nations during the month
of December.

51. The time for such measures has arrived, since
I$rilel hits utterly refused to rescind its effective annexation of the Syrian Arab territory of the Golan
Heights. The United States and other members of the
(.‘ouncil now face the task of defining the means to
cumpcl Israel to comply.

59. It gives us immense satisfaction to express our
warmest greetings and heartfelt congratulations
to
Mr. Javier PCrez de CuCllar on his election as Secretary-General. His experience in diplomacy and his
active involvement in complex negotiations on international crisis situations lend him a unique position
to head the world body. We wish him success in his
new responsibility.

Jjut hOW can any measure be “appropriate”
and
thcrcforc. effective when the United States signals td
the world that it intends to prevent the imposition
of banctil)nS against its pampered
prodgi-a
sort
of
21.

Prc‘-t‘Illph%

diplvmatic

strike’?

60. The Council is again seized of a crisis threatening
international peace and security arising out of Israeli
aggression on Arab territories. The annexation of the
Golan Heights by an act of the Israeli Parliament
in
utter Violation of international law and the GenkVa
Conventions of 1949, is yet another example of the
callous disregard with which Israel has treated international opinion.

53. Jt i* no exaggeration to say that in Once again
shielding Israel from the consequences
of its illegal
actions, the United States risks creating an atmosphere Of international anarchy. It is sanctioning, in
effect, the historically condemned practice ofacquiring
territory by force. In other words, by protecting Israel
6

61. It is the bounden duty and solemn obligation of
all Member States to uphold and honour the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The world
community cannot come to terms with the idea that
Israel can afford to be a singular exception, Here is
yet another clear example of blatant disregard by a
Member State not only of the wishes of the vast majority of the Members of the United Nations but also of
the international obligations and duties enjoined by the
Charter. No words of condemnation
can be strong
enough to denounce the illegal move by Israel to annex
Syrian territory in the Golan Heights.

hers of the Council and in fact all Members of the
United Nations in demanding that Israel should rescind its decision forthwith and continue to apply to
the Syrian Golan Heights the provisions of the Geneva
Convention
relative to the Protection
of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of I2 August 1949.’
67. Bangladesh has always favoured the settlement
of the Middle East problem in conformity with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principles
of the Charter. We reaffirm our belief that there can
be no comprehensive,
lasting and just peace in the
Middle East without adherence to the recognized principles of international
law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. Appropriate
action
must be taken to ensure that Israel desists from
extending its laws to the illegally occupied Syrian
Golan Heights and refrains from creating further
provocations in the area. We demand that the Council
condemn this aggressive conduct by Israel and, if
necessary, impose mandatory
sanctions to compel
Israel to rescind its decision to extend the operation
of its laws to the occupied areas of the Syrian Golan
Heights. The Council should also fully discuss and
examine the various economic and political measures
that can be adopted with a view to the immediate
withdrawal of Israel from all illegally occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, and the restoration to
the Palestinians of their inalienable
rights+, including
their right to a State of their own.

62. Bangladesh has strongly condemned this move by
Israel as an act of unwarranted provocation and a
blatant violation of all international laws, canons and
conventions. The concern and anxiety felt by Bangladesh about this serious development
hav.e been
emphatically demonstrated by its President and Minister for Foreign Affairs and they apprehend that this
aggressive and illegal act on the part of Israel is bound
further to aggravate and complicate the already explosive situation in the Middle East and thus cause a
serious threat to regional and global security.
63. The flagrant defiance by Israel of the norms of
conduct of international relations and its disregard fol
the relevant decisions of the United Nations make
it crystal clear that Israel is still wedded to a policy of
aggression, belligerency and provocation towards its
neighbours. With such an expansionist policy, how
can Israel have the world believe that it is inclined to a
peaceful settlement of disputes with its neighbours‘?

68. The PRESIDENT
(intr/*prPtLltion
jk)m
Russiun): The next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

64. Bangladesh
has always unequivocally
condemned all acts of annexation of territories by force.
In the case of the Golan Heights, Israel not only has
illegally occupied Syrian territory by force of arms but
also has sought to legitimize,
consolidate and perpetuate the fruits of aggression. This deserves to be
condemned. Bangladesh joins all the peace-loving
countries of the world in expressing unreserved consternation at the continuing bellicose conduct of Israel.

69. Mr. ROA KOURi
(Cuba) (into’pwtotior?
.f?orn
Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
members of the Council for allowing me to speak at I
this meeting on “The situation in the occupied Arab
territories”
and to express our pleasure at seeing you
presiding over the work of the Council this month.
Your recognized talent and diplomatic
skill, togethet
with the unswerving position of principle of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, which you so worthily
represent, guarantee in advance the just conduct of the
debate which we are resuming today on the Israeli
decision to annex part of the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic in the Golan Heights.

65. This move, coming as it did shortly after the
announcement of the eight-point peace proposal by
Prince Fahd, has further diminished the prospects fo1
a peaceful, comprehensive and lasting solution of the
Middle East problem. Bangladesh has always stood fol
the peaceful and negotiated settlement of problems.
In the Middle East, the search for peace has been
seriously thwarted by the aggressive and thoughtless
act of Israel in deciding to legitimize the illegal occupation of Syrian territory in the Golan Heights. Israel will
have to bear the full responsibility
for endangering
international peace and security by this act of belligerency and aggression.

70. I wish also to reaffirm my delegation’s gratitude
to Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda for his outstanding
work as President of the Council last month.
71. Barely three weeks ago, on I6 December 1981,
speaking here in the Council on the same question
[2.3/7th meeting], I pointed to the recurrence of the
acts of aggression perpetrated by the Zionist rkgime
of Israel against a number of Member States and the
inability of the United Nations to curb its illegal conduct, which is contrary to the letter and the spirit of
the Charter, as a result of the collusion of a permanent
member of the Security Council with the rapacious,

66. Bangladesh fully supports Council resolution
497 (1981) declaring the Israeli decision to impose its
laws in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights as null
and void in international law. We also join the mem7

expansionist
Begin.

and aggressive policies

of Menachem

gnrding the Middle East, especially thr>se concerning
the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights as a situ> L/IILI 17017 for any just and comprehensive settlement of the conflict.

72. At that time I said that quite obviously that
policy was aimed at annexing once and for all the
Arab territories
which Israel had occupied unlawfully
since 1967 and at de-Arabizing the territory of Palestine and denying the Palestinian people the exercise of
their inalienable
rights and in fact preventing a just,
comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the conflict
in the Middle East.

78. The Group of Non-Aligned Countries, over which
it is my honour to preside, met the day before yesterday
here at Headquarters
and issued the following communiquC [S//482Y, ~IWMC.~] which, with your permission, I will read:
“The plenary meeting of non-aligned countries
held in New York on 5 January 1982, having listened
to the statement made by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic and bearing
in mind the reports of the Secretary-General
of
2 I December [S/148&~] and of 3 1 December l98f
[S/1482/3, expressed its deepest concern and indignation at Israel’s defiance of Security Council resolution 497 (198 1) and General Assembly resolution
361226 B.

73. On 17 December 1981, the Council unanimously
. adopted resolution 497 (l981), in which, in paragraph 1,
the Council decided that “the Israeli decision to impose
its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international
legal effect”, and consequently, in paragraph 2, it demanded that “Israel, the occupying
. Power, should rescind forthwith its decision”.
74. The Israeli reply, sent to the Secretary-General
in a note of 29 December 1981, is an insolent rebuff
of the Council and the international community. The
quintessential
aggressor in the Middle East, the occupier of a territory that is an inalienable part of the
Syrian Arab Republic, is now calling the victim to
account and blaming it for its own unlawful acts,
completely
disregarding the decisions of the United
Nations which are, moreover, perfectly clear and
unequivocal.
The representative of the Zionist r&im,e
has cynically
argued that the Israeli legislation
in
question in no way diminishes the rights of what he
has called the local population [SIJCS//4821, pc~rrr. 31.

“The plenary meeting further condemned the
action taken by Israel on I4 December 1981 to
impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
on
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights as an unequivocal
act of aggression under the provisions of Article 39
of the Charter of the United Nations as well as
General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX)
and,
accordingly,
expressed its firm conviction that the
international
community
should immediately
apply
the necessary sanctions in conformity with Article 41
of the Charter.
“In this regard, the non-aligned countries called
on the Security Council to take appropriate measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter to oblige Israel to
restore all Syrian occupied territories to the full
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.

75. .The Government of Israel, violating all the norms
of law and the Charter of the United Nations, has
stripped the Palestinian people of their inalienable
rights, expelling them from their homeland and occupying their property and land. It has militarily seized
and today still holds other Arab territories, including
the Syrian Gotan Heights. It has carried out the forced
colonization
of those territories, and daily violates the
rights of the Arab citizens, It has annexed the city of’
Jerusalem,
wishing to make it its capital, It pursues
an expansionist,
annexationist policy that has repeatedly been condemned by the General Assembly and
the Council. It engages in aggression and tel.rorism
and it is even shameful enough to claim that its unlawl
ful actions are aimed at protecting the rights of the
local population
of the Syrian Golan Heights.

“The plenary meeting reaffirmed the solidarity
of the movement of non-aligned countries with and
support for the Government
and people of the
Syrian Arab Republic and called upon all members
to participate actively in the forthcoming session of
the Security Council which will examine the situation in the occupied Arab territories.”
79. Those, then, are our considerations
and OUI
demands. We hope that the Council will be able to
act jointly, in accordance with the dictates of justice
and law and in keeping with the will of the majority
of Members of the Organization and the mandate of
the Charter.

76. We must conclude that, as in Alit in WOI~CI‘
I~nd, when the Israeli representative speaks of respect
what he really means is trampling underfoot the rights
of the Syrian people, just as he attributes to others
Israel’s own expansionist,
annexationist designs,
77.

But we have not come to this meeting of the
to hear the fables of the representative of
Israel regarding the wonders of Israel’s occupation of
the Golan Heights. We have, rather, come to reiterate
the demands contained in resolution 497 (1981) and
the recommendations
of the General Assembly reCouncil

8
