S/PV.7814

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7814

th meeting
Thursday, 17 November 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
12 August to 25 October 2016) (S/2016/950)
Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951)
Letter dated 15 November 2016 from the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2206 (2015) addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2016/963)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-38965 (E)
*1638965*

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Løj and Mr. Dieng. I will brief the
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 12 August to
25 October 2016) (S/2016/950)
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
review of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951)
Letter dated 15 November 2016 from the
Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to Security Council resolution
2206 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/963)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan; and
Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2016/950, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on South Sudan, and document
S/2016/951, which contains the special report of the
Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
I wish to also draw the attention of participants
to document S/2016/963, which contains a letter dated
15 November 2016 from the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
2/29

17/11/2016

I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the developments
in South Sudan since the release of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/950). As members have the
report before them, I will focus my comments on more
recent updates, progress and challenges.
While the Transitional Government of National
Unity that was reconstituted after the July crisis has
taken steps to improve security in Juba, the overall
security situation in South Sudan — in particular, in
the greater Equatorias, in parts of Unity, and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal — remains volatile. In the Equatorias,
recurring attacks on passenger and commercial
vehicles traveling along the main roads linking Juba
to the country’s southern borders have resulted in
civilian casualties and disrupted the flow of muchneeded commodities and supplies, including food, to
Juba and other parts of the country. These attacks have
also exacerbated ethnic tensions in the Equatorias,
which have spread to other parts of the country — a
subject upon which I am sure my colleague Mr. Dieng
will elaborate on this following his recent visit. These
targeted attacks, as well as sporadic clashes between
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and other
armed groups in the Equatorias, have also resulted in
additional displacement and inflicted further suffering
upon the civilian population, with many fleeing to
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The greater Bahr el-Ghazal region has also witnessed
an upsurge in violence involving the SPLA and armed
groups, with serious incidents in and around Wau and
Rajaf, seriously impacting civilians. Intercommunal
confrontations among once-peaceful neighbouring
ethnic groups have led to the displacement of a large
number of civilians in the once-thriving city of Wau,
including over 28,000 who are currently seeking safety
in a protection area established adjacent to the base of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In Unity, we are currently seeing significant
mobilization and violent confrontations between
opposition forces allied to Mr. Riek Machar and
elements affiliated with First Vice-President Mr. Taban
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7814

Deng Gai, which have allied themselves with the SPLA.
Fighting between the SPLA and pro-Machar opposition
forces in late October resulted in an influx of hundreds
of internally displaced persons (IDPS) to the UNMISS
temporary operating base in Leer. The instability, as
well as the looting and vandalism of humanitarian
compounds, have also prompted humanitarian agencies
to suspend operations in Leer, thereby creating yet
another area of significant civilian protection and
humanitarian concern.

of the document after the meeting and on the same day
it was submitted to the Security Council. Therefore, we
have not had the opportunity to review its contents in
detail. We are currently consulting internally and with
Headquarters here in New York on the details before
formally responding to the Government. In that regard,
the mandate of UNMISS continues to be guided by
resolution 2304 (2016) and, in line with it, the Mission
will continue to report through the Secretary-General’s
30- and 90-day reports to the Security Council.

The deterioration of the economy and the
increasingly fragmented conflict — often with ethnic
undertones — that we are seeing have placed the
country on a potential downward slide towards greater
divisiveness and risk of a full-scale civil conflict that
could render national cohesion almost impossible to
achieve. Much more needs to be done by the Transitional
Government to put a stop to these security incidents,
which contribute to an environment of instability and
violence, lead to displacement and exacerbate the
already dire humanitarian situation. The guns simply
have to be silenced if the suffering of the people is not
going to become even more dire.

As for the freedom of movement, the Government
has agreed that UNMISS will inform the Government
of patrols and movements but not await formal approval
to conduct such movements. However, challenges
continue to exist in implementing that in practice, since
commanders on the ground are either not informed
or are simply not willing to comply. However, we
did manage to conduct two patrols to Yei in Central
Equatoria last month following this procedure, thereby
enabling the Mission to get first-hand knowledge of the
dire situation in the area.

We must also make greater efforts to stem the
increasing number of localized conflicts, intolerant
ethnic rhetoric and incitement to violence. That will
require the involvement of local leaders, religious
leaders and civil society representatives. The Mission
is undertaking a number of actions to support and
facilitate such nation-building activities.
Since the Security Council’s visit to South Sudan
in early September, the Mission has been engaging
with the Transitional Government of National Unity
at the political and technical working levels on the
implementation of the commitments contained in the
joint communiqué issued at the end of the visit. As
far as the Regional Protection Force is concerned, on
16 November the Transitional Government of National
Unity circulated a document to the members of the
Security Council that gives the impression that an
agreement has been reached between the Government,
the Security Council and the United Nations on the
provisions of resolution 2304 (2016) and that of the
4 September joint communiqué.
I would just like to clarify that on 16 November we
had a meeting with the Government on the Regional
Protection Force and the status of the implementation
of the joint communiqué, but we only received a copy

As for the bureaucratic procedures regarding
clearances of the military contingents, equipment
and so on, we have agreed with the Government on
the modalities for a one-stop shop, but it remains
to be implemented. We have also agreed with the
Government that staff in the Mission will be issued with
multiple entry visas, the issuing of which is expected to
commence this week.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the dire
humanitarian situation, which is worsening every day
owing to the security situation and the deteriorating
economy. We now estimate that 4.8 million people are
severely food-insecure, and food insecurity has spread
to the Equatorias as well as to the Bahr el-Ghazal
region. Furthermore, because of the security situation
and a lack of seeds, farmers in those food-producing
areas are likely to miss the upcoming planting season.
Our humanitarian colleagues are doing their utmost to
reach people in need, but they continue to face obstacles
in terms of movement, bureaucratic procedures and
criminality.
Following the Security Council’s visit, a
humanitarian oversight committee has been established,
made up of members of the Cabinet and security
institutions as well as representatives of UNMISS
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The first meeting took place on 26 October,

16-389653/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and a number of recommendations were made with
the aim of improving humanitarian access. However,
we have yet to see if they will translate into tangible
improvement for the humanitarian personnel on
the ground.
As I prepare to leave South Sudan after more
than two years as Head of the Mission, I would like
to make two points. First, the difference between
the success and failure of the peace agreement, and
of peace in South Sudan generally, depends on the
parties’ commitment to pursuing its comprehensive
and inclusive implementation, with the firm backing
and support of regional and international partners.
Secondly, I urge all involved, and especially the South
Sudanese leaders, never to lose sight of the ultimate
goal — a peaceful and prosperous future for the people
of South Sudan.
Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the Council for its support to me during my
assignment in South Sudan. It has been an honour to
serve the Organization and the people of South Sudan.
As a parting appeal, I would like to ask that the Council
not let South Sudan be pushed off the radar screen as
other pressing global challenges demand its time. The
people of South Sudan have suffered far too much
and for far too long. The victims of the conflict still
have hope and high expectations of the international
community. As I often say, we must not let the boys and
girls of South Sudan down, and we must put them at the
forefront of all our decisions on South Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Løj
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dieng.
Mr. Dieng: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council on my visit to South Sudan last week. As the
Council may know, I decided to go because of growing
concern about recent developments there, including
reports of violence targeting multiple ethnic groups that
is taking place against the background of a breakdown
in the political process and stalled implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. The purpose of my visit
was to assess the situation from the perspective of my
mandate in order to better understand the landscape of
ethnically fuelled violence, including hate speech and
incitement to violence, and the risk that it could lead to
further atrocity crimes, including genocide.
4/29

17/11/2016

In the course of the week, I met with a variety of
stakeholders, including religious leaders and community
members. I also visited a protection-of-civilians site
in Juba and travelled to the town of Yei in Yei River
state to meet with members of the community and
Government. Yei, which until recently had been spared
the violence seen in other areas, has now been identified
as a conflict hotspot, with escalating violence against
multiple tribal groups in Yei and the State of Central
Equatoria of which Yei River is a part. The perpetrators
of the violence are varied and reportedly include the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO),
unidentified armed groups, militias and bandits.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Løj for the excellent support
provided by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for my visit, and to express my appreciation
to the Transitional Government of National Unity for
facilitating the visit and for its cooperation while I was
there. That said, however, as I reported last week, I was
dismayed that what I saw and heard in South Sudan
confirmed my concerns about the fact that there is a
strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines,
with the potential for genocide. I do not say that lightly.
As the Secretary-General highlights in his report
(S/2016/950), there are myriad underlying risk factors
that in my assessment provide an environment ripe for
the commission of mass atrocities.
First, in addition to the loss of life and trauma,
the violence has an ever-increasing economic cost,
both domestically and internationally. It is causing a
drain on much-needed resources for development and
humanitarian assistance. The Government is reportedly
spending half of the national budget on security. There
will be neither growth nor development in South
Sudan if that continues. The economy has stagnated,
inflation is very high and the population is increasingly
desperate. The political and security crisis that resulted
from the violence in July was fresh in the minds of those
with whom I spoke, and many referred to the potential
for a further deterioration of the security situation in
the coming dry season, when movement around the
country will be easier. Reports from the field indicate
the existence of constant security incidents and the
arming, recruitment and training of both the SPLA and
SPLA-IO.
As the Security Council has noted, we have
seen patterns of human-rights violations and abuses
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

committed mainly by SPLA soldiers, police officers
and members of the National Security Service, as well
as by SPLA-IO and militia groups. Those violations
have not been addressed. There is widespread impunity
and lack of accountability for violations, including
those committed in the name of counter-insurgency.
Civil society organizations have been directly targeted,
as have human-rights defenders and journalists. Some
have been killed, and many others have fled the country
out of fear for their safety. Many people with whom
I spoke referred to an amorphous and undisciplined
army formed out of what had once been two opposing
forces. They have now splintered into multiple armed
groups, criminal gangs and bandits, over which the
Government is failing to exercise control. Some of the
groups are formed along ethnic lines and are pursuing
their own objectives.
In speaking to people, I heard of tremendous
mistrust between the civilian population and the
military. The people no longer seem to view the
military as their protectors but rather as an entity to be
feared — or joined as one of the country’s few potential
employers. One elder I met summed up the current
ethnic polarization, saying that he could see fear in the
eyes of some and enthusiasm in the eyes of others.
There is a serious, protracted humanitarian crisis
and widespread, prolonged displacement of populations,
both internally and to neighbouring countries. In
some cases, displacement has caused the disruption
of agricultural activities and food insecurity. Despite
that crisis, the Government and non-State armed
groups continue to hinder access to the humanitarian
and human rights community. While aid agencies
continue to deliver assistance to people in need across
the country, at times there is outright obstruction of the
delivery of services and support to people in need.
The scarcity of resources has contributed to
divisions within society. Instead of the development
of a South Sudanese national identity, we are seeing
the extreme polarization of some ethnic groups, which
has increased in certain places since the outbreak of
violence in July and the disintegration of the peace
process. Some groups shared with me their feelings of
betrayal, and a perception that the SPLA is increasingly
ethnically homogenous, composed mostly of Dinka
members, and has been ethnicized as part of a wider plan
to launch systematic attacks against ethnic Nuer and
multiple tribal groups which make up the Equatorias.

S/PV.7814

At the same time, there were a number of incidents last
month that specifically targeted Dinkas.
Inflammatory
rhetoric,
stereotyping
and
name-calling have been accompanied by threats,
targeted killings and rape of members of particular
ethnic groups, and by violent attacks against individuals
or communities on the basis of their perceived political
affiliation. Especially worrying was a statement issued
by President Kiir on 19 October, in which he said he
would personally lead military operations against the
armed groups responsible for killings in the Equatorias.
I visited Yei River State, and I was shocked by what
I found. Yei had previously been spared the violence
seen elsewhere but did suffer the consequences of the
violence in July, when the SPLA pursued Riek Machar
and his supporters through the Equatorias into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recent reports
detail the expulsion of farmers from their land into
the city of Yei. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reported that 100,000
people were trapped in Yei at the end of September.
Many farmers have lost their homes and belongings,
livestock and land. Property has been looted and
villages have been burned. I heard reports of targeted
killings, assault, maiming, mutilation, rape, and the
barbarous use of machetes to hack families to death.
When I visited, there was widespread fear among
the people. One person told me in desperation,
“Tonight I don’t know what will happen to me”. An
elder expressed terror that his community would be
finished. And Yei is just one location among many
that are experiencing that kind of violence. Despite
the challenges it faces, the United Nations system has
been monitoring signs of increased conflict potential in
other areas of Central Equatoria, as well as in Western
and Eastern Equatoria, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Upper
Nile, Unity, and Jonglei. However, there is much that
we do not know.
The media, including social media, are being used
to spread hatred and encourage ethnic polarization,
and letters threatening particular ethnic groups, telling
them to leave, face violence or be eliminated from
specific areas, have surfaced in the past month. I am
particularly worried by the involvement of the youth,
who make up a large percentage of the population and
who are particularly susceptible to divisions within
society. I was also informed by a number of people
that the South Sudanese diaspora has been playing

16-389655/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

an influential, negative, role in spreading hatred and
inciting violence.
There is a range of different perpetrators and
victims, which makes an assessment of the risk of
atrocity crimes in South Sudan more complex. But
the warning signs are there. Throughout my visit,
conversations with all actors confirmed that what began
as a political conflict has transformed into what could
become an outright ethnic war. With the stalling of the
implementation of the peace agreement; the current,
worsening, humanitarian crisis; a stagnating economy
and the proliferation of arms, all of the ingredients exist
for a dangerous escalation of violence. There is both
motivation and the means.
I must emphasize that genocide is a process; it does
not happen overnight. And because it is a process and
one that takes time to prepare, it can be prevented. The
political leadership of South Sudan has the primary
responsibility of protecting its population and must be
held to that responsibility. Action can and must be taken
now to address some of the factors that could provide
fertile ground for genocide.
My intention in delivering this briefing is to provide
impetus for preventive action. We have a collective
responsibility to protect the population of South Sudan
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. Bearing that in mind, it is
highly desirable that the Security Council consider the
following options which, if implemented, could reduce
the risk of atrocity crimes.
First, while I commend the Security Council for its
strong condemnation of ethnically fuelled violence and
hate speech, it should continue to insist on preventing
further incitement to discrimination, hostility, and
hatred that could lead to more violence. The Security
Council should also publicly call for the political
leadership of South Sudan to immediately condemn
and take steps to prevent any act of discrimination,
hostility, and hatred that could constitute incitement
to violence. The Security Council must specifically
request that UNMISS monitor, investigate and report on
all incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence,
and be provided full access by the Government of South
Sudan to do so.
All support should be given to UNMISS to carry
out all the Mission’s mandated tasks, in particular,
tasks that relate to the protection of civilians and human
rights monitoring, which could contribute to preventing
6/29

17/11/2016

future violence. The Government should be pressed
to ensure that freedom of movement is granted to all
United Nations personnel, both civilian and military,
to conduct patrols, investigate and report on incidents,
and conduct community-based conflict prevention and
resolution initiatives.
The Security Council might also consider requesting
that the Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) investigate and
report on individuals, within the country and in the
diaspora, who are inciting violence, have perpetrated
targeted ethnic killings or are propagating hate speech.
Given the current scenario, it is urgent that the Security
Council impose an arms embargo. The proliferation of
arms is devastating and could have an significant impact.
Similarly, the sanctions regime should not be
limited to a few individuals; freezing assets and
restricting offenders’ movements should be imposed
more widely. South Sudan’s top officials have benefited
both financially and politically from the war, and could
not maintain the status quo without the free flow of
funds and arms into the country. There is a known
system of international banks, businesses, weapons
traders, and intermediaries that has contributed to the
perpetuation of the conflict through their dealings, and
the Security Council certainly has the power to bring
its influence to bear on the situation.
The Security Council should also continue to
stress the importance of an inclusive political process,
accompanied by a cessation of hostilities. If some
sectors of the population continue to feel excluded
from participation, there is little incentive for them
to pursue peace. Until the formal peace process is
reinstated, there is much that can be done in terms of
facilitating dialogue. What surfaced over and over in
my discussions last week was the presence of longstanding anger, combined with misconceptions and
preconceived notions. These need to be addressed if
there is to be a change to peace.
All of the actors with whom I met stressed that there
was an urgent need to engage in both community and
national level dialogue and I was encouraged by their
eagerness to engage in such processes. Community
and religious leaders, provincial level authorities and
UNMISS colleagues shared experiences of efforts
to promote communication. Such efforts should be
supported by the international community. Once
there is greater stability and redoubling of efforts for
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

dialogue, I urge the establishment of the commission
of truth, healing and reconciliation by the Government,
foreseen in the peace agreement.
Beyond reconciliation, justice and accountability
were common themes in my discussions with the people
of South Sudan. Even as the conflict becomes more
complex, the effects of the December 2013 outbreak
of violence and subsequent violence linger, and human
rights violations committed during the past few years
have not been adequately documented or accounted
for. I welcome the commitment of the signatories of
the peace agreement to establishing a hybrid court to
prosecute cases of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, as well as other serious crimes
under international law. It is my sincere hope that the
Council’s discussions with national authorities and
with the African Union may move such plans forward.
In the interim, I urge the Security Council to call for
the establishment of an investigation mechanism that
would collect and preserve evidence that could later
provide evidence to national or international courts.
That would help in assessing the full scale of violations
and track patterns in violence.
Finally, while the State has the primary
responsibility to protect its populations, other States,
regional organizations and the international community
can assist its protection efforts. Indeed, neighbouring
countries have an intrinsic interest in doing so. The
involvement of neighbouring countries in domestic
conflicts with resulting spill-over beyond national
borders has occurred in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Somalia, to name a few. Regional action
needs to be reinvigorated. African leaders must coalesce
around a unified strategy to prevent an escalation of
violence. Given the different regional interests and
allegiances of the political leadership in South Sudan,
any political strategy must be endorsed by all national
actors if it is to succeed. The Security Council should
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
Peace and Security Council and relevant actors within
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
order to move that process forward.
Last week, I saw all the signs that ethnic hatred and
the targeting of civilians could evolve into genocide if
something is not done now to stop it. I urge the Security
Council and member States of the region to unite and
take action.

S/PV.7814

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Dieng
for his briefing.
I have the honour to present this briefing to the
members of the Council in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. I will outline the
main conclusions and recommendations contained in
the final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2016/963).
I will speak briefly about the discussion that followed
the presentation of the Panel of Experts’ report by
its Coordinator on 11 November and report on the
activities carried out by the Committee and the Panel
of Experts since my previous briefing (see S/PV.7628)
in the Chamber on 19 February. In its progress report,
the Panel of Experts analysesd the security situation,
the political process and the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan, which I shall briefly discuss.
With regard to the political situation and security
conditions, the Panel of Experts found that they had
seriously deteriorated and felt that an escalation of
violence that would herald the dry season in November
and December was expected. In paragraph 10 of its
progress report, the Panel of Experts statesd that the
principal factor driving the extension and expansion
of the war in South Sudan was the belligerent attitude
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Government, led by President Salva Kiir,
on the one hand, and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM-IO) in Opposition, led by
Riek Machar, on the other.
As Special Adviser Dieng has just stated, the Panel
of Experts underscoresd that the war in South Sudan is
“increasingly characterized by the targeting of
civilians on a tribal basis, given that it has evolved
into what is widely perceived to be a zero-sum
confrontation between the Dinka and non-Dinka
tribes in many areas” (S/2016/963, para.13).
Incentives to violence, in the form of open letters,
official statements or messages posted on social
networks, have also multiplied, as illustrated by the
Panel of Experts. The security situation has become
increasingly unstable because of the economic situation.
In that regard, the Panel of Experts statesd that the
Transitional Government of National Unity had not
yet demonstrated its commitment to sound economic
governance practices.

16-389657/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

A large section of the report of the Panel of
Experts is devoted to the information it has gathered
on the extension of the war, in particular, conflicts in
the region of Equatoria, in which numerous cases of
conflict-related sexual violence have been identified, as
well as the destruction of villages, looting and killing
of civilians including women, children and the elderly.
Yei County, Equatoria, was particularly affected by the
recent acts of violence. The Panel reported deliberate
attacks on civilians, including extrajudicial executions,
rape, kidnappings, forced recruitment, arbitrary arrests
and detention, torture, beatings and harassment,
intimidation and looting and the destruction of the
livelihoods and assets of civilian populations. The
Panel concludesd that atrocities and flagrant violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
were being committed in Equatoria.
In its report, the Panel indicatesd that it had
conducted several investigations, including one into
the purchase of the L-39 jet, which was delivered after
the formation of the Transitional Government in April
as it sought to discharge its mandate to collect, review
and analyse information concerning the supply, sale
and transfer of arms and related materiel in the country.
With regard to the political situation, the Panel
of Experts findsfound that it had deteriorated
considerably, as the permanent ceasefire provided for
in the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan had not been respected
by the parties following the clashes in July. The Panel
also considered that the resumption of the clashes in
July had undermined the meagre progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement. The Panel identified
only two cases where progress appeared to have been
made in the establishment of institutions, namely, the
establishment of the provisional National Legislative
Assembly and the approval of cantonment sites in the
regions of Equatoria and Bahr el-Ghazal, which have
been challenged. In addition, the Panel of Experts
identified acts being committed that were at crosspurposes with the security sector reform provided for
in the Agreement. The SPLA had continued to accept
new contingents and, representatives of SPLM/A in
Opposition who had been appointed by Machar had
been replaced by persons affiliated with Taban Deng
Gai. According to the Panel of Experts, legislation and
regulations adopted in 2016 include provisions that are
not in line with international best practices as provided
for in the Agreement. The Panel concluded that these
8/29

17/11/2016

measures had led to a stalemate in the reconciliation
and political processes in South Sudan.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the Panel
of Experts reported that there was an acceleration in
mass displacements of people. On 16 September, when
the Panel Coordinator submitted the Panel report on
its activities over the previous 120 days, the number
of refugees fleeing South Sudan had reached 1 million
persons. When the Coordinator briefed the Committee
on 11 November, he reported that in two months the
number of refugees had increased by a further 250,000
people, with most of the refugees crossing the border in
recent weeks fleeing Equatoria.
Some 4.8 million people, or one-third of the
population living in South Sudan, faced severe food
insecurity approaching famine levels in some areas.
The Panel of Experts also outlined what it viewed as
relentless obstruction of the efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian missions and attacks against them.
The Panel reported that the most senior members of the
SPLM/A in the Government consistently demonize the
United Nations. The Panel gave examples of hostility
towards the international presence in South Sudan
through official statements and social media, which
was confirmed by sustained and systematic violations
of the status of forces agreement, with 19 violations
in September alone. The situation for humanitarian
workers in South Sudan was particularly serious, given
that 67 of them had been killed since the beginning
of the conflict in December 2013. Furthermore, three
humanitarian workers were killed in a single week
in October.
With regard to humanitarian access, 640 incidents
were reported in the first nine months of 2016, and in
September alone 81 incidents were reported, 59 of which
involved violence against humanitarian personnel and
the property of humanitarian agencies.
The Panel
its report.

made

three

recommendations

in

First, it reiterated a recommendation from its
January 2016 final report, in connection with its initial
mandate, namely, that in order to achieving the Council’s
objective of an inclusive and sustainable peace in South
Sudan, the Committee should designate the high-level
decision makers who would be responsible for actions
and policies that threaten the peace, security and
stability of the country and who have the means, through
their power and influence, to change the course of the
16-38965

17/11/2016

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

war. In this regard, the Panel recalled the confidential
annex it had provided to the Committee in January,
which included the names of these decision makers.
Similarly, the second recommendation in the
Panel’s report was a reiteration of a proposal that it
had made twice during its initial mandate, namely, that
the Council should impose a general arms embargo on
South Sudan in order to prevent further destabilization
of the security situation, and in particular the ongoing
large-scale human rights violations. The Panel
concluded that these violations were directly related
to the fact that the supply of arms and ammunition to
non-State actors and groups was done by all sides.
The Panel’s third recommendation was aimed at
promoting the national implementation of the sanctions
measures taken against six individuals designated by
the Committee in July 2015. In this regard, the Panel
recommended reaching out to the banking regulatory
authorities in several States in the region as well
as issuing a press release encouraging State and
commercial banks to implement asset freezes.
With regard to the examination of the Panel’s
findings and recommendations in the report, the ensuing
discussion among members of the Committee was
comprehensive and spirited. The Coordinator heard a
wide variety of comments from members and answered
many questions. The Committee’s consideration of
the proposed action in connection with the Panel’s
recommendations is ongoing, with special focus on the
two recommendations specifically addressed to it.
I would also like to provide the Council with a brief
overview of the Committee’s work since 19 February,
when I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.7628). On
14 March, the Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict held joint informal
consultations featuring a briefing by Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, on the impact
of the armed conflict on children in South Sudan. Citing
the names of perpetrators from both sides, the Special
Representative called upon the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan and its Panel of Experts to continue to
investigate and examine the individual and command
responsibility of all parties to the conflict for attacks
committed against children.
On 15 July, members of the Committee were briefed
by Coordinator of the Panel of Experts, whose mandate

was extended by resolution 2290 (2016), in connection
with the Panel’s programme of work. On 16 September,
the Committee was briefed by Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ms. Bangura
told the Committee that it was disturbing to report
that the war in South Sudan continued to be waged
on the bodies of women and girls. She reiterated that
addressing sexual violence in conflict required national
ownership, leadership and responsibility and that the
authorities in South Sudan were not carrying out these
three crucial functions in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the commitments they had made. Ms. Bangura
noted, inter alia, that, in the light of the continuous
systematic patterns of sexual violence in South Sudan,
and this in spite of the formal commitments undertaken
by the parties, the Committee should consider activating
targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual
violence and reiterated her Office’s willingness to work
with the Committee and the Panel in this regard.
Before concluding, I would like to remind delegations
that I intend to travel to South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda
and the Sudan from 10 and 19 December. While I had
already visited South Sudan in early September as part
of the Security Council mission, my trip in December
is being undertaken with a view to implementing
paragraph 11 of resolution 2290 (2016), by which the
Security Council had emphasized the importance of
regular consultations with concerned Member States,
international, regional and subregional organizations,
and in particular neighbouring States and States of the
region, in order to ensure the full implementation of
the measures and encourage the Committee to consider,
as appropriate, visits to selected countries by the Chair
and/or Committee members. I am hopeful that all four
States will facilitate this visit by the Chair, which will
be the first such visit to take place by the Chair of the
2206 (2015) Committee.
I now give
Security Council.

the

floor

to

members

of

the

Ms. Power (United States of America): Let me
start by paying tribute to Special Representative Løj
for her briefing, but above all for her more than two
years of service in one of the most difficult Missions on
the planet. We could tell, from our two trips to South
Sudan — one at the beginning of her deployment and the
other, recently, at the tail end of her deployment — just
how much of herself she had invested in the Mission.
We saw the kind of relationship she had with local South

16-389659/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudanese staff, many of them terrified by the events
unfolding around them, the relationship she managed to
have even through difficult times with Government and
opposition actors and the respect that people in civil
society had for her.
For me watching Special Representative Løj
dodge bullets in July, stay to be with the people of
South Sudan, open the United Nations gates with the
support of the Secretary-General and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and shelter local staff
who feel that they have no place to go or sleep other
than under their desks because they were so afraid was
reflective of her bravery but also of her compassion for
the people of that country. She will be missed by a lot
of people.
I thank the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Dieng, for
taking the trip that he took and for when he took it,
his candour and the level of the detail in his briefing,
as well as the knowledge that he brings from other
contexts and history. I believe that it is chastening for
us all. I thank Ambassador Seck for his leadership of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan and his dark briefing,
which was in keeping with the general tenor here today.
South Sudan is a nation on the precipice. As
Mr. Dieng said upon completing his visit to the country
last week, there is “a strong risk of violence escalating
along ethnic lines with the potential for genocide”.
When the United Nations designated Special Adviser
on the Prevention on Genocide reaches the conclusion
that genocide might be imminent, it should serve as a
wake-up call for us all. As he so aptly put it last week
in Juba, all the ingredients exist for the already horrific
violence to escalate dramatically. Let me touch upon a
few of those ingredients.
First, as has been stressed by our briefers, we
have seen violence escalating not merely along
political lines — which was bad enough — but also
now dramatically along ethnic lines. This is not an
assessment that anyone reaches lightly. It is an empirical
assessment from a range of credible sources, including
the Panel of Experts on South Sudan, the SecretaryGeneral, serious independent human rights groups and
independent journalists. We heard this ourselves with
our own ears from petrified and thoroughly unscripted
civilians. As just one example — unfortunately, there
are too many — Sara Kakuni, who fled her village on
10/29

17/11/2016

the outskirts of Yei, is now living in a refugee camp in
Uganda from where a lot of our information is coming
because reporters are able to debrief those who arrive
there often with nothing more than the shirts on their
backs. This young women told a reporter that she and
her two young daughters were kept awake at night by
gun shots. She said,
“[w]hen it stops, that is when they are slaughtering
people with knives and pangas. Dinkas will open
your door and kill you if you do not have their
tribal scars”.
This is the ethnic dimension.
Secondly, we do not have adequate forces in place
to stop mass atrocities should the violence continue to
escalate, as all those who watched South Sudan closely
deem likely. The Secretary-General has said that even
if the soldiers and police personnel deployed in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan were to use
all necessary means to protect civilians under attack,
as the Security Council has mandated them to do,
they “do not have the appropriate reach, manpower or
capabilities to stop mass atrocities” (S/2016/951, p. 16).
And that is a big “if” because, as we all know, the South
Sudanese Government continues to block peacekeepers
from conducting the basic operations, such as the
routine patrols that are necessary to even have a chance
of protecting civilians. Many troop contributors cannot
get access to their equipment. They are either delayed
or blocked. These are capabilities that are being
systematically denied to those who are there.
Even if they had them, the Secretary-General
assesses that they would not be enough. The shortage
of appropriate manpower is in part because the South
Sudanese Government also continues to stand in the
way of the deployment of the 4,000-strong Regional
Protection Force to Juba, which the Council authorized
more than three months ago — a force whose
deployment would give an important and much needed
boost to the 14,000 soldiers and police officers who are
currently deployed.
The third ingredient involves a growing climate,
which we have seen, of incitement, fear and intimidation.
Government officials openly threaten journalists, as
when the Minister of Cabinet Affairs, Martin Lomuro,
with whom we met in Juba, told journalist at a press
conference in September, “[i]f you are going to say
something which is not correct... we will go after you,
whichever hole you are in”. When the Council visited
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the country that same month, we heard directly from
civil society leaders, felt their palpable sense of fear
and, in many instances, were made aware of the threats
that they received because of their work. A group that
calls itself the Angry Youth of former Northern Bhar
el-Ghazal posted the following message on Facebook
directed at civilians in the southern Equatoria region:
“We are going to take a quick revenge attack against
Equatorians anywhere and anyplace from now on.
We will find you and kill you. We will despicably
and barbarically kill you.”
If these were just words or incitement, that would be
one thing, but as another recent example — once again,
I stress that are too many — 20-year-old Abraham
Aloro was recently interviewed in the Bidibidi refugee
camp in Uganda shortly after fleeing an attack on his
home town of Yei, the same town as Ms. Kakuni’s.
Aloro said,
“[a]bout two weeks ago, soldiers came to my
brother Emmanuel’s house at night and demanded
that he open the door. They accused him of joining
the rebels. He had not, but they cut him to death
with pangas, that is machetes”.
Aloro’s brother was 24-years-old.
And yet those who perpetrate these attacks, hack
innocent civilians to death, burn down their homes,
rape women, conscript men and young boys to fight
and threaten journalists and human rights defenders
enjoy nearly total impunity. The same goes for those
who incite others to carry out such hateful acts. The
message that the Government sends by not holding
them accountable is crystal clear: “Keep at it; keep
doing what you are doing”.
The ingredients that I have described and that
others have in more powerful and greater detail are ones
that create a climate conducive to massive atrocities.
With each of these factors, we are reminded of all of
the warnings that the United Nations missed or saw but
chose to ignore in places like Srebrenica and Rwanda
in the 1990s. Given the accumulation of warnings,
we have lost the right individually and collectively to
act surprised in the face of even greater atrocities in
South Sudan. None of us can say that we did not see
it coming. The question therefore for us is — what
will we do? We can start by acknowledging the deeply
precarious situation on the ground and the fact that

S/PV.7814

the international community’s current approach is not
stopping the cycle of violence.
Let us not treat the leaders of South Sudan as
though they are responsible and credible interlocutors
but engage them as the cynical actors whom they
unfortunately have shown themselves to be, too often
putting their short-sighted personal interests above
the welfare of millions of their own people who are
suffering. Let us stop asking for permission to carry
out a mandate authorized by the Security Council in
the interest of peace and security and, instead, start
demanding it to unite around that message and mandate.
Let us stop acting as if the principle of sovereignty, as
critical as it is to the functioning of the international
order, gives the South Sudanese Government or any
Government license to commit mass atrocities against
its own people or fuel a humanitarian crisis that has left
millions of lives hanging in the balance.
In the coming days, the United States will put
forward a proposal to impose an arms embargo on South
Sudan and targeted sanctions on the individuals who
have been the biggest spoilers to achieve lasting peace
in the country. In the interest of the people of South
Sudan and the region, this constitutes an important step
towards curbing the ongoing violence perpetrated by
the Government and opposition forces against civilians.
Let me anticipate some of the comments that we will
hear today from countries expressing scepticism with
regard to these steps.
First, we know that no embargo can completely
stop weapons from entering the country. To state the
obvious, we also know that an arms embargo will not
remove those weapons already in South Sudan, but
an arms embargo could have a significant impact on
the ground, particularly with regard to preventing the
acquisition of arms that occurs daily. As we sit here,
more arms are flowing into that country, including the
acquisition of heavy weapons, aircraft and military
vehicles that have been used to inflict such devastating
violence in the conflict and were used in the conflict
in Juba in July, during which United Nations staff,
including our Special Representative and others, had
to take shelter and duck the incoming gun fire aimed
at them.
As the crisis escalates, we should all flash forward
and ask ourselves how we will feel if Adama Dieng’s
warnings come to pass. We will wish we had done
everything we could to hold spoilers and perpetrators to

16-3896511/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

account and limit to the maximum extent that we could
the inflow of weapons. As we have learned elsewhere,
an arms embargo is effective if there is a broad and
robust commitment to its enforcement. Imposing
new targeted sanctions designations will isolate the
individuals who have consistently been responsible for
the acts that have brought South Sudan to this moment
and caused so much suffering. Such sanctions will limit
the ability of such individuals to travel freely as they
are doing now across the region or to move assets that
could be used to fund further violence. There is no
good reason why we would not deprive those who have
shown a willingness to commit mass atrocities of the
means of doing it more efficiently.
There is also no good reason why we should not try
to prevent at least some weapons from getting into the
hands of people who have consistently used them to kill
innocent men, women and children. Those who have
argued against taking such modest steps in the face of a
conflict that has so many ingredients of mass atrocities
have honestly had months to show that an alternative
approach can work and help those people on our visit
who cried out for our support for those actions. The
approach we have been pursuing has been an approach
of dialogue, of patience, of waiting for the next South
Sudanese Government Cabinet meeting or the next
letter to the Security Council — letters that include
happy talk and bureaucratic language but describe no
material change in the Government’s behaviour. They
are letters that also include falsehoods, including, as
we saw yesterday, and as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General just reminded us, blatant
misrepresentations.
The United States advocates continuing our
engagement. We agree with all those who stress that
dialogue is critical. However, we must complement
that engagement with steps that show a far greater
seriousness of purpose and steps that show that the
Council means what it says and intends to actually
perform the mission that was given to us, which was to
enforce international peace and security, support our
peacekeepers, take seriously the warning of multiple
United Nations officials and protect civilians in
desperate need.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
confess that I am very pleased to see that a number of
delegations will be accompanying me in making official
statements before the Council. Without prejudice to the
statements that they might want to make in the informal
12/29

17/11/2016

consultations. I understand that making statements in
public contributes to greater transparency in the work
of this Council.
Allow me first to express my delegation’s gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), Ms. Ellen Løj. We commend her for her
work over the past two years and wish her every success
in her future endeavours. We would also like extend our
thanks to the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser for
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for his
resounding briefing. We also thank Ambassador Seck
for his briefing on the sanctions committee.
My delegation expresses its deepest concern
regarding the current situation in South Sudan. I will
start my remarks by referring to those who are suffering
most from the conflict — civilians. The intensification
of violence, particularly since this past July, has had
devastating consequences for civilians. There have
been violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including extrajudicial executions,
forced disappearances, rapes and other instances of
sexual assault, arbitrary imprisonment, attacks on
civilians, attacks on medical facilities, humanitarian
aid workers, medical personnel and journalists.
Those violations of human rights are taking on
an ethnic aspect. Hateful rhetoric is increasing across
the entire country, which is entirely alarming given
that such rhetoric could produce mass atrocities. The
humanitarian crisis continues to grow in intensity and
magnitude as a consequence of the armed conflict in
various regions of the country, the deterioration of food
security and the worsening of the economic situation.
The figures coming from the United Nations
are concerning: more than 1 million refugees, more
than 1.5 million displaced persons, close to 5 million
people who are severely food insecure. We note, as
mentioned by Mr. Dieng, that the degree of inaction
in the implementation of the peace agreement, the
humanitarian crisis and the proliferation of arms in the
country are all ingredients that may lead to a dangerous
escalation of violence. My delegation is concerned about
a scenario in which the lives of civilians are in imminent
danger and in which weapons are proliferating. We are
seriously evaluating measures that could be taken to
mollify the risk of more lost lives.
I urge all those involved in the conflict and the
entire international community to help end the suffering
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the civilian population of South Sudan. In that sense,
we ought to continually remind the South Sudanese
Government that it is its principal responsibility to
protect its own citizens. The Government must offer
that protection regardless of the ethnic background or
political affiliation of its citizens. Furthermore, the
political leaders of South Sudan must act responsibly
by rejecting any incitement to violence and opting for
the path of dialogue. We continue to call for such action
despite the fact that the actions taken by the Government
seem to fall directly contrary to what we advise.
It is critical that immediate measures be taken in
order to resume the political process and seek a peaceful
solution to the conflict. My delegation believes that such
measures would include the following three aspects.
First, the parties to the conflict must immediately
establish a ceasefire. Secondly, the parties to the conflict
must commit to resuming a dialogue, which should be
transparent, inclusive and in good faith. The Security
Council should play a more active role in the process
of dialogue in South Sudan and serve as a pillar of
support for the African Union, The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and other interested parties
that might be involved. Thirdly, urgent measures must
be taken to put an end to impunity. It is important
to maintain efforts to implement chapter V of the
peace agreement with respect to transitional justice,
accountability, reconciliation and healing. On that
point, we take note of the African Union’s intentions
to establish a hybrid court as soon as possible. We
believe that the establishment of such a tribunal would
be a positive, given that accountability for the grave
violations of human rights in South Sudan is lacking
and does nothing but perpetuate the conflict.
In another area, we are struck by the letter sent
by the Government of South Sudan to the Council,
with an annex contaiing the agreement between the
Government of South Sudan and the Security Council
about the implementation of the joint communiqué of
4 September. It would be helpful if the authorities of
South Sudan were more careful with respect to the
precision of their official communcations with the
Council.
Finally, I would like to reference the work of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), which has a very ambitious and bold
mandate and which works in an extremely complex and
dangerous operational theatre. It is fundamental that

S/PV.7814

UNMISS be able to fulfill its mandate, and we therefore
urge South Sudan to lift any restrictions on the Mission
in keeping with the commitments undertaken in the
status of forces agreement.
As mentioned by Mr. Ladsous on a number of
occasions when he has spoken on the topic of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, I am pleased
to learn that the conclusions of the special independent
investigation on the violent events that took place
in Juba between 8 and 25 July and the response of
UNMISS with regard to the protection of civilians has
been taken into account by the Secretariat and will be
implemented with oversight by a task force led from
Headquarters.
It is also unavoidable and necessary to mention that,
for the third time, we are seeing low-level results from
UNMISS in terms of protecting civilians. This would
appear to indicate that it is also very likely that there
were also low-level results in the actions that should
have been taken to prevent the problem from being
reproduced. In that sense, we understand that there are
three aspects that require special attention in order to
avoid new failures in the protection of civilians.
First, we must review the processes for selecting
leaders for the most relevant positions. Secondly, we
must review the operational concept of UNMISS, the
orders and operational procedures provided by the
Mission for the protection of civilians and the use of force
as required. Thirdly, we understand that it is necessary
to require, as is done in situations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, that the criminal and disciplinary norms
of contributing countries take action in situations in
which there is a failure in the protection of civilians, so
that accountability does not end in simple repatriation,
but reaches its furthest consequences. We especially
believe that this last measure contributes to achieving
an effective protection of civilians, which is the most
sensitive job of peacekeeping and that there must be
zero tolerance for failures in that regard.
In conclusion and as expressed by Ambassador
Samantha Power a few moments ago, I would like to echo
the Secretary-General’s special report (S/2016/951) to
the effect that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are not equipped with the scope, staff or capacities to
put an end to mass atrocities from occurring.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers.
I would like to begin by paying particular tribute to
Special Representative Ms. Ellen Løj for leading the

16-3896513/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
through an extremely difficult period. As all three
briefers have made so painfully clear, South Sudan is
deteriorating before our very eyes. Ethnic tensions have
reached a breaking point. The humanitarian situation
now rivals the worst on the continent of Africa and the
political talks that could have brought peace to millions
now appear to be further from success than at any point
in the country’s brief history. We just cannot stay silent
in the face of such tragedy. Here are the three things
that we need to do to help the people of South Sudan.
First and foremost, we need to recognize that this
is no ordinary civil war. Mr. Adama Dieng just said
genocide does not happen overnight. The warning signs
are there. That should play over and over our minds.
He is telling us to open our eyes. He is telling us to act
before it is too late. If we fail to do so, the consequences
will be unspeakable. Just think, if that horrific process,
if that tragedy were to become a reality, how could
we sit around this table and ask what could we have
done? Instead, today, we need to choose to take a
different path.
This brings me to my second point. On the eve of
South Sudan’s independence, we unanimously adopted
resolution 1996 (2011), which authorized the creation of
UNMISS. Since that day, South Sudan has landed on
the Council’s agenda 70 times. On how many of those
occasions has the Council spoken with one voice? Is
it not time for us to unite to give the people of South
Sudan hope? I know the United Kingdom is willing to
do so. I know that the United Kingdom can and must
play a greater, even more significant part in that effort
as a member of the troika and as a bilateral partner. But
this effort extends beyond any single Government. In
fact, beyond the confines of this Chamber. We need a
truly global effort — one that includes the members of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union, the United Nations, and especially one
that requires the political will, the political courage of
South Sudan’s leaders. They must admit to the scale of
the problem and commit to being part of an inclusive
and peaceful political solution.
My third point is that we already know the steps
that need to be taken: an immediate end to the fighting;
an immediate end to obstructions on UNMISS, the
Regional Protection Force and humanitarians; an
immediate end to hate speech and incitement; and
a redoubling of collective political effort behind an
inclusive political conversation. The situation in South
14/29

17/11/2016

Sudan described today is dark. It is grim. But ley us
make no mistake that, as Ms. Ellen Løj said, it can get
darker. For this reason, we need to listen to Mr. Adama
Dieng and use the tools that we have to prevent that
from happening. I agree with all of his proposals and
that includes his point that it is urgent for the Security
Council to impose an arms embargo. The United
Kingdom has consistently called for that and we
support the United States’ proposal. We cannot stand
idly by while the people of South Sudan have weapons
used against them by their fellow citizens. There is no
reason, given these conditions, to allow the continued
flow of weapons to those who could eventually turn
them on civilians.
Let me tackle concerns about an arms embargo
head on. First, an arms embargo is no longer a matter of
political leverage — we have other tools. Cooperation
around a political process and stopping the flow of
arms are not mutually exclusive. Secondly, we know
that an arms embargo can be implemented because of
the limited infrastructure in South Sudan — only one
main tarmac road and only four main airports. Thirdly,
we know that, with an embargo, the operation of heavy
weaponry will be limited and the flow of ammunition
will be reduced. Therefore, we know that an arms
embargo will have an impact in the short, medium
and long term. We know all the answers to all of those
questions and we know that stopping these weapons
will be a step in the right direction in this matter of life
and death.
No matter how dark the situation is in South Sudan,
it can get worse, but it can also get better, provided we
take action. So let us act collectively and with authority,
wisely using the tools at our disposal, to get where we
are all aiming, namely sustainable peace and freedom
from fear for the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS); Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide; and
Ambassador Seck, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, for their briefings.
Despite the fact that there have been three years
of conflict, the situation in South Sudan remains
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

complex and volatile. Its effects are manifested at
different levels. In the area of security, armed clashes
among the parties continue, in violation of the cessation
of hostilities agreements. Those clashes have kept
UNMISS headquarters and the civilian settlements
right in the line of fire. Examples of this would be
Malakal in February and Juba in July. Similarly, the
political crisis has limited the implementation of the
peace agreement of August 2015, owing to the lack of a
structural approach to the conflict, which leads to the
exile of some of the parties to the agreement and a lack
of inclusivity in the political process, which calls into
question the legitimacy of the transition institutions.
Added to that is the dire economic situation, which is a
result of the fall in oil prices.
We are also concerned at the continuing violations
of human rights, including sexual and gender-based
violence, the continued recruitment of children, and,
more recently, the incendiary pronouncements filled
with hatred and incitement to violence among the
various ethnic groups living in South Sudan, which
could result in genocide, according to the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Adama Dieng.
Similarly, the humanitarian crisis facing that
country, as manifested by the existence of more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons, including more
than 1 million refugees in neighbouring countries, was
aggravated by the incidents of violence in Juba during
the month of July. At least 4.8 million South Sudanese
are food-insecure, while in the last three years severe
acute malnutrition among children under five years of
age has increased by more than 150 per cent.
Faced with that dramatic reality, we are convinced
of the fundamental role played by UNMISS, particularly
with regard to the protection of civilians, its support for
the political process and the creation of conditions for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We must also
bear in mind the adverse conditions under which the
Mission operates on the ground, including logistical,
operational and political challenges. We hope that
those problems can be resolved promptly within the
framework of the technical support group working with
UNMISS and the Transitional Government of National
Unity, and not the Salva Kiir regime, as described
by the Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) in its recent interim
report (S/2016/963).

S/PV.7814

In addition, we welcome the opportunity to
encourage the Mission to take all necessary means to
improve the security and protection situation inside
the civilian camps in Bentiu, which are the biggest
in South Sudan, with 103,494 internally displaced
persons, and have the highest number of distressing
incidents, like those recorded in Malakal and Juba. We
believe that it would be possible to introduce some of
the positive practices implemented in other areas, such
as the establishment of a zone free of arms around
the perimeter.
We reiterate that it is not possible to achieve a
military solution to the conflict afflicting the country
and that we must combine efforts so as to revitalize the
political process. We therefore decisively renew our full
backing for all efforts and initiatives in that direction
that could help the former President of Botswana,
Festus Mogae, at the helm of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, working with the former
President of Mali, Mr. Alpha Konaré, who is the High
Representative of the African Union for South Sudan,
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for Eastern Africa.
We agree with the Secretary-General on the need to
elaborate a clear political strategy to address the conflict
in South Sudan and the region in a comprehensive way
and to recognize the need to prevent the situation on
the ground from escalating. That strategy should be
marked by national ownership and include aspects such
as the agreement to and effective implementation of a
cessation of hostilities, including the demilitarization
of the main cities of the country, given the fact that the
dry season is coming soon and the troops will then have
a greater ability to deploy on the ground. There is also a
need to follow up on the necessity of reaching a solution
to the political conflict and of adopting effective
measures on disarmament and quartering the troops.
A solution needs to take into account the need
to put into practice reconciliation initiatives and
confidence-building measures between the parties
in conflict, in order to prevent another escalation
and the commission of mass atrocities, so that an
inclusive dialogue can be fostered in which all voices,
including dissenting ones, can be heard and taken
into consideration. On the other hand, we consider of
paramount importance the effective application of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan, including its provisions on matters of security
and transitional justice, for the purpose of ensuring,

16-3896515/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

among other things, that people will be held accountable,
thereby breaking the prevailing cycle of impunity. That
is the only framework for putting an end to the crisis and
for reaching a lasting and sustainable peace in South
Sudan. We also believe that such an approach serves to
promote measures for the prevention and mitigation of
local conflicts and for fostering initiatives that aim at
reconciliation and the creation of a favourable climate
for the existence of a culture of peace in the country,
particularly at the intercommunal level.
In regard to the Regional Protection Force, we
reaffirm that the activities of the Force ought to have
the proper consent of the host State and be fully in
accordance with the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations. We are of the opinion that the Transitional
Government of National Unity is advancing in that
direction, as is reflected in its recent communication to
the Council. Our delegation believes that the Security
Council ought to act with caution, but with full
determination, in its handling of the crisis.
In that regard, we wish to report that we will be
circulating a brief on a draft press statement on the
situation in South Sudan. We hope that we can count on
the support of member States of this body in such times
of vital importance and that the Council will maintain
its unity, so that it can have a positive influence that
contributes to reaching a peaceful resolution to the
conflict that afflicts that brotherly African country.
Finally, I wish to ask a follow-up question of
Mr. Dieng. Could he provide us with more detailed
information on the plan of action to prevent the
commission of criminal atrocities in South Sudan and
on any measures being taken in the Mission at the
base level in order to resist the propagation of hate
speech, incitements to violence and interethnic strife
in the country?
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I appreciate the opportunity to
speak about this pressing matter. I would like to thank
Ms. Ellen Løj, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, for their detailed briefings.
I listened to both briefings carefully and with great
concern. Japan recognizes that, while Juba is relatively
calm at this moment, the security situation in South
Sudan as a whole is very tense, with frequent armed
clashes and killings of civilians. We cannot be optimistic
about how things will unfold and should continue to
closely monitor the security situation in the country.
16/29

17/11/2016

As many speakers before me have noted, the
question now is how the Security Council can
improve the situation. Our credibility is on the line.
Whatever action is taken, our ultimate goal should be
to advance the political process. While the will of the
parties is of paramount importance, the engagement
of neighbouring countries is the key factor. The
decision by Kenya to withdraw its contingent only
further highlights the importance of the role of South
Sudan’s neighbours. Many points from the special
report (S/2016/951) on the review of the mandate of
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) are
useful in that regard. It is indispensable that the United
Nations coordinate with the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the key players supporting the political process, so as
to more effectively facilitate the development of the
political process. We highly commend the Secretariat
for its efforts, in consultation with the AU and IGAD,
to devise a comprehensive political strategy aimed at
achieving a cessation of hostilities and at bringing the
parties back to an inclusive political process. In that
regard, we recognize the importance of the engagement
of AU High Representative Konaré.
We welcome the suggestion to expand UNMISS
patrols around the protection of civilians sites and
to enhance cooperation with humanitarian actors.
Increasing UNMISS interaction with communities and
local authorities is also important.
Having carefully listened to the remarks by
Mr. Dieng, we are deeply concerned about rising ethnic
tensions in the country. In that vein, the proposal by
the AU Commission to establish an over-the-horizon
force to respond to possible mass atrocities caught
our attention. We hope to see further consultations on
the matter between the United Nations and the AU,
including clarification as to how the proposed force’s
mandate would be differentiated from that of the
UNMISS Regional Protection Force.
Japan, as an UNMISS troop-contributing country,
attaches great importance to creating an environment
in which effective activities can be safely undertaken.
In that regard, we call on the Transitional Government
of National Unity to cooperate further and more
seriously with the United Nations. It is Japan’s sincere
hope that South Sudan will achieve peace and stability
and make strides on the path to development. Japan, as
a friend of South Sudan, has supported the country and
has dispatched an engineering unit to UNMISS since
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the independence of the country. Japan will continue
to contribute to South Sudan’s peace and security
going forward.
Finally, on behalf of the Government of Japan, I
would like to express special thanks to Ms. Ellen Løj
for her very hard and dedicated work on the ground in
an extremely difficult environment.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj
for her briefing and service to the United Nations,
particularly in South Sudan. I would also like to thank
Mr. Adama Dieng for his frank and clear briefing of
the risks that we now face in South Sudan, as well as
the President, Mr. Fodé Seck, for his similarly honest
assessment of the situation as seen by the South Sudan
Sanctions Committee.
As we have heard, the situation in South Sudan is
appalling. The peace agreement negotiated last year
is moribund, if not dead. There is no political process
occurring, and the key actors are not inclined in any
serious way to join one. We had the horrific outbreak
of violence in Juba in July, and the response by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
was the subject of a searing report by the Independent
Special Investigator appointed by the SecretaryGeneral. Since then, Sudan People’s Liberation Army
in Opposition (SPLA-IO) troops and other militias
continue to skirmish with each other and maraud about
the country, committing atrocities against each other
and innocent civilians, to the point where we are now
being warned of the real risks of a full-scale civil war
and even genocide.
Responsibility for the state of affairs rests
principally with South Sudan’s leaders, who have
prioritized power and self-enrichment over the needs
of their peoples. However, some responsibility also lies
with those who have offered sanctuary to such people
and their assets, with those who have supplied arms to
fuel such a crippling war in the world’s poorest country
and, indeed, with those who have constrained the
Council from taking effective action in response to a
situation that has been brewing for many years. We are
now being warned that a very real and serious disaster
is looming at a time when UNMISS is ill-equipped to
deal with it. As we know, UNMISS is operating in a
non-permissive environment, beset by deep systemic
and political problems and in a state of flux, facing

S/PV.7814

changes in leadership in the field and indeed in New
York next year.
UNMISS, as is sometimes forgotten, has four key
tasks: protecting civilians, monitoring and investigating
human rights abuses, creating the conditions for
delivering humanitarian assistance, and supporting
the implementation of the peace agreement. However,
the only task that UNMISS has really been able to
undertake in the past six months and longer is the first
of those tasks and, as has been cruelly demonstrated,
even that has not been done very well when the pressure
has been on.
Responsibility for the situation lies primarily with
the South Sudanese parties, especially the Government,
which has used its position as host Government and its
military strength to prevent UNMISS from carrying
out its mandate. What do we do? We cannot abandon
South Sudan, but neither can we magically conjure up
an instant change in the behaviour of South Sudanese
leaders or indeed in the way that UNMISS is constituted
and operates. Despite the scale of the problem, we need
to be focussed and realistic in our immediate objectives,
until longer-term arrangements can be developed and
put into place.
Right now, we first have to heed the warnings of
Mr. Adama Dieng about the dangers of genocide and
make it clear to South Sudan’s leaders that they will be
held to account if events deteriorate further. Secondly, we
need to implement without delay the recommendations
in the Independent Special Investigation report that are
capable of immediate implementation.
The Council should be kept updated regularly
on progress in implementation, and the SecretaryGeneral and his team need to ensure that such updates
are provided. We also need to set clear guidance and
expectations for the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Force Commander, and
require them to ensure that the civilian and military
components of UNMISS work in support of each
other’s operations, particularly with respect to the
implementation of the mandate, the rules of engagement
and the use of force.
The Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) also have a shared responsibility to
address the systemic issues in UNMISS. We need to be
having more frank conversations with each other so as
to clarify expectations and to highlight the decisions
by the TCCs not to follow orders. We should also be

16-3896517/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

working with Council members and the TCCs to
document benchmarks and violations of the status of
forces agreement and to build a shared understanding
of the picture of non-compliance.
At the level of the Council, we and the international
community have to take steps to change the calculus
of the Government of South Sudan, and the SPLAIO in particular, so as to give UNMISS the room it
needs to conduct its basic mandate. As a Council, we
need to send a clear signal, including through targeted
sanctions and an arms embargo, that the status quo will
no longer be tolerated.
The argument that sanctions must be linked to a
political process in order to be effective, or that they
might complicate the political process, only holds,
in our view, when there is a realistic prospect for
a political process. At the moment, there is none. In
that case, aside from at least reducing the importation
of weapons, especially heavy weaponry, the purpose
of the embargo would be to signal that international
tolerance of what has been going on in South Sudan has
reached an end.
New Zealand therefore looks forward to working
with the United States and other Council members on
the draft resolution that is anticipated.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for your work at the helm of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) on South Sudan at a particularly difficult time.
We wish to thank Ms. Løj for her efforts; she has
Spain’s full appreciation, gratitude and recognition
for her commitment to her work as Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in seeking
to promote peace in South Sudan.
We also thank Mr. Dieng for his timely visit to
South Sudan and for coming to the Council to present us
with his view of the events taking place in the country.
His participation in the Chamber today was particularly
relevant and necessary, given the real danger, as he has
reported, of mass atrocities occurring in the country.
What we have just heard from Mr. Dieng only reaffirms
the urgency of the need to act immediately and to
prepare ourselves for any possible occurrence.
As we are well aware, in 2005 world leaders endorsed
the principle and doctrine of the responsibility to
protect, which is designed to enable the United Nations
to act and assist in situations such as the one Mr. Dieng
18/29

17/11/2016

has just described. I would like to pick up on one of his
sentences that genocide is not an event, it is a process.
The main responsibility for stopping that process
is clearly one that rests with the authorities of South
Sudan and all of the political and military actors in the
country. However, when those actors are not capable
of assuming nor desire to assume their responsibility,
it is then up to the rest of the international community
to meet the needs of the people who find themselves
threatened. It is therefore up to the United Nations
system and more specifically the Council.
In that regard I would like to highlight two points.
First, there is a clear responsibility that must be
assumed by the United Nations system and the Mission
directed by Ms. Løj — we are highly aware of the
limits that the Mission faces in its ability to meet that
responsibility. This is why we are particularly satisfied
to see the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
to explore, together with the African Union, possible
options aimed at finding a solution. Those options
certainly include mechanisms to ensure the deployment
of a regional protection force, or other options beyond
the so-called over-the-horizon force referenced in
the report (S/2016/951), which we consider to be an
interesting initiative. Nevertheless, taking into account
the fact that the protection of civilians should be our
absolute priority, we hope that the interactions with
the African Union will lead to clear, specific plans and
proposals containing viable, realistic options.
One of the key elements in ensuring that
Ms. Løj can fulfil her functions is the need to ensure
the freedom of movement of UNMISS, as mentioned
on many occasions in the Chamber. Without freedom
of movement, it is impossible for her to provide followup or fulfil her mandate. The restrictions imposed
on the Mission by the South Sudanese authorities are
completely unacceptable. The security guarantees
offered by the South Sudanese authorities should,
as Ms. Løj has indicated, lead to genuine action in
practice. Restoring confidence between the Mission
and the South Sudanese authorities is essential. To that
end, it is critical that the South Sudanese authorities
act in good faith in their relationship with the United
Nations and the Security Council, as we hope they will.
Moreover, it is true that the Mission’s efforts do
not depend only on third parties. Part of issue is the
responsibility that the Mission must shoulder on its
own. That is why it is important to implement the
lessons learned from the incidents in Malakal and the
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violent incidents in July and to ensure that they do
not recur. We therefore reiterate our support for any
measure geared towards preventing any repetition
of those errors and towards ensuring the necessary
accountability, when appropriate.
Additionally, a part of the responsibility to protect
the people of South Sudan falls on the Council. We
must make that commitment as of now. In December
we must review the UNMISS mandate. We welcome
the proposals put forth in the report and the ambitious
goals set forth for the Mission, including bolstering
the protection of civilians, ensuring humanitarian
access, enhancing child protection, and fighting sexual
abuse and violence. We are fully aware, as we have
stated before, of the difficulties facing the Mission
in guaranteeing the protection of civilians located
outside of the camps.Nevertheless, we would be very
interested in some of the elements put forth in the
report, some of the innovative ideas on guaranteeing
and improving that protection, for example, foot patrols
to prevent sexual violence in areas surrounding the
UNMISS camps, as well as the idea of exploring highly
innovative measures, such as the protection of unarmed
civilians on the part of civil society, which is already
taking place somewhat successfully in some parts of
the country.
Secondly, I wish to refer to another responsibility
of the Council, namely, the need for capacity-building
by the Mission and the Special Representative in order
to better support the political process. As we have
reiterated, it is certain that we require a collective
effort to restart the dialogue and promote inclusivity in
the political process. In that regard, the Council could
consider other kinds of tools that might be available,
for example, individual sanctions like those that it has
available. People who are threatened with sanctions
might think twice before choosing hatred or division.

S/PV.7814

violence on the ground. It would limit the deployment of
heavy weaponry and reduce the possibility of escalating
bellicose actions. Above all, we are convinced that
having fewer weapons in the country would facilitate
an environment more conducive to promoting inclusive
political dialogue, which is the only way for the country
to find its way out of the current situation.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset I wish to thank the briefers for their presentations.
The recent situation in South Sudan remains
complex. On the one hand, the security situation
in Juba is easing. President Kiir is continuing to
implement the joint communiqué (S/2016/776, annex)
issued by the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan and the Security Council. He
has agreed to the participation of troops from relevant
neighbouring countries in the Regional Protection
Force. Furthermore, the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly has started its work, and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC) has
organized a workshop on setting up their own permanent
ceasefire and transitional security arrangements. On
the other hand, the overall situation in South Sudan
remains grim, with numerous difficulties involving
humanitarian assistance. The international community
should continue to provide assistance in the following
areas.
First, it is necessary to continue pushing for a
political process aimed at resolving the issue of South
Sudan. The international community should accelerate
efforts to ensure that all of the parties in South Sudan
return to the track of implementing the political
settlement and peace agreement in the interest of
resolving differences through dialogue and negotiation,
in a joint effort to achieve the peace, stability and
development of South Sudan.

Other instruments available to the Council include
the possibility of finally imposing an arms embargo on
South Sudan. We find it interesting that the United States
delegation has announced its intention to propose that
the Council establish an arms embargo. Spain has been
saying for more than a year — nearly two years — that
there is a need to adopt such a measure.

China supports all means aimed at strengthening
further implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in the
areas of good offices, the protection of civilians and
assisting humanitarian access, with a view to resolving
the problems encountered in the process of cooperation
with the Transitional Government of National Unity of
South Sudan through patient dialogue and consultation.

We believe, as the representative of the United
Kingdom has just mentioned, that imposing an arms
embargo is not, nor has it ever been, a political burden.
Rather, it is a genuine instrument aimed at reducing

Secondly, it is necessary to ensure the full
participation of regional and subregional organizations.
China has consistently backed the settlement of African
issues by Africans using their own methodologies. It

16-3896519/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

has supported the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development in its leading role in the settlement of the
South Sudan issue. The United Nations must increase
its support to the JMEC Chairperson, Mr. Festus
Mogae, and the African Union High Representative
for South Sudan, Mr. Alpha Oumar Konaré, so as to
enhance mutual cooperation and coordination in the
interest of enhancing synergy in the political settlement
of the South Sudan issue.
Thirdly, the implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions must enjoy the support and cooperation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan. The Transitional Government is committed to
the implementation of the joint communiqué issued
with the Security Council and the implementation
of resolution 2304 (2016). It is also committed to
supporting the full implementation of the UNMISS
mandate and the work of the humanitarian actors.
The Transitional Government of National Unity of
South Sudan agreed to allow the relevant neighbouring
countries to send their troops to participate in the
regional protection force and agreed to discuss with
UNMISS lands for the regional protection force.
The Security Council and the relevant parties should
seize this opportunity to encourage the Transitional
Government to promote consultations with all parties
involved and implement the joint communiqué and
relevant Council resolutions in a joint effort to promote
peace and stability in South Sudan.
Fourthly, China commends Ambassador Seck for
his leadership in the active work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan and has taken note of
the interim report submitted by the Panel of Experts
to the Sanctions Committee (S/2016/963). China urges
the Panel to strictly abide by the Council’s mandate
and conduct its work objectively and fairly in putting
forward its practical recommendations to the Sanctions
Committee concerning South Sudan.
In today’s complex situation, the Security Council
should send further positive signals to all sides and
encourage all parties in South Sudan to continue their
efforts to implement the peace agreement. The Council
should be prudent in taking action on the sanctions,
with a view to avoiding complicating the situation.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
20/29

17/11/2016

Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), Ms. Ellen Løj, for
her briefing and her active work in her post. We wish
her all the very best.
We also take note of the letter dated 9 November, the
recent report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2016/950), the special report of the
Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951),
the interim report of the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan (S/2016/963), and your statement, Mr. President,
in your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.
We note the recommendations issued by the
Secretary-General on the Mission’s mandate, wherein
he speaks of the priority given to promoting a peaceful
process and normalizing the situation in the security
area. That implies that peacekeepers should provide
capacity-building support to South Sudanese power
structures. Those proposals are in line with our own
approach. We think that the way to improve the
humanitarian situation and the human rights situation
in South Sudan lies through a lasting settlement on the
basis of inclusiveness.
As a step towards an inclusive political process
and national reconciliation, we welcome the amnesty
announced by President Salva Kiir for the supporters
of Riek Machar who participated in the armed clashes
in Juba in July and who are currently in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We share the opinion of the
Secretary-General that strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the Mission, including the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force, is not a panacea against
all of the country’s ills.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2304 (2016) and the joint communiqué between the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Security Council of 4 September (S/2016/776, annex),
we see a certain amount of progress there, which shows
that there is a constructive nature to the currently
ongoing negotiations with Juba. In particular, the South
Sudanese agreed to host contingents from Kenya,
Ethiopia and Rwanda. It is not their fault that, because
of the well-known hasty and ill-advised actions of the
Secretariat, Nairobi refused to send a new contingent
to South Sudan and is withdrawing the contingent
that was already deployed. One more positive element
here is the letter of 15 November containing the draft
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

agreement between Juba and the Mission, addressing
the implementation of the communiqué of 4 September.
We thank Mr. Dieng for his briefing. We share
his concerns with regard to the spread in South Sudan
of rhetoric and actions targeting individual ethnic
groups. What draws our attention is the fact that such
rhetoric frequently comes from various kinds of armed
and criminal groups and undisciplined elements of
various power structures. We would therefore refrain
from drawing the conclusion that they represent an
intentional policy, all the more so since some parties
have a tendency to exploit the emotional reaction of
the international community to the really difficult
and dramatic situation in South Sudan. In particular,
some colleagues refer to that situation in order to
justify their appeals to expand the sanctions regime
against that country, including an arms embargo by the
Security Council.
Our position on that has not changed. We think that
implementing such a recommendation would hardly
be helpful in settling the conflict. Furthermore, newer
sanctions could further complicate the relationship
among the host country, the peacekeepers and the
international
community.
Generally
speaking,
introducing targeted sanctions now against South
Sudanese leaders would be the height of irresponsibility.
Someone probably wants very much to see President
Kiir share the fate of Al-Qadhafi, against whom
targeted sanctions were also introduced.
In the Secretary-General’s letter of 9 November,
we did not note any conclusion that the Government
is impeding the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force in South Sudan. Quite the contrary, there is
positive movement in that area. Therefore, even if
we were to follow the formal logic of resolution 2304
(2016), which was, by the way, supported by our
Western colleagues, the reintroduction of an arms
embargo by the Security Council against South Sudan
would be premature.
With regard to the sanctions against South Sudan,
there is again no unity among African countries,
including the neighbouring countries. That lack of
unity could undermine the effectiveness of potential
restrictions. We can see that in the example of a
number of African countries, including the Central
African Republic, where sanctions, including the arms
embargo, are not working. By the way, with regard
to the communiqué of the African Union Peace and

S/PV.7814

Security Council of 19 September and their statement
after their visit to Juba at the end of October, we saw
no call for new sanctions either. We draw that to the
attention of those colleagues who are selective in
referring only to those decisions of the African Union
that they find useful.
Another point needs to be made. There is an
official arms embargo against South Sudan imposed
by the European Union (EU), but the United Nations
experts confirm that a functioning network supplying
weapons to South Sudan is operating in European
countries, so the EU embargo is not working. Where
is the guarantee that a United Nations embargo would
function? By the way, we are surprised by the double
standards of some colleagues who actively call for an
arms embargo against South Sudan while their own
nationals and companies are involved in supplying
weapons to that country.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation appreciates
the briefings by Ms. Ellen Løj and Mr. Adama Dieng and
by Ambassador Fodé Seck as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. Based on those briefings,
Malaysia is deeply concerned about the protracted
conflict and the deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situations in South Sudan. The briefers
described in detail the exacerbations of the crisis, the
renewed violence and the heightening of tensions along
ethnic lines, the potential risk for genocide and the dire
humanitarian situations.
Despite the Council’s numerous efforts to urge the
parties to the conflict to find a political solution, South
Sudan continues, unfortunately, to slide into chaos. As
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations, we urge the Transitional Government of
South Sudan to do its utmost to protect its people and
to urgently prioritize the welfare, safety and security of
all of the people of South Sudan, regardless of ethnicity
and political affiliations. National leaders must rise
above the parochial politics of divisions and ethnicity
and promote unity for all South Sudanese.
As previous speakers have rightly advocated, an
inclusive political process and national reconciliation
provide the only legitimate path towards restoring peace
and stability in South Sudan. Any call to arms would
only lead to further protracted conflict at the price
of more deaths and destruction. Despite the political
impasse and the stalled implementation of the peace

16-3896521/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

agreement, the leadership and solidarity shown by
regional partners, particularly the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, led former President Mogae
of Botswana, to mediate a dialogue and reinvigorate
the peace process, continue to provide some glimmers
of hope. It is imperative that the Security Council
continue to support those mediation efforts and sustain
engagement with regional partners, including the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well
as the European Union, for a comprehensive approach
to addressing the current situations in South Sudan.
Malaysia has always maintained its firm
commitment and support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations as a tool for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In that context, we
reiterate our full support for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and commend the men and
women of the Mission, who have continued to operate
under enormous pressure in challenging circumstances.
UNMISS must implement its mandate effectively.
That is extremely crucial, particularly in the current
situation in South Sudan. It is also imperative that both
the South Sudanese authorities and the armed forces
step up their efforts to enhance cooperation in order
to ensure the swift implementation of resolution 2304
(2016), including finalizing the outstanding matters
on the establishment and deployment of the original
protection force.
At the same time, it is also crucial for the parties
to engage in further discussions aimed at resolving
any misunderstandings, and address their differences.
For example, UNMISS views the request for the
participation of Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism liaison personnel in UNMISS convoys as
obstructions to UNMISS operations, whereas the South
Sudanese authorities view the proposal as a positive
mechanism aimed at facilitating the movement and
access of UNMISS into difficult areas.
Clearly more should and could be done to enhance
the trust and confidence levels between UNMISS and
the South Sudanese authorities. Within UNMISS, we
hope that the task force established by the Secretariat
will be able to swiftly implement the recommendations
of the Independent Special Investigation with a view to
restoring the credibility of the Mission.
We thank Ambassador Fodé Seck for his excellent
stewardship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan. Malaysia
22/29

17/11/2016

will continue to work closely with and support the
Committee, as we view the its work as an integral aspect
in supporting the peace process and our collective
objective of restoring lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan.
To conclude, as Ms.Løj approaches the end of her
tenure as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNMISS at the end of this month,
allow me to take this opportunity to express our heartfelt
appreciation for her relentless efforts and dedication in
carrying out her duties over the past two years. We wish
her all the best in her future endeavours.
Mrs. Gueguen-Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to South Sudan, Ms. Ellen Løj; Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng; and you, Sir, in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan, for your
briefings. I would also like to particularly welcome
the activities of Ms. Løj in heading the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) over the past few
years in very different circumstances.
The seriousness of the situation that has just
been described fully justifies today’s open meeting
to speak about the matter. France is deeply concerned
by the threat of a new escalation of violence in South
Sudan. Since the conflict began almost three years ago,
civilians have been the victims of unspeakable violence
and abuse. Men, women and children have been
executed, murdered, raped, mutilated and abducted.
Violence has spread to many regions of the country.
In addition to the fighting between the two parties to
the conflict, there are now cross-community conflicts,
ethnic violence and armed group attacks.
While that is already a bleak picture, today South
Sudan is in danger of plunging further into a new
spiral of violence. The Secretary-General, the Panel
of Experts of the Sanctions Committee and Mr. Dieng
himself have sounded the alarm. They have alerted us
to hate speech and incitement to murder, which makes
us fear the worst. They have drawn our attention to
the risk of an escalation of violence, particularly along
ethnic lines, which could result in mass violence.
The Security Council cannot turn a deaf ear to
such dangers. As was underscored by Mr. Dieng, such
a spiral of violence is not inevitable and therefore can
be prevented. The people of South Sudan cannot be
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7814

abandoned to such a fate. They are in danger and we
have to provide them with the necessary support. The
Security Council must therefore mobilize to prevent
South Sudan from descending into chaos. It cannot
and must not stand idly by. It has to act in accordance
with its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations and take the necessary measures.

civilians mandate in very difficult circumstances. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts deployed by the
Secretariat to draw lessons from the shortcomings
noted during the outbreak of violence in Juba in July. We
welcome and support the commitment of the Secretariat
to implementing the recommendations as quickly as
possible. The Council must support those efforts.

First of all, establishing an arms embargo is now
urgent. The ongoing influx into South Sudan of light
and heavy weapons feeds the conflict and makes it
easier to commit acts of violence against civilians. We
need to do our utmost to slow this flow of weapons.
France has long called for such an embargo and regrets
that the Security Council could not decide on it earlier.
However, there is still time. We support the United
States proposal and call on members of the Council to
stop prevaricating.

The civilian populations of South Sudan have
suffered for far too long from the war, which to them
seems endless. That situation could deteriorate further.
It is the Council’s responsibility to mobilize in order
to prevent South Sudan from plunging further into the
spiral of violence. It is time for us to act.

Next, the resumption of the political process is
critical to restoring hope to South Sudan. The conflict
cannot be resolved militarily; any settlement must be
political. The parties must therefore urgently commit to
ceasing hostilities and participate in inclusive dialogue
that can stabilize the governance of the country and
move towards an exit to the crisis. For that reason, we
welcome the active roles that the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union have
played since the beginning of the crisis in trying to
promote a political solution. Today more than ever it
is necessary to redouble the efforts in that regard, and
the United Nations can help, in particular through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Security Council must also play its role by supporting
those efforts. We must stand ready to remind those who
seeking to impede peace initiatives that the Council is
ready to take necessary measures against them.
Lastly, UNMISS must be in a position to carry out its
mandate. We strongly condemn the attacks perpetrated
against the Mission and humanitarian workers. The
obstacles that have been set up to prevent UNMISS
access to vulnerable populations are unacceptable.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and all
the parties to the conflict to guarantee full freedom
of movement to UNMISS. The Government of South
Sudan must also honour its commitments and ensure the
proper deployment of all Mission contingents, including
the Regional Protection Force, and their equipment.
I also want to reiterate the full support of France
to UNMISS, which is implementing its protection of

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I join other delegations
in thanking today’s briefers for their useful updates. I
would also like in particular to pay sincere tribute to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Løj
for her dedicated service at the helm of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which
I was privileged to witness while in South Sudan on
the Council’s most recent mission. In the light of the
information that we just heard, I would like to highlight
three main points.
First, we are extremely concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in South Sudan. As we
just heard, violence is surging in Equatoria, Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, Upper Nile and Unity states, where
armed actors on all sides systematically target civilians
and commit sexual violence and abuses and other
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. As we have just learned, while we
have been speaking here fighting has reportedly erupted
in Unity state between military forces and fighters
loyal to Riek Machar, killing at least 15 people. I am
still worried that we cannot rule out a further escalation
of violence once the rainy season ends this month.
Ukraine also takes reports of growing ethnic
tensions and the spread of hate speech, hostility and
incitement to violence very seriously. In that regard,
we believe that the visit to South Sudan by Special
Adviser Adama Dieng was an extremely timely move.
We support his proposals and ask him to continue
monitoring the situation on the ground and keep the
Security Council fully updated. The worsening security
climate has resulted in mass displacements, with over
1 million South Sudanese having sought refuge in
more safe regions of the country or in neighbouring
countries. Nearly half of the population requires

16-3896523/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

constant humanitarian assistance. All of that underlines
the urgent need for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the full implementation of the ceasefire. We could
not agree more with Ms. Ellen Løj that the guns have
to be silenced. I would only add that the guns have also
to be prevented from flowing into South Sudan. In that
light, we are ready to work on the relevant proposal of
the United States delegation.
The continuous fighting suggests that the parties
still hope to achieve their goals by military means, while
it is clear that the political process is the only realistic
way towards peace and stability in South Sudan. That
is why we urge the parties to immediately resume
the implementation of the peace agreement in good
faith and without preconditions. That includes the
resumption of participation of all parties in the work
of the Transitional Government and the promotion of
confidence-building and reconciliation measures.
At such a critical time, it is very important that the
United Nations, and in particular UNMISS, continue
assisting the South Sudanese people. Over the past
month, there has been some improvement in removing
obstructions to the Mission’s ability to implement its
mandate, yet many restrictions, in particular those
of freedom of movement and humanitarian access,
still remain. In that regard, we urge the Transitional
Government to respect its commitments under the
status of forces agreement and fully implement relevant
provisions of the joint communiqué of 4 September,
agreed to by the Council in Juba. Ukraine believes that
the deployment and operatinalization of the Regional
Protection Force, as envisaged in resolution 2304
(2016), would help to stabilize South Sudan.
We welcome the fact that the Transitional
Government and the Secretariat have come to an
agreement on the composition of the troop-contributing
countries. In that respect, my delegation looks forward
to the rapid conclusion of deployment preparations
and the arrival of troops. It is also critical that the
Transitional Government fully cooperate with UNMISS
in the operationalization of the Regional Protection
Force. To sum up, in our view there are the following
prerequisites for the stabilization of the situation in
South Sudan: the cessation of hostilities, resumption of
the implementation of the peace agreement, the removal
of obstructions to UNMISS work and the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force.
24/29

17/11/2016

Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I thank all briefers for
their briefings, and in particular I commend Ms. Ellen
Løj for her service and efforts in the very difficult and
challenging conditions to support the people of South
Sudan in reaching sustainable peace after years of
conflict. We wish her the best in her future endeavours.
Five years after the proclamation of South Sudan’s
independence and 20 months of conflict, the South
Sudanese parties signed a peace agreement brokered
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
which was endorsed by the African Union and the
international community. Today, following the incidents
that took place in Juba between 8 to 11 July, the situation
has worsened. Progress on the implementation of the
provisions of the peace agreement has been halted, and
instead of increased dialogue we have borne witness
over the past month to the resurgence of hate speech
and incitements to violence.
The international community must send a clear
message to the leadership of South Sudan. First, the
leadership must recall its responsibility to protect the
civilian population. Secondly, it must be informed
that the international community will not tolerate a
genocide or war crimes and crimes against humanity
in South Sudan. Thirdly, perpetrators of all acts of
violence, in particular ethnic and/or sexual violence,
will be held accountable.
We as the international community also have a
responsibility to revive the peace agreement in South
Sudan, which is the legal instrument signed by the
parties and international partners. In that regard, we
think that an arms embargo is not a solution to the
conflict. The efforts of the international community
must encourage the parties towards more dialogue
and inclusivity. However, we recognize that some
important steps that have been taken by the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan regarding
the operationalization of the Regional Protection Force
authorized by the Security Council, but we also regret
all violations of the status of forces agreement and the
blockade that has created additional challenges for the
performance of the Mission.
I would like to ask Mr. Dieng a question. In light
of the difficulty in deploying the 4,000 personnel of
the Regional Protection Force, what does he think of
increasing the number of unarmed civilian protectors
who are currently protecting civilians in 10 locations
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

around the country, including the protection of civilian
areas in Bentiu, Malakal and Juba?
We commend you for your hard work, Sir, in
your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan, and
we welcome your initiative to visit South Sudan and
other countries of the region. It is important to establish
contact with the reality of South Sudan and the various
stakeholders in order to address misunderstandings
regarding the role of the Committee. On the other
hand, we regret the fact that the Panel of Experts that
supports the Committee produces biased, unbalanced
and controversial reports that are contradicted by
other issues reported by other United Nations organs.
It should be noted with regret by the Panel that the
peace agreement has already collapsed and that the
Transitional Government of National Unity has become
a regime, with all its negative and biased perceptions.
We believe that it is our responsibility, as members
of this organ, which is responsible for maintaining
peace and security, to support the people of South
Sudan in addressing their current challenges and help
them on the path towards sustainable peace. Angola is
fully committed to those objectives.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Mr. Dieng to respond to questions and
comments raised.
Mr. Dieng (spoke in French): I wish first to address
the question raised by the representative of Venezuela
concerning the measures that might be taken with a
view to reducing prevailing tensions.
(spoke in English)
I should, first of all, indicate that, in close
cooperation with my colleague Hervé Ladsous, even
prior to my trip to South Sudan we had put in place
a working group to look into the measures that need
to be taken to prevent a further escalation of the
current violence. While I was in South Sudan, what I
offered as a way to help, beginning at the local level
in Yei River state — where, as I indicated and was
confirmed by almost everybody, the situation had been
deteriorating — was to facilitate a dialogue with the
community and religious leaders. We felt that such
dialogue was extremely important.
We also felt that it was important to develop
a communication plan at Headquarters in order to
increase global and regional awareness of the risk of

S/PV.7814

mass atrocities in South Sudan. As a matter of fact,
as I indicated in my presentation, I hope — and I
mentioned this to our colleagues in the United Nations
country team while I was there — that they will also
help to monitor, on a daily basis, all the incitements
and examples of hate speech, with the help of the staff
on the ground, including in the local languages, so that
they have the most accurate record of such messages.
We also felt that it will be very important to engage
further with the African Union and the countries of the
region, and I am very pleased, Mr. President, that you
will be visiting the region in December. As a matter
of fact, the African Union High Representative for
South Sudan and former President of Mali, Mr. Alpha
Oumar Konaré, is very concerned about this and will
be in Juba himself in the coming days to follow up on
the issue. I think we should provide him with as much
support as we can, so I have already alerted him and
have been in contact with the office of Mr. Mogae,
the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, encouraging them to make that trip to
Juba. If necessary, we are considering activating the
mechanism of the African Union’s Panel of the Wise
to discuss additional initiatives. In the light of the
seriousness of the situation, we are also considering
asking the Secretary-General — with your support,
Mr. President, and that of all the members of the
Security Council — to convene a high-level meeting to
address the situation.
I have also been urging Riek Machar himself to
make clear to him his responsibilities from his side.
At the end of the day, of course, this is in the hands
primarily of the South Sudanese themselves, and
primary responsibility lies with South Sudan. As I
reminded the authorities while I was there, President
Salva Kiir is in charge of law and order. He is not the
President of the Dinka or of the Nuer, he is the President
of all South Sudanese and the father of the nation. I
have even asked him to clarify the speech he delivered
on 19 October, to reassure the people that he did not
mean that he would be going to Equatoria to fight them.
I have also offered to provide two investigators to help
the South Sudanese judiciary start investigating the
allegations of crimes committed in Yei River state. At
the end of the day, the people must be reassured, or they
will continue to flee the country, and we must put an
end to this situation.
Concerning the question raised by the Ambassador
of Angola, it is clear that the deployment of the 4,000

16-3896525/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people in the Regional Protection Force is one thing,
but ultimately, after recruiting and placing 4,000 troops
or even more, that will not solve the problem on the
ground. What we desperately need, and I insisted on
this while I was in Juba, is to have a truly inclusive
process. In the end, with the entire debate that has
taken place regarding Riek Machar’s replacement by
Taban Deng Gai, and whatever interpretation can be
put on that — and the man must be included — what
is most important is not about personalities but about
getting civil society and everybody else on board. I was
with the elders of the Equatorias, and that is one of the
reasons that I said at some point while I was there that
there is still hope for ensuring that. But I can say that
in the discussions with some of those actors, one can
feel the hatred, and that situation must be calmed down.
But, unfortunately, what is most worrying is the
amount of arms that are circulating. Many young people
have those weapons and are doing whatever they can to
try to survive. Because the country is split everywhere,
not just in Yei. That is why I have to say that
(spoke in French)
this is a very serious moment in South Sudan, and
it is time to act and to act urgently.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your leadership of the Council
for this month, and to pledge our full cooperation
during the remainder of your presidency. I would
also like to thank Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS); Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide;
and Ambassador Fodé Seck of Senegal, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), for their briefings.
I would like to begin by expressing our appreciation
to you and the members of the Council for giving us
the opportunity to share our views on the SecretaryGeneral’s letter of 9 November to the Security Council
and his reports on the security and humanitarian
situation in South Sudan (S/2016/950) and the role of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951).
There are allegations in the reports whose accuracy
is debatable; our intention is not to contest them but
26/29

17/11/2016

simply to help the Council and all the parties concerned
to get a better understanding of the root causes of the
problems so that we can develop appropriate remedies.
South Sudan fully understands that the motive
behind the work of the United Nations, the African
Union,
the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development and other international partners is their
growing concern for the security, safety and general
welfare of our people. We share that concern not only
because we are the country affected, but also because
we are part and parcel of the United Nations and the
international community, and we share the same moral
values and normative principles. We also remember,
with deep gratitude, the support we received from the
international community in the struggle for liberation
that led to our independence. The support of the
United Nations and the international donor community
for our newly independent country that led to the
establishment of UNMISS is also something for which
our Government and people remain deeply grateful.
Our people’s long struggle, which went on
intermittently for half a century before we achieved
independence, was basically a quest for the ideals that
the United Nations stands for — peace, security and
the enjoyment of all human rights. In other words, it
represented the pursuit of universal human dignity.
That being the case, we must ask why South Sudan has
suddenly descended into its current crisis.
To answer this question, the starting point must be
that the objective of restoring peace and security and
addressing the humanitarian needs of our people is first
and foremost the major concern of the people and the
Government of South Sudan. If we fail, it should be
recognized that the explanation lies not in a lack of will
but in the limits of our national capacity to respond. The
conflict has intensified divisions among our leaders
and their people. We should, however, be all aware that
the crisis in South Sudan — indeed, as in many other
countries experiencing conflict — is a result of internal
and external factors alike. Rather than pointing fingers,
we should all cooperate and understand that we are in
it together and, in one way or another, all affected and
share the responsibility for the crisis.
In the hierarchy of shared responsibility, we
fully recognize what the Secretary-General has
highlighted in his observations on the situation and
that the primary responsibility to protect all citizens,
without discrimination on the basis of their ethnicity
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

or political affiliation, rests with the Government. We
also acknowledge that it is the responsibility of the
Government to meet the humanitarian needs of its
people. That is the core of responsible sovereignty.
In the case of South Sudan, the critical question
then becomes one of strengthening the capacity of the
State to discharge these national obligations effectively,
bearing in mind the principle that the international
community has the complementary responsibility to
provide a State in need with supplementary assistance
to meet its national responsibility. It should be recalled
that South Sudan was grossly neglected by the colonial
administration and has been devastated by the long war
that erupted in 1955, a few months before independence
on 1 January 1956. It should therefore be recognized that
the country continues to lack the capacity necessary to
deal with its grave challenges in a robust manner. These
challenges emanate from internal and external factors
alike, particularly the continuing legacy of the long war
between the north and South Sudan. Both sets of causes
require the diligent efforts of the two countries and the
international community to be effectively addressed in
a constructively dialogue.
The necessary support of the world bodies to
address these interconnected crises must strengthen the
institutions whose primary responsibility is to protect
the people. This support should be based on a genuine,
mutual and respectful cooperation that does not infringe
on the sovereignty of the Republic of South Sudan.
It should also be premised on the fact that there is an
elected and legitimate Government in South Sudan that
fully represents the will of the people. It is, of course,
undeniable that the country is now divided and that it
is also the responsibility of the Government, supported
by the international community, to restore the unity of
the leaders and their people. However, nowhere in the
world can a sovereign Government accept an armed
rebellion. As we have seen in comparable situations,
it is the responsibility of the international community
to assist Member States in stopping and eliminating
armed rebellion against an elected Government.
South Sudan also agrees with the Secretary-General
that the inclusion of all ethnic groups and political
factions should be the desired objective so long as these
groups adhere to the democratic principles and the
rule of law. The international response to our situation
has, however, been characterized by a persistent
tendency to strike a moral equivalency that does not
apportion accountability for the crises or recognize

S/PV.7814

the difference between the elected Government and an
armed rebellion. It is important for the international
community to identify those who are genuinely striving
to find workable solutions through legal institutions
and those undermining efforts to restore peace, unity
and stability, particularly by resorting to violence.
An example of this misleading tendency towards
moral equivalency is the statement in the report that
categorically asserts the lack of inclusivity in the
political process and the increasing feelings of political
marginalization among other ethnic groups, many
of which believe that the Government is pursuing a
policy of Dinka domination across the country. Rather
than make an assertion based on presumed feelings, a
responsible observation must look into the composition
of the Government at all levels. It is a glaring fact that
members of the Nuer group and other smaller ethnic
groups have always been well represented at the senior
levels of the Government and the army, and indeed
throughout the bureaucracy.
It should be remembered that the Dinka are
the overwhelming majority across the country, and
their numbers cannot be minimized by any notion of
proportional representation. But although the Dinka
are the largest group in the country, South Sudan
has over 60 ethnic groups and there is no way for
one group, out of self-interest, to dominate all the
other groups. If anything at all, the Dinka national
leadership has tended to bend over backward not only
to ensure the representation of all groups, but also to
counter any fears of Dinka domination. To assert the
opposite is to be blind to the facts, stress the tendency
to stigmatise one group and promote a self-fulfilling
dangerous propaganda.
As the popular saying goes, actions speak louder
than words. President Salva Kiir, in his commitment
to peace, security, stability and the general welfare
of all his people, has repeatedly demonstrated his
determination to end the crisis in the country. Far from
promoting Dinka domination, he has promoted the
unity of South Sudan by incorporating Nuer militias
into the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, to the
point at which over 70 per cent of the army is Nuer.
It is however, those former militias who became Riek
Machar’s rebel army. And yet, Nuer representation in
the Government and the army remains significant, and
the President has maintained his commitment to the
policy of inclusiveness.

16-3896527/29

S/PV.7814

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We want to draw the attention of the Council to
the appointment of General Taban Deng Gai as First
Vice-President so that the peace process is not held
hostage by the absence of Riek Machar from the country.
First Vice-President Gai is already demonstrating his
commitment to move the peace process forward. It
should be remembered that he was a signatory to the
initial security arrangement of the Machakos Protocol
in 2004 and his contribution to the liberation struggle is
well known to the people of South Sudan. He was also
the leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition (SPLM-IO) negotiating team.
Since his appointment as First Vice-President, Gai has
been given full support by the President to implement
the agreement and through its established modalities,
address the grievances of our people.
While there is no intention to exclude any citizen
from the political process, there is no justification, locally
or internationally, to support Riek Machar’s continued
armed rebellion against an elected Government. It is
a misleading assumption to assert, as the report does,
that Riek Machar retains significant political and
military support. The implication is that such support
is from the Nuer community. But in addition to Taban
Deng Gai’s role as First Vice-President, and a number
of other Nuers in important positions in Government,
significant numbers of the Nuer ethnic group fled into
Dinka areas and are living peacefully with their host
Dinka communities. There are, of course, genuine
grievances among members of various groups, including
sections of the Dinka that need to be addressed. The
Government is however committed to correcting the
differences among groups, some of which go deep into
the history of inequitable development in the Sudan
and now South Sudan, but this should not be confused
with the tendency of political entrepreneurs to exploit
ethnic politics.
We must acknowledge that recognizing the efforts
of the Government is a source of encouragement to
continue positive reforms, while disregarding such
efforts can be a disincentive. In addition to Gai’s
appointment, the President recently made several
decisions by republican order — one instructing the
Ministerial Committee of the Transitional Government
of National Unity, charged with the implementation of
the joint communiqué and resolution 2304 (2016), to
expedite and complete its work within 14 days, and the
other establishing a Humanitarian High-level Oversight
Committee led by the Minister of Cabinet Affairs to
28/29

17/11/2016

work towards removing all impediments affecting
humanitarian operations in the country. The President
also established by republican order a National Planning
Committee, chaired by the Minister in the Office of the
President, to enhance the security and production of oil,
launch infrastructure projects and stimulate external
support.
As such entities are intended to address the
relevant aspects of the crises confronting the country,
their active coordinating role should be recognized and
respected by our international partners to ensure more
effective partnership in providing assistance to the
country. Close partnership with existing Government
institutions is crucial not only to achieving positive
results, but also to enhancing the capacity of the
Government to be more effective in the delivery of vital
services to the people of South Sudan.
Permit me now to comment on two other issues that
have been of concern to the international community
and considerable debate recently — the proposed
Regional Protection Force and the formation of a
hybrid court. Both proposals have been accepted by
the Government of South Sudan. It must, however,
be recognized that there are significant challenges
associated with both the force and the court that should
be constructively addressed.
The Regional Protection Force should be
approached in a spirit of cooperation and with the
active engagement of the Government of South Sudan
and in a manner that reinforces and strengthens
the command and control of our armed forces and
respect for the rule of law. International involvement
should be a supplement or reinforcement, rather
than a replacement, to the Government’s efforts to
protect its own people, in accordance with its national
responsibility. The hybrid court should also be seen as
complementary to the national judicial responsibility
for justice. In that connection, it must carefully
balance the quest for justice and accountability with
the promotion of peace and national reconciliation.
For both the protection force and the hybrid court to
succeed, cooperation and constructive partnership with
the Government are crucial. As such, we have agreed
to implement the agreement of the joint Transitional
Government of National Unity and Security Council
communiqué of 4 September, in the spirit of cooperation
to advance peace, security, stability and reconciliation
in our country.
16-38965

17/11/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would also like to comment on the proposed
arms embargo on all parties engaged in the conflict.
Although the motive of that proposal as it aims to end
the violence that continues to devastate the country,
it is unfortunately another indication of the moral
equivalence that does not distinguish between a
legitimately elected Government and an armed rebellion
intent on overthrowing the Government. We continue to
stress that it is the responsibility of the Government to
protect all its citizens and defend its borders. To deny the
Government the necessary means for discharging that
responsibility is to basically undermine its sovereignty,
which is totally unacceptable.
Finally, much has been said about increasing
violence targeting ethnic groups and violations of
the UNMISS status of forces agreement. Without
challenging the accuracy of such allegations, what should
be highlighted is that they do not in any way reflect
Government policy. It is undeniable that incidents occur
on the ground that responsible authorities may not be
aware of and, therefore, cannotbe control on the spot. It
is, however, important that the report of the SecretaryGeneral document specific cases where measures were
taken by elements at the lower levels of the operational
hierarchy, in violation of the agreed guidelines, which,
when brought to the attention of senior authorities, were

S/PV.7814

corrected. This further underscores the problems of
capacity and the need for the capacity-building support
of the international community.
To conclude, we recognize that our country is
confronting severe challenges and that our national
capacity to deal with the crisis is severely constrained.
We need the complementary support of the international
community not only because South Sudan is a State
Member of the United Nations, but also because the
Government and the people of South Sudan are the
beneficiaries of that cooperation. However, such
cooperation should not in any way come at the cost of
our hard-won independence and national sovereignty.
We trust that the United Nations and our international
partners will respond to our aspirations and concerns to
promote constructive and productive partnerships.
I also take this opportunity to thank Ms. Ellen Løj
for her service with UNMISS in South Sudan, and wish
her the best in her future endeavours. We pledge our
cooperation with her successor.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

16-3896529/29
