Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

tary budgets" and, in this context, to finalize, at its sub­
stantive session in 1986, the principles that should govern
the actions of States in the field of freezing and reduction
of military expenditures on the basis of the working paper
annexed to its report,35 as well as other proposals and ideas
on the subject;
5. Draws anew the attention of Member States to the
fact that the identification and elaboration of the principles
which should govern further actions of States in freezing
and reducing military budgets could contribute to harmo­
nizing the views of States and creating confidence among
them conducive to international agreements on the reduc­
tion of military budgets;
6. Urges all Member States, in particular the most
heavily armed States, to reinforce their readiness to co­
operate in a constructive manner with a view to reaching
agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain military
expenditures;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Reduction of military
budgets".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

B
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the arms race and present ten­
dencies to increase further the rate of growth of military
expenditures, the deplorable waste of human and econo­
mic resources and the potentially harmful effects on world
peace and security,
Considering that a gradual reduction of military expend­
itures on a mutually agreed basis would be a measure that
would contribute to curbing the arms race and would
increase the possibilities of reallocating resources now
being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,
Convinced that such reductions could and should be car­
ried out on a mutually agreed basis without detriment to
the national security of any country,
Reaffirming its conviction that provisions for defining,
reporting, comparing and verifying military expenditures
will have to be basic elements of any international agree­
ment to reduce such expenditures,
Recalling that an international system for the standard­
ized reporting of military expenditures has been intro­
duced in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 35/
142 B of 12 December 1980, and that national reports on
military expenditures have been received from a number
of Member States belonging to different geographic regions
and having different budgeting and accounting systems,
Considering that a wider participation in the reporting
system of States from different geographic regions and rep­
resenting different budgeting systems would promote its
further refinement and would, by contributing to greater
openness in military matters, increase confidence between
States,
Emphasizing that the above-mentioned activities and
initiatives, as well as other ongoing activities within the
United Nations related to the reduction of military
35 Ibid., Supplement No. 42 (A/40/42). annex II.
36 A/40/421. The report was subsequently issued with the title Reduction
of Military Budgets: construction of military price indexes and purchasing­
power parities/or comparison of military expenditures (United Nations publi­
cation. Sales No. E.86.IX.2).

budgets, have the objective of facilitating future negotia­
tions aimed at the conclusion of international agreements
on the reduction of military expenditures,
Recalling its resolution 37/95 B of 13 December 1982,
in which it requested the Secretary-General, with the
assistance of a group of qualified experts and with the vol­
untary co-operation of States, to undertake the task of con­
structing price indices and purchasing-power parities for
the military expenditures of participating States,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General36
containing the report of the Group of Experts on the
Reduction of Military Budgets,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Group of Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Group of Experts that assisted him in the prepa­
ration of the report;
3. Commends the report and its conclusions and rec­
ommendations to the attention of all Member States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the report as a
United Nations publication; 36
5. invites all Member States to submit to the Secretary­
General, no later than 15 April 1986, their views regarding
the report and to suggest further measures with a view to
facilitating future international agreements to reduce mili­
tary expenditures;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing the views of Member States received con­
cerning this issue to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session;
7. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General containing the replies received in 1985
from Member States in the framework of the above-men­
tioned reporting system;37
8. Stresses the need to increase the number of report­
ing States with a view to the broadest possible participa­
tion from different geographic regions and representing
different budgeting systems;
9. Reiterates its recommendation that all Member
States should report annually, by 30 April, to the Secre­
tary-General, using the reporting instrument, their mili­
tary expenditures for the latest fiscal year for which data
are available;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Reduction of military
budgets".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/92. Chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons
A
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 75 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 which
states that the complete and effective prohibition of the
37 A/401) I ·1 and Add.1-1

78

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and their destruction represents one of the most
urgent measures of disarmament,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the com­
plete and effective prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and to
their destruction,
Convinced of the need for the earliest conclusion of a
convention on the prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction, which would significantly contribute to
general and complete disarmament under effective inter­
national control,
Stressing the continuing importance of the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poi­
sonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, 38 signed sixty years ago at Geneva,
Determined, for the sake of all mankind, to exclude
completely the possibility of the use of chemical weapons,
through the earliest conclusion and implementation of a
convention on the prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of all types of chemical weapons
and on their destruction, thereby complementing the obli­
gations assumed under the Geneva Protocol of 17 June
1925,
Taking into consideration the work of the Conference on
Disarmament during its session in 1985 regarding the pro­
hibition of chemical weapons and, in particular, highly
appreciating the work of its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemi­
cal Weapons,
Expressing profound concern at recent decisions on the
production of binary chemical weapons, as well as at their
intended deployment,
Deeming it desirable for States to refrain from taking any
action that could delay or further complicate negotiations
and to display a constructive approach to such negotia­
tions and the political will to reach an early agreement on
the ,chemical weapons convention,
Aware that the qualitative improvement and develop­
ment of chemical weapons complicate ongoing negotia­
tions on the prohibition of chemical weapons,
Taking note of proposals on the creation of chemical­
weapon-free zones aimed at facilitating the complete pro­
hibition of chemical weapons and at contributing to the
achievement of stable regional and international security,
l . Reaffirms the necessity of the speediest elaboration
and conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and on their destruction;
2. Appeals to all States to facilitate in every possible
way the conclusion of such a convention;
3. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to intensify
the negotiations in the Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical
Weapons with a view to achieving accord on a chemical
weapons convention at the earliest possible date and, for
this purpose, to intensify the drafting process of such a
convention for submission to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
4. Reaffirms its call to all States to conduct serious
negotiations in good faith and to refrain from any action
that could impede negotiations on the prohibition of
chemical weapons and specifically to refrain from the pro­
duction and deployment of binary and other new types of
chemical weapons, as well as from stationing chemical
weapons on the territory of other States;

5. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases,
and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at
Geneva on 17 June 1925.
I 13th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

381.eague of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138, p. 65.
39 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

40 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. Supple­
ment No. '!7 (A/40/27 and Corr. I), para. 96.

B
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the com­

plete and effective prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and to
their destruction,
Reaffirming the urgent necessity of strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 38 and of
the adherence by all States to the Convention on the Pro­
hibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, signed in London, Moscow and Wash­
ington, on 10 April 1972,39
Having considered the part of the report of the Con­
ference on Disarmament on chemical weapons, in particu­
lar the report of its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical
Weapons,40
Convinced of the necessity that all effvrts be exerted for
the continuation and successful conclusion of negotiations
on the prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruc­
tion,
l. Takes note of the work of the Conference on Dis­
armament during its session in 1985 regarding the prohibi­
tion of chemical weapons and, in particular, appreciates
the work of its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons
on that question and the progress recorded in its report;
2. Expresses again its regret and concern that an agree­
ment on the complete and effective prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and on their destruction has not yet been elabo­
rated;
3. Urges again the Conference on Disarmament, as a
matter of high priority, to intensify, during its session in
1986, the negotiations on such a convention and to rein­
force further its efforts, inter alia, by increasing the time
during the year that it devotes to such negotiations, taking
into account all existing proposals and future initiatives,
with a view to the final elaboration of a convention at the
earliest possible date, and to re-establish its Ad Hoc Com­
mittee on Chemical Weapons for this purpose with the
1985 mandate;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
results of its negotiations.
I I 3th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

III.

C
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the urgent necessity of strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,38 and of
the adherence by all States to the Convention on the Pro­
hibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, signed in London, Moscow and Wash­
ington, on lO April 1972, 39
Noting with concern reports that chemical weapons have
been used, as well as indications of their emergence in an
increasing number of national arsenals,
Expressing concern at the increasing risk that chemical
weapons may be resorted to again,
Noting international efforts to strengthen relevant inter­
national prohibitions, including efforts to develop appro­
priate fact-finding mechanisms,
Recalling its resolution 39/65 A of 12 December 1984,
Rededicating its efforts to protect mankind from chemi­
cal and biological warfare,
l . Reaffirms the need for strict observance of existing
international obligations regarding prohibitions on chemi­
cal and biological weapons and condemns all actions that
contravene those obligations;
2. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to ensure the most
effective prohibitions possible on chemical and biological
weapons;
3. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to accelerate
its negotiations on a multilateral convention on the com­
plete and effective prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their
destruction;
4. Calls upon all States, pending the conclusion of such
a comprehensive ban, to co-operate in efforts to prevent
the use of chemical weapons.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/93. Israeli nuclear armament
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli
nuclear armament, the latest of which is 39/147 of 17
December I 984,
Recalling resolution 39/54 of 12 December 1984, in
which, inter alia, it called upon all countries of the Middle
East, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, to agree to place all their nuclear
activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safe­
guards,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 487 ( 198 l)
of 19 June 198 1 in which, inter alia, the Council called
upon Israel urgently to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to
commit itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weap­
ons, despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
41 N40/520, annex.

79

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committe.-

Agency, and to place its nuclear facilities under Agency
safeguards,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger interna­
tional peace and security as a result of Israel's develop­
ment and acquisition of nuclear weapons and Israel's col­
laboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons
and their delivery systems,
I. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Insti­
tute for Disarmament Research on this question;41
2. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to
renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests once more the Security Council to take
urgent and effective measures to ensure that Israel com­
plies with Security Council resolution 487 ( 198 1) and
places all its nuclear facilities under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Reiterates its request to the Security Council to
investigate Israel's nuclear activities and the collaboration
of other States, parties and institutions in these activities;
5. Calls upon all States and organizations that have not
yet done so to discontinue co-operating with and giving
assistance to Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Reaffirms its condemnation of the continuing
nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli nuclear activities and to report thereon as appropri­
ate to the General Assembly.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/94. General and complete disarmament
A
CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT ON A REGIONAL
SCALE

The General Assemblr.
Reaffirming the determination to save succeeding gener­
ations from the scourge of war that is expressed in the Pre­
amble to the Charter of the United Nations,
Again recognizing the urgent need for the harmonizing
of political wills in order to promote initiatives aimed at
reducing expenditure on armaments so that the resources
thus released can be devoted to the social and economic
development of all peoples,
Recalling paragraph 2 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 in which
it is stated, inter alia, that the nuclear and conventional
arms build-up threatens to stall the efforts aimed at reach­
ing the goals of development, to become an obstacle on the
road of achieving the new international economic order
and to hinder the solution of other vital problems facing
mankind,
Recallingfurther paragraphs 45 and 46 of the Final Doc­
ument of the Tenth Special Session, 10 in which it declared,
inter alia, that priorities in disarmament negotiations
should be: nuclear weapons; other weapons of mass des­
truction, including chemical weapons; conventional weap­
ons, including any which may be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects; and reduction
of armed forces; and that nothing should preclude States
from conducting negotiations on all priority items concur­
rently,
