United Nations

A/54/PV.93

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

93rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 15 March 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ingólfsson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decisions A/54/L.77 and A/54/L.78.

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.

The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
decision A/54/L.77, entitled “Arrangements regarding
participation of non-governmental organizations in the
special session of the General Assembly entitled
Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century'”.

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Allocation of items and organization of work
The Acting President: I should now like to recall for
representatives that agenda item 110 entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women” was allocated to the Third
Committee. In order for the Assembly to proceed
expeditiously on this item, may I take it that the Assembly
agrees to consider agenda item 110 directly in plenary
meetings?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 110? I see no objection. We
shall therefore proceed accordingly.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/54/L.77?
Draft decision A/54/L.77 was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly will next take
a decision on draft decision A/54/L.78, entitled
“Arrangements regarding accreditation of nongovernmental organizations to the special session of the
General Assembly entitled Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century'”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/54/L.78?

Agenda item 110 (continued)
Draft decision A/54/L.78 was adopted.
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women
Draft decisions (A/54/L.77 and A/54/L.78)

00-34528 (E)

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 110.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 49
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
(b) The Millennium Assembly of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/54/L.81/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I should now like to draw the
Assembly’s attention to some revisions I made to the text
of the draft resolution which was contained in document
A/54/L.81.
With regard to paragraph 1 of the draft resolution,
following consultations I had with member States after
sending the Assembly the draft dated 13 March 2000, I
have made a slight revision to the title of the overall theme
of the Summit, which now reads “The role of the United
Nations in the twenty-first century”. This does not imply
any prejudice against any other operative paragraphs.
With regard to paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, the
original text did not reflect properly one of the provisions
of Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
that the General Assembly shall elect a President, not a
country, for each session. Consequently, I have replaced
twice in paragraph 3 the words “the country holding the
presidency” by the words “the country of the President”.

93rd plenary meeting
15 March 2000
By operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide that the Millennium
Summit would be composed of plenary meetings and of
four interactive round-table sessions, with each interactive
session to be held in concurrence with a plenary meeting.
On the basis of this decision, the related estimated costs
for security and protocol requirements would amount to
$450,000 and $193,000, respectively. The related
provisions would be reflected in the context of the first
performance report on the programme budget for 20002001 to be presented to the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
Consequently, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/54/L.81/Rev.1, any additional
requirements which would arise would be considered in
the context of the first performance report for the
biennium 2000-2001 at the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
The Acting President: As provided for in operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, all outstanding issues,
including this matter, will be considered at an appropriate
moment by the General Assembly.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/54/L.81/Rev.1, entitled “Millennium
Summit of the United Nations”.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/54/L.81/Rev.1.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/54/L.81/Rev.1?

I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

Draft resolution A/54/L.81/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 54/254).

Mr. Perfiliev (Director of General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs): By operative
paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/54/L.81/Rev.1, the
General Assembly would decide that the Millennium
Summit should be held from 6 to 8 September 2000 in
New York. In connection with conference servicing
requirements, the servicing of the plenary meetings would
be part of the normal servicing of the sessions of the
Assembly. No additional requirements would thus arise in
this respect.

2

The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item
49.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
