A /75/PV.16

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

16th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 13 October 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Highness Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the
State of Kuwait
The President: It is my sad duty to pay tribute to
the memory of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait,
who passed away on 29 September. On behalf of the
General Assembly, I request the representative of
Kuwait to convey our condolences to the Government
and the people of Kuwait and to the bereaved family of
His Highness.
On behalf the General Assembly, I extend my
deepest condolences to the Al-Sabah family and to the
Government and the people of Kuwait on the passing
of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, the Amir of the State of Kuwait.
The Amir was known as the dean of Arab diplomacy
for his commitment to peace and dialogue. It is a
privilege to call this great man one of us — a diplomat.
His Highness spent 40 years as Kuwait’s Foreign
Minister and played a key role in creating the Gulf
Cooperation Council, which was and still is crucial to
strengthening cooperation in the region.
I would also like to take a moment to remember the
times the Amir addressed the General Assembly. Two
instances come to mind. The first was the most recent,
at the 2015 United Nations Sustainable Development
Summit for the adoption of the Sustainable Development
Goals, where the Amir made Kuwait’s commitment

to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
abundantly clear. The second was back in 1963, when
Kuwait became the 111th State Member of the United
Nations. The Amir, then a young Foreign Minister, said,
“Kuwait’s participation in these international
activities clearly indicates that it does not look on
independence and membership of the United Nations
as ends in themselves. It considers them rather as a
means of sharing in the responsibility of securing a
better life for its people and for the people of other
nations” (A/PV.1203 (XVII), para. 114).
The United Nations has recognized the work of
this eminent leader, and in particular the humanitarian
leadership of His Highness in 2014. Kuwait’s leadership
and funding saved tens of thousands of lives and
galvanized others to participate in coordinated
international action. Its generosity extended beyond
the Middle East as Kuwait also supported humanitarian
action in other countries and regions.
I wish the people of Kuwait and the family of the
Amir well as they mourn this great leader.
I now ask representatives to join me in observing
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-26542 (E)

*2026542*

A/75/PV.16

The Secretary-General: I would like to express
my profound condolences to the family of His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al Sabah and to the
Government and the people of Kuwait.
His Highness was a distinguished statesman, an
outstanding humanitarian, a bridge-builder and a
messenger of peace. We mourn his loss together with
Kuwait. And it is fitting that we do so in the General
Assembly. His Highness prioritized cooperation and
multilateralism and led Kuwait to join the United
Nations in 1963.
He steered his country’s foreign policy for almost
60 years, first as Foreign Minister and then as ruler
from 2006. Throughout his reign, His Highness
earned recognition and respect from near and far
for his outstanding leadership and commitment to
peacemaking. He always stood ready to bridge faiths,
cultures and countries in the neighbourhood and beyond.
With foresight, political wisdom and persistence,
His Highness shaped Kuwait’s preventive diplomatic
engagement in the region and internationally. He played
a vital role in mediating crises, facilitating dialogue
and spreading messages of peace, tolerance and
coexistence. As a close friend of the United Nations,
he was also reliably on the front lines of mobilizing the
international community in acts of solidarity.
I will never forget when I was High Commissioner
for Refugees at the peak of the Syrian refugee crisis. In
the complex political situation at the time, it was very
difficult to mobilize international solidarity to support
Syria’s refugees. It was His Highness who decided to
convene the first conference for solidarity with Syria.
Kuwait started it with an offer that was so generous
that other countries felt the need to do the same, and we
were able to provide an effective response to the Syrian
refugee crisis. Then, for two more years, when no other
countries volunteered to do so, His Highness continued
to convene conferences for humanitarian solidarity
with the Syrian people and refugees and maintained a
very high level of support and generous leadership.
His initiative and leadership were decisive in some
of the most important humanitarian efforts around the
globe. The lives of millions of people in need were
improved because of his compassion and commitment.
His ambitious vision also contributed to the evolution
of modern Kuwait. His work to support and empower
women at all levels was manifested in his efforts to
ensure women’s suffrage in Kuwait.
2/14

13/10/2020

The world has lost a global leader and a symbol
of humanity. I extend my best wishes to Amir Sheikh
Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, who, while
grieving the loss of his brother, has taken over the
leadership of Kuwait.
The United Nations looks forward to continuing
its strong partnership and friendship with the State of
Kuwait, while building on the legacy of His Highness.
We will keep supporting Kuwait’s mediation efforts
and its role in promoting peace and stability. I trust
that the tireless efforts of His Highness in regional and
international diplomacy and stability will remain a
priority for the State of Kuwait.
At this difficult time, I once again offer my deepest
condolences on this heavy loss to the people of Kuwait,
the region and far beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cameroon, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of African States.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon): On behalf of the
Group of African States, it is with profound respect that
I pay tribute to His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Amir of the State of Kuwait,
who passed away two weeks ago.
The Amir leaves behind an important legacy
through his major contributions to the development
of the State of Kuwait and international humanitarian
efforts throughout the world. The leadership and vision
of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah at home
led to key advances in many important areas. His
efforts helped to ensure that his nation enjoyed strong
international engagement and partnership.
A couple of years ago, under the leadership of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah, Kuwait donated hundreds of
millions of dollars for humanitarian operations in many
African countries as well as in the Middle East. Kuwait’s
leadership and funding has saved lives and encouraged
others to participate in coordinated humanitarian action.
Under the Amir’s leadership, Kuwait also became an
important contributor to humanitarian issues, helping
to improve the lives of people across the globe. The
Amir’s efforts to promote dialogue, harmony and peace
will always be remembered.
In conclusion, I would therefore like to extend my
sincere condolences to his bereaved family and to the
Government and the people of Kuwait.
20-26542

13/10/2020

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): On behalf of the Group of
Asia-Pacific States, I express my deepest condolences
to the family of the late Amir of Kuwait, His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and to
the Government and the people of the State of Kuwait.
My sympathies also go to His Highness Sheikh Nawaf
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.
The late Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah will be remembered for his notable leadership
and his remarkable acts of kindness, compassion
and generosity. His exemplary leadership in the
humanitarian field will long be remembered. In 2014,
our former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon honoured
him as a humanitarian leader, and His Highness will
be remembered for the fundamental part he played
in shaping Kuwait’s role as a humanitarian centre,
which is a source of significant pride for the country’s
Government and people. He is known for repositioning
Kuwait as a peacebuilder, negotiator, humanitarian and
development icon, both regionally and globally.
We are here today to pay sincere tribute to the life
and leadership of His Highness Sheikh Sabah. We are
grateful to His Highness and the people of Kuwait for
their outstanding generosity towards those in need.
We will always remember Sheikh Sabah as a noble
advocate for tolerance and peace. He demonstrated
courage and statesmanship in his engagement with
the world’s leaders and prioritized peace above all. As
we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah will be remembered as a peacemaker
and humanitarian leader committed to the founding
ideals of our Organization. May he rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): On 29 September, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait, passed away at the age of
91. At this time of national mourning in Kuwait, the
Group of Eastern European States offers its sincere
condolences to the ruling family, the Government and
the people of Kuwait.

A/75/PV.16

His Highness ruled over Kuwait for 15 years and
had overseen Kuwait’s foreign policy for almost 40
years. He was known as the wise man of the region, or
the dean of Arab diplomacy, for his determination and
his unreserved efforts to strengthen peace, cooperation,
prosperity, both in the region and throughout the globe.
The late Amir has left an impressive legacy. For more
than five tumultuous decades, he maintained Kuwait’s
strong commitment to international cooperation and
especially to the United Nations. His determination
was tested by wars, conflicts and a foreign occupation.
In 1990, His Highness spearheaded the creation of the
international coalition that recovered the freedom and
sovereignty of Kuwait following its painful occupation
by the forces of Saddam Hussein. That historic unified
response by the United Nations community upheld
the Charter of the United Nations and demonstrated
clearly that no Member of the United Nations will be
abandoned in the face of external military aggression.
That telling lesson still resonates today.
His Highness spared no effort in orchestrating
reconciliation and reconstruction in the Gulf region
and the Middle East. He was one of the architects of
the Gulf Cooperation Council, enhancing regional
cooperation. Kuwait has shown a strong commitment
to enhancing the role of the United Nations, while
playing an active part in the Security Council in
2018 and 2019. Kuwait has also generously hosted a
number of donor conferences to alleviate humanitarian
suffering and foster recovery in Syria and Iraq. His
Highness was honoured with a United Nations Global
Leadership Award in recognition of the significance
of his contribution in that area. At the ceremony, thenSecretary-General Ban Ki-moon said,
“We are sitting together with a great
humanitarian leader of our world.... Kuwait may be
a small country in size but it has a big, broad and
compassionate heart.”
His Highness was a strong voice in the region
when promoting women’s rights and the freedom of the
media, thereby paving the way for more democratic,
inclusive and prosperous societies in the future.
Last but not least, under the leadership of His
Highness, Kuwait has played an active role in advancing
the Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and development
cooperation around the world.

20-265423/14

A/75/PV.16

Many world leaders have been paying their
respects to the late Amir of Kuwait, including in
Eastern Europe. Secretary-General António Guterres
calls him an extraordinary symbol of wisdom and
generosity, a messenger of peace and a bridge-builder.
Those qualities will be greatly missed and admired
by future leaders of the twenty-first century. Once
again, the Group of Eastern European States offers
its sincere condolences to the ruling family and to the
Government and the people of Kuwait.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of Uruguay, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I would like to pay tribute to the memory of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait.
First, on behalf of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, I would like to extend sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of
Kuwait and to the Permanent Mission of the State of
Kuwait to the United Nations on the passing of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.
His Highness had been at the helm of the State of
Kuwait since 2006 but his statesmanship was shaped
over many years before that, during which he held
several Government posts, including those of Foreign
Minister, Finance Minister and Prime Minister.
Consequently, his extensive experience in Government
made him an expert on his country’s policies for 50
years. His leadership was inspired as stability was
achieved. He did notable work in serving as a mediator
in various crises and conf licts in the region and made
significant contributions at critical junctures in his
country’s history. As Head of State, he also played
a key role in maintaining stability within the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
This is also the right time to recall his work as a
humanitarian, especially his generous contribution to
efforts to ease the suffering of thousands of refugees.
His work was recognized by the Organization in 2014
when the then-Secretary-General honoured him for his
exemplary humanitarianism as one of the world’s great
leaders. People such as His Highness Sheikh Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah inspire the international community and our
policy decisions and continue foster understanding,
concord and good relations among peoples.
4/14

13/10/2020

The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of Liechtenstein, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of Western European
and other States.
It is with profound sadness that we learned of the
passing of the late Amir of the State of Kuwait, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States, I would like to express our deepest condolences
to his family and to the people and the Government
of Kuwait. Our thoughts and prayers are with them
during this difficult time.
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah will be remembered for his commitment
to peace, as a steadfast supporter of humanitarian
activities and as a voice of pragmatism and
reconciliation. Under his leadership, Kuwait extended
very generous humanitarian support and convened and
hosted relevant conferences on various occasions.
In a region often troubled by conf lict, His Highness
acted as a mediator in regional disputes and was a
staunch advocate and petitioner for the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, a principle anchored
in the Charter of the United Nations. His leadership
and guidance were also ref lected in the constructive
and independent role that Kuwait played as an elected
member of the Security Council in 2018 and 2019. The
Group of Western European and other States is thankful
for his commitment to multilateralism, diplomacy and
solidarity and we will honour his impressive legacy.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): It is a
solemn honour to join with so many others today
in paying tribute to His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah. We extend our sincere
condolences to his family and to the people of Kuwait.
He will be missed not only by the people of his country
but also by his friends and admirers in the region and
throughout the world, including the United States.
As the United States Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo has said, the Amir’s vision shaped Kuwait into
the prosperous and modern State it is today, and his
20-26542

13/10/2020

global leadership has resulted in lasting and positive
change in Kuwait and the entire region of the Middle
East. It is a testament to the strength of the many deep
friendships that Sheikh Al-Sabah forged over the course
of a life devoted to the peaceful resolution of disputes
that he was known among many of those friends as the
dean of Arab diplomacy. His life’s work — first during
his almost 40 years as Kuwait’s Foreign Minister,
then as Prime Minister and, finally, as Amir — was
dedicated to peaceful dialogue and unity.
Sheikh Al-Sabah was instrumental in the creation
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), truly one of
his greatest legacies. In honour of his life’s work, we
hope that the members of the GCC will recommit to
healing the rift that he sought to mend during his last
years. Sheikh Al-Sabah set Kuwait on a prosperous
path to sustained peace and safety in cooperation with
the GCC, in which he was a tireless mediator, capable
of bridging apparently insurmountable divides in the
pursuit of stability and security.
His Highness Sheikh Al-Sabah was a revered
leader and a friend to all nations. He led efforts to
help rebuild relations with Iraq, thereby once again
demonstrating his dedication to peaceful dialogue and
coexistence. He was committed to action as well as to
words and concepts. He gave generous political and
economic support to Kuwait’s friends and neighbours
in times of need. In recognition of his generosity, the
United Nations named him a humanitarian leader
in 2014. In 2018, he hosted a summit that produced
$30 billion in pledges to help rebuild Iraq after the
war against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
Sheikh Al-Sabah hosted similar donor conferences to
raise funds for Syrians suffering from their country’s
civil war. An extraordinary architect of Kuwait’s
humanitarian contributions in the world, Sheikh
Al-Sabah personified the shared value that Kuwait
and the United States place on helping the most
vulnerable, and in doing so he promoted a safer and
more secure world.
The United States so valued the Amir’s strong
partnership in promoting regional stability and security
that President Trump awarded him the prestigious
order of the Legion of Merit, Chief Commander, as a
token of our country’s appreciation. And so today the
United States mourns the loss of a dear friend, who
distinguished himself by his exceptional leadership,
humanitarianism and efforts to bring about a stable
and more secure region. We mourn with the Kuwaiti

A/75/PV.16

people for the loss of such a wise and devoted leader.
We honour his legacy and remain committed to our
strong partnership and friendship with Kuwait.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Arab States.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
We are here today to bid farewell to a man whose
death is a loss for Arab and Muslim nations. His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait, has left us. However, he
will live on through his noble endeavours, which bear
witness to his work and legacy.
Bidding farewell to His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah means saying goodbye
to one of the symbols of our Arab nation, belonging
to a generation of leaders, pioneers and founders of
the nation-State project in the Arab world. The late
Amir was a witness to all the major events that shaped
the contemporary Arab world, including many varied
challenges. He also felt the hopes and aspirations of
the people in the region through the important posts
and roles that he assumed after our sister State of
Kuwait achieved independence. The late Amir held
the post of Minister of Information in the first Kuwaiti
Government, in 1961. In 1963 he became Minister for
Foreign Affairs and held that post for nearly 40 years.
He was also the first to raise the Kuwaiti f lag here at
the United Nations when his country became a member
of our Organization in 1963. On 13 July 2003 he was
appointed Prime Minister of Kuwait, a post he held
until on 29 January 2006, when he became Amir of the
State of Kuwait, succeeding His Highness Sheikh Saad
Al-Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah.
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah worked to achieve the advancement of our
sister State of Kuwait through the various posts he
held. Thanks to him, Kuwaiti women were able to
exercise their political rights. The first appointment
of a woman as a Cabinet Minister came in 2005 after
His Highness became Prime Minister during the reign
of His Highness Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
and Kuwaiti women also entered Parliament when he
became Amir.
During the Amir’s reign, Kuwait witnessed
comprehensive development progress in various

20-265425/14

A/75/PV.16

sectors. The State of Kuwait enshrined the concept of
citizenship, the rule of law and national unity. But His
Highness’s contributions were not limited merely to
the development of our sister State of Kuwait. On the
contrary, he launched and made a number of initiatives
and contributions at the international level. In 2007,
for example, at the third Summit of the Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries, held in Riyadh, he
made a major donation to establish scientific research
programmes related to the environment and climate
change. In 2008 he established a Decent Life Fund,
which enabled efforts to deal with the ongoing food
crisis at the time. Kuwait also hosted several donor
conferences in support of Syria in 2013, 2014 and
2015, in addition to an international donor conference
in 2018 for the reconstruction of Iraq.
The late Amir received several regional and
international prizes in recognition of his work as
a leader in the humanitarian field, including the
Certificate of Appreciation awarded to him by the
United Nations in September 2014. His country will
therefore be remembered and acknowledged as one
that has provided humanitarian assistance throughout
the world. He received such accolades and expressions
of gratitude from Arab and non-Arab States alike.
With regard to international peace and security in
the Arab region, in April 2016, under the auspices of the
United Nations, His Highness hosted talks on bringing
about peace in Yemen. The Amir also believed in the
importance of deepening relations between Arab and
African nations, which was why his country hosted
the third African-Arab Summit in November 2013,
and he launched several important initiatives aimed
at strengthening relations between African and Arab
countries and developing African States. The State of
Kuwait made soft loans to several African States with
a view to strengthening them in the areas of investment
and infrastructure. In addition, his country established
an annual $1 million prize to foster research related
to development in Africa. At the African Union
Summit in July 2012, the State of Kuwait announced
that it would contribute to building the new African
Commission headquarters in Addis Ababa.
His Highness launched so many initiatives that
it would be difficult to list them all here. I would
nevertheless like to point to the crucial role that
his country played in promoting Arab and Islamic
issues, particularly the Palestinian cause, the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
6/14

13/10/2020

the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We will never forget the work of His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah in fostering
the development and prosperity of his country.
Lastly, we bid farewell today to a symbol of the
nation and a man representative of a generation of
pioneers in whom we in the Arab world take pride. We
pray that the people of our sister State of Kuwait, as well
as the other Arab and Islamic nations, will stay strong
while mourning the death of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah. May his soul rest in peace.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates,
who will speak on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Ms. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On behalf
of the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), I express our heartfelt and sincere
condolences to the honourable Al-Sabah family and to
the Government and the people of Kuwait, following
the passing on 29 September of His Highness Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State
of Kuwait.
His death is an immense loss to the Islamic world
and to advocates for peace, humanity and mediation
around the globe. The late Amir of Kuwait left an
outstanding legacy of advocacy for multilateralism
and preventive diplomacy. His Highness demonstrated
wisdom, compassion and strength in the most
challenging moments to bring peace and stability to the
region and beyond. He has been recognized globally
and here in this Hall today as an exceptional leader
who sought peace and supported humanitarian causes.
He worked tirelessly to mediate conf licts in
the region and all around the world. His Highness
mobilized the international community on many
occasions to support people in the most vulnerable
situations. His empathy for those in need was ref lected
in his dedication and generous contributions to
numerous global humanitarian causes. We also recall
Kuwait’s active role within the OIC, successfully
hosting the fifth session of the Islamic Summit
Conference in 1987, when His Highness was Kuwait’s
Foreign Minister, as well as the forty-second session
of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the OIC in 2015,
when His Highness had become Amir of Kuwait.
20-26542

13/10/2020

At home, His Highness built Kuwait into the great
country that it is today. For more than 50 years, he
served his country with honour and grace. He promoted
peaceful coexistence and interfaith and intercultural
dialogue at the national, regional and global levels.
He called for unity and development for people
everywhere. He was also dedicated to empowering
women and young people, to cite only a few of his
numerous achievements.
We will always remember His Highness Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah as a distinguished
leader and a great friend to our nations and peoples,
a man who built bridges of peace and understanding
between countries. May he rest in peace. We reiterate
our condolences to the Government of Kuwait, and
we would also like to wish His Highness Sheikh
Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the new Amir
of Kuwait, every success in serving his country and
supporting international peace and security.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On
Tuesday, 29 September, Kuwait bade farewell to the
leader of its journey. We received the news with hearts
replete with faith in our acceptance of God’s will.
Death is a fact and a part of life. The Amir’s departure,
however, is difficult. We seek comfort in the words of
God, who when disaster falls instructs us to say, “We
belong to Allah, and to Him we shall return” (The Holy
Qur’an,2:156).
We would like to express our sincere gratitude and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for holding this
special session of the General Assembly to pay tribute
to the late Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah. May he rest in peace in God’s
heaven. We also thank the Secretary-General and those
who have spoken today on behalf of the regional groups
for their kind and heartfelt words. The Government
and the people of Kuwait are grateful to all who have
shared in our sorrow and offered us their condolences
on the loss of our deceased as well as the deceased of
the Arab and Muslim nations.
The Amir dedicated his life to serving his nation
and defending its causes in every regional and
international forum for more than six decades. History
will remember his steadfastness and his long journey.
It will remember all that he contributed to Kuwait’s
development, stability and security, as well as what

A/75/PV.16

he did to enhance the prosperity of his people and
ensure that they assumed their rightful place among
the nations of the world.
The late Amir’s life was marked by numerous
achievements, illustrated by the many offices he held
throughout his life. He made his mark in the cultural,
media, economic and political arenas. His legacy is
also embodied in huge architectural and development
projects dedicated to education and culture, which
will continue to advertise the history of Kuwait as
well as the progress and development that the country
has accomplished so far. During the Amir’s reign,
Kuwait made great strides in human development that
reached every sector of society. The late Amir believed
that young people hold the key to our future and that
we need them if we are to continue on the way to
development and prosperity. He always supported and
encouraged young people while incentivizing them to
use and channel their creative energy to serve their
country and its educational and cultural institutions,
whose purpose is their betterment.
During the late Amir’s reign, women were able to
effectively exercise their political rights. In 2006 they
participated as voters and candidates in parliamentary
elections for the first time. His Highness played an
important part in advancing the role of women and
their status in society. He laid the foundation for
developing a legislative framework that has enabled
women to enjoy all their rights, empower themselves
and participate in political decision-making. He also
appointed women to ministerial and high-level posts
and increased their representation in various State
institutions, including in the areas of security and
the judiciary.
In addition, there were many bright moments and
achievements for Kuwaiti diplomacy during the late
Amir’s reign. Guided by his wisdom, he was able to
navigate the troubled waters of our region and see
Kuwait safely to shore. He was able to maintain our
country’s security, stability and prosperity while
working with determination to achieve unity among
the nations of the Gulf and the Arab and Islamic world.
He worked tirelessly to overcome crises and made use
of the deep trust placed in him as a mediator to resolve
conf licts and heal divisions in many regions.
The Amir’s work was based on goodwill and a
sincere desire to achieve peace, security and stability,
as well as to end bloodshed and channel efforts and

20-265427/14

A/75/PV.16

resources towards developing and realizing the
aspirations of the people and the region. He did not
falter in defending issues related to the destinies of
Arab and Islamic nations, particularly the Palestinian
question, where he supported the choices of the
Palestinian people. He held to the relevant international
terms of reference and Security Council resolutions
as the way to bring about a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution leading ultimately to a two-State
solution and the establishment of a Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. He was right in
laying a strong foundation for Kuwait’s foreign policy
based on reason, moderation and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which call for respect
for the sovereignty of States, non-interference in
others’ internal affairs and refraining from the use or
threat of use of force while resolving conf licts through
peaceful means, as well as for establishing relations
based on mutual respect and good neighbourliness.
After he became Head of State in 2006, the
Amir continued his efforts aimed at achieving
international and regional cooperation through his
hosting of many economic, social and humanitarian
conferences. He launched noble initiatives aimed at
increasing partnership among nations, eliminating
poverty, maintaining human dignity and alleviating
the suffering of people affected by natural or other
disasters, regardless of their nationality, colour, race
or religion. He also took many initiatives designed to
promote sustainable development. With its various
establishments and funds, Kuwait has been active in
pursuing sustainable development and continues to
support development and humanitarian programmes in
many developing and least developed countries.
The international community recognized the
role that the late Amir played in supporting United
Nations humanitarian aid efforts. In 2014, the thenSecretary-General Ban Ki-moon conferred the
distinction of humanitarian leader on the late Amir
and on Kuwait as a humanitarian centre. The late
Amir believed in collective international action and
was a staunch supporter and defender of the purposes
and principles enshrined in international law and the
Charter. He called for peace and tolerance, rejecting
hatred, violence and intolerance while supporting the
United Nations as an indispensable international tool
for confronting international threats and dangers. In
that regard, I would like to quote the late Amir in his
first address from this rostrum after Kuwait joined the
8/14

13/10/2020

United Nations in 1963. At the time, the late Amir was
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait. You cited
the same address in your statement, Mr. President:
“Kuwait’s participation in these international
activities clearly indicates that it does not look
on independence and membership of the United
Nations as ends in themselves. It considers them
rather as a means of sharing in the responsibility,
of securing a better life for its people and for the
people of other nations.” (A/PV.1203, para. 114)
May he rest in peace.
He was an Amir of humanity and modesty, and we
ask Almighty God to embrace him in his mercy and
graciousness, give him a place in heaven and reward
him for all the good that he did for his people and his
nation and for humankind as a whole. His achievements
will continue to be a shining and sustained testament to
all his efforts, while his memory will continue to live
in the minds and hearts of his people. We wish every
success for the new Amir of Kuwait, His Highness
Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and his
Crown Prince, Sheikh Mishaal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, as they continue on the path of contributing
to the welfare of Kuwait, its people, the region and the
world at large.
In conclusion, we once again thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this meeting, and we also
thank the Secretary-General and all those who spoke,
attended and offered their condolences. Kuwait
will remain on its path and in its commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter, defending its
noble message of peace, tolerance and justice as an
active member of the United Nations. We will continue
to assist international efforts to improve people’s lives
and maintain human dignity.
Agenda item 145
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/382)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. May I therefore take it
that if there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, the General Assembly decides not to
20-26542

13/10/2020

discuss the report of the Fifth Committee before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of position. Before we begin
to take action on the recommendations contained in
the report of the Fifth Committee, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations:
requests under Article 19 of the Charter”, recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 75/2).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has joined the consensus that has made
it possible to adopt resolution 75/2. However, we must
reiterate that this should in no way be interpreted as
an endorsement, validation or recognition on our
part of the most recent report of the Committee on
Contributions (A/75/11). That is because despite
the fact that the Committee is a technical body, the
internal discussions of the request that Venezuela
made at the time were deliberately exploited by some
of the Committee’s members to advance petty national
political interests and prevent our delegation from
participating, by depriving it not only of a voice but also
of a vote in the intergovernmental processes that take
place within the framework of the General Assembly,
thereby blocking the existing majority consensus from
recommending that our country also be granted the
corresponding exemptions.
Venezuela is one of several countries whose right
to vote in the General Assembly has been suspended
since January 2020, pursuant to the provisions of

A/75/PV.16

Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations. Today
my country is still unable to fully enjoy its rights and
privileges within the Organization, including voting.
That is because despite having the financial means to
do so — as we have shown and as the Secretariat is
aware — it has been impossible for us to honour our
financial commitments, for reasons clearly beyond
our control.
The ever-increasing magnitude and scope of the
illegal economic, commercial and financial blockade
that the United States Government has unilaterally
imposed on our country, in flagrant violation of the
Charter and the norms of international law, has had
extraterritorial consequences that are exacerbated by
the policy of persecution and extortion that the same
Government carries out against any entity that enters
into commercial relations or other types of entirely
legal transactions with Venezuela. We are therefore not
only cut off from regular access to the international
financial system, but companies and individuals are
threatened by so-called secondary sanctions and forced
into a position of violating international law, as has in
fact already happened with companies and individuals
who have nothing to do with our country. That is the
reason why it has become virtually impossible to
effectively transfer the funds needed to pay our arrears
to the United Nations.
This situation has been brought to the attention
of the Secretary-General as well as that of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country and
the Committee on Contributions since last year. You
yourself, Mr. President, like your predecessor and the
membership of the Organization, have been informed in
detail of this injustice. Unfortunately, nothing concrete,
practical or even remotely tangible has been done so far.
In the interests of transparency, I should mention
that seven weeks ago the United States Government
issued a new licence, which is supposed to end this
unfortunate situation. Since then, we have tried to
work with it to test its effectiveness. However, what we
have seen so far is that the document has had the same
effect as the two previously issued licences — which
is to say none whatever. In practice, United States
licences change nothing. Moreover, as the United
States delegation has been covering for itself here by
saying that its Government has already issued a licence
and that everything has been resolved, its authorities
in Washington, D.C., have been threatening banks with
the consequences of doing business with Venezuelan

20-265429/14

A/75/PV.16

13/10/2020

sources, something that was even confirmed recently
by Mr. Elliott Abrams in a statement to the press.

soon as possible to our brotherly countries Sao Tome

My country is not asking for its debt to be cancelled
or to be exempted from honouring its international
obligations. We possess both the economic resources
and the political will needed to pay our arrears to the
United Nations. As is obvious from the evidence at hand,
however, we are facing a situation in which — although
Venezuela has the financial resources to fulfil its
commitments in terms of quotas and contributions
to the Organization — every channel for making that
payment has been blocked. We therefore call for the
complete and immediate lifting of all the unilateral
coercive measures and other limitations that have been
imposed on us to prevent our delegation from fully and
effectively exercising its responsibilities and thereby
complying with the purposes of the United Nations.

that the case of Venezuela should have been considered

Venezuela reaffirms its commitment to continuing
to take every possible step and redoubling its efforts to
end this injustice. At the same time, we are asking the
General Assembly and you, Mr. President, to exercise
your good offices with the relevant authorities of the
host country, in coordination with the Secretariat,
in order to establish a financial channel that will
ensure that our payments reach their final destination
effectively and safely, without being illegally or
arbitrarily rejected or confiscated, thereby enabling us
to finally settle our debt to the Organization and freely
exercise all our rights and privileges.
In conclusion, using coercion to control legal
efforts is impermissible and should be categorically
rejected. Let us remember that today it is Venezuela, but
tomorrow any other State Member of the Organization
could be subjected to the United States Government’s
campaign of so-called maximum pressure. We must
therefore all unite to defend the principle of the legal
equality of States and the integrity of the Headquarters
Agreement, and to end once and for all the United States
Government’s abuse of its role as host country to the
United Nations through its use of coercion, threats and
blackmail to advance petty national political interests.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation endorses the statement
made by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We agreed with the
adoption by consensus of resolution 75/2, as we believe
it to be of the utmost importance that waivers to Article
19 of the Charter of the United Nations be granted as
10/14

and Principe, Somalia and the Comoros. We reiterate
within the Committee on Contributions without
political intrigue and in strict adherence to Article 19
of the Charter. The situation involving arrears is the
result of circumstances beyond Venezuela’s control, as
its representative has just comprehensively explained.
Ignoring such f lagrant violations is akin to committing
them. We emphasize that while today it is Venezuela,
tomorrow it could be any of us if we allow the host
country to act with impunity.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
In the light of resolution 75/2, which we have
just adopted, I would like to kindly request the
representatives of the Comoros, Sao Tome and Principe
and Somalia to approach the East Documents Counter
in order to receive their ballot papers for the election
of members to the Human Rights Council. I would like
to ask all other delegations that have not already picked
up their ballot papers to do so now.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Draft decision (A/75/L.3)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/75/L.3, entitled
“Introduction of certain reports in the plenary meetings
at the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
adopt draft decision A/75/L.3?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 75/506).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 7.
20-26542

13/10/2020

Agenda item 119
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of members of the Human Rights
Council
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed with the election of 15 members of the Human
Rights Council to replace those members whose term of
office expires on 31 December 2020.
The 15 outgoing members are the following:
Afghanistan, Angola, Australia, Chile, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Senegal, Slovakia, Spain
and Ukraine.
In accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006, these Member States are
eligible for immediate re-election, except those that
have served two consecutive terms, namely Nigeria
and Qatar.
The 15 vacant seats should be distributed among
the regional groups as follows: four seats for the
African States; four seats for the Asia-Pacific States;
two seats for the Eastern European States; three seats
for the Latin American and Caribbean States; and two
seats for the Western European and other States.
In accordance with resolution 60/251, membership
in the Council shall be open to all States Members of
the United Nations, and the members of the Council
shall serve for a period of three years. The members of
the Council shall be elected directly and individually,
by secret ballot, by a majority of the members of the
General Assembly. Accordingly, 97 votes constitute
a majority in the General Assembly, which has a
membership of 193 States.
I would like to inform members that the following
States will continue to be members of the Human Rights
Council: Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea,
Fiji, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Libya,
the Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Namibia, the
Netherlands, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Somalia, the Sudan, Togo, Uruguay and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. The names of
these States, therefore, should not appear on the ballot
papers. I also want to remind delegations once again

A/75/PV.16

that the following Member States should not appear on
the ballot papers, as they have served two consecutive
terms and are therefore not eligible for this election:
Nigeria and Qatar.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly
on elections. In that regard, rule 94 shall be applied.
As indicated in my letter dated 9 October 2020, all
representatives have been requested to pick up their
ballot papers from the East Documents Counter, located
towards the back of the General Assembly Hall, before
being seated. The ballot papers are marked “A”, “B”,
“C”, “D” and “E”. Each ballot paper is assigned to one
of the five regional groups. I ask that representatives
use only these ballot papers.
Representatives of the following States have
kindly agreed to serve as tellers: Hungary, Indonesia,
Saint Lucia, South Africa and Spain. One ballot box
has been placed at the front of the General Assembly
Hall, where tellers will be able to observe it and the
casting of ballots.
For the casting of ballots, the Secretary will call
the name of each delegation following the General
Assembly protocol seating arrangement, starting with
the delegation of Iceland, and ask the representative of
that delegation to proceed to cast their country’s ballot.
Representatives are requested to practice distancing of
no less than two metres and to proceed to cast their
ballots only when the previous representative has
finished. This will continue until the last representative
has cast a ballot.
In order to minimize the risks posed by prolonged
exposure and crowding, once representatives have cast
their ballots, they are requested to leave the General
Assembly Hall through the exit on the west side. Once
all ballots are cast, the meeting will be suspended and
the tellers, accompanied by the Secretariat staff, will
proceed to the Trusteeship Council Chamber for the
counting of the ballots. Upon receipt of the results
certified by the tellers, I will resume the plenary
meeting to announce the results and to declare elected
those Member States that have received the greatest
number of votes and the required majority.
The proceedings of the resumed plenary meeting
for the announcement of the results will be televised on
the webcast. If additional balloting is needed to fill any
remaining places, the next round of secret balloting

20-2654211/14

A/75/PV.16

will take place at the plenary meeting to be held this
afternoon at 4 p.m. in this Hall. Representatives should
aim to arrive at the Hall 30 minutes before the start
time of the meeting in order to collect their ballot
papers and take their seats so that the meeting can
begin on time.
Consistent with the practice of the General
Assembly, if more than the required number of
Member States have obtained the votes of a majority of
the members of the Assembly on the same ballot, those
Member States that have obtained the largest number
of votes above the required majority will be considered
as elected, up to the number of seats to be filled. Also
consistent with past practice, if, due to a tied vote, it
becomes necessary to determine one candidate to be
elected or to proceed to the next round of restricted
balloting, there will be a special restricted ballot
limited to those candidates that have obtained an equal
number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: Regarding the candidatures of the
respective regional groups, the Secretariat has been
informed that for the four vacant seats for African
States, the Group has endorsed four candidates: Côte
d’Ivoire, Gabon, Malawi and Senegal.
For the four vacant seats for Asia-Pacific States,
the Secretariat has received communications from
five candidates: China, Nepal, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia
and Uzbekistan.
For the two vacant seats for Eastern European
States, the Secretariat has received communications
from two candidates: the Russian Federation
and Ukraine.
For the three vacant seats for Latin American
and Caribbean States, the Secretariat has received
communications
from
three
candidates:
the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Cuba and Mexico.
For the two vacant seats for Western European
and other States, the Secretariat has received
communications from two candidates: France and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I have also been informed by the Secretariat
that voluntary pledges and commitments made by
Member States in accordance with paragraph 8 of
12/14

13/10/2020

General Assembly resolution 60/251 have accordingly
been issued as official documents of the seventyfifth session.
Before we begin the voting process, I would like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
71/323 of 8 September 2017, the names of the States that
have been communicated to the Secretariat at least 48
hours prior to the election today have been printed on
the ballot papers for each of the regional groups. Also,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other names as necessary.
Representatives are requested to use only the
ballot papers that have been provided at the Documents
Counter, to put an “X” in the boxes next to the names
of the States that they wish to vote for and to write
other eligible names on the blank lines. If the box next
to the name of a candidate is checked, the name of that
candidate does not have to be repeated on the blank line.
The total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed the number of vacant seats
to be filled, as indicated on the ballot paper. A ballot
paper containing more votes than the number of vacant
seats indicated on the ballot paper will be declared
invalid. A ballot will also be declared invalid if all the
votes on that ballot do not belong to the relevant region.
Accordingly, for the ballot papers marked “A” for
African States, the total number of checked boxes and
handwritten names should not exceed four; for the
ballot papers marked “B” for Asia-Pacific States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed four; for the ballot papers marked
“C” for Eastern European States, the total number
of checked boxes and handwritten names should not
exceed two; for the ballot papers marked “D” for Latin
American and Caribbean States, the total number
of checked boxes and handwritten names should not
exceed three; and for the ballot papers marked “E” for
Western European and other States, the total number
of checked boxes and handwritten names should not
exceed two.
If a ballot paper contains the name of any of the
following types of Member States, the ballot remains
20-26542

13/10/2020

A/75/PV.16

valid but the vote for that Member State will not be
counted. These are: Member States that do not belong
to the region concerned; Member States that are not
eligible for re-election; and Member States that will
continue to be members of the Council next year.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation
other than votes in favour of specific candidates, those
notations will be disregarded. If a mistake is made in
filling out the ballot paper, delegations should request
a new ballot paper from the Secretariat at the East
Documents Counter.
We shall now begin the voting process.
The Secretary will now call on delegations in the
seating protocol order and invite them to come forward
to cast their ballots. Representatives should proceed to
the ballot box only after the name of their delegation
has been called. Once their ballots have been cast, I
ask representatives to leave the General Assembly Hall
and exit the building. The results of the election will be
seen on the webcast.
At the invitation of the President, representatives
of Hungary, Indonesia, Saint Lucia, South Africa
and Spain acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.50 p.m. and
resumed at 2 p.m.
In the absence of the President, Ms. McGuire
(Grenada), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The Acting President: The result of the voting in
the election of members to the Human Rights Council
is as follows:
Group A — African States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Senegal:
Côte d’Ivoire:
Malawi:
Gabon:
Morocco:
Group B — Asia-Pacific States (4 seats)

192
1
191
1
190
97
188
182
180
176
1

Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
1
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
0
Number of members present and voting:
191
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Pakistan:
169
Uzbekistan:
169
Nepal:
150
China:
139
Saudi Arabia:
90
Group C — Eastern European States (2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
4
Number of members present and voting:
188
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Ukraine:
166
Russian Federation:
158
Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
191
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Mexico:
175
Bolivia (Plurinational State of):
172
Cuba:
170
Group E — Western European and other States
(2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
18
Number of members present and voting:
174
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
France:
167
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland:
165
Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes of the members of the
General Assembly, the following 15 States were
elected members of the Human Rights Council for

20-2654213/14

A/75/PV.16

a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2021: Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, France, Gabon, Malawi, Mexico,
Nepal, Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Senegal,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Uzbekistan.

14/14

13/10/2020

The Acting President: I congratulate those States
that have been elected members of the Human Rights
Council, and I thank the tellers for their assistance in
this election.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 119.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

20-26542
