S/2008/732

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 November 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 25 November 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to convey the attached
letter dated 6 November 2008, which I received from Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
and Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union, transmitting the report
on the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
covering the period from April to September 2008 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-62611S (E) 041208

*0862611*

S/2008/732

Annex
Letter dated 6 November 2008 from the High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
and Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUPM). The reporting
period is aligned with that covered by the six-monthly review prepared by the
Mission, which runs from April to September 2008.
On 19 November 2007, the Council of the European Union adopted the Joint
Action 2007/749/CFSP, providing for a second extension of the mandate of EUPM
until 31 December 2009, following the invitation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to continue its activities.
Although considerable achievements have been made since the initial launch
of EUPM on 1 January 2003, effective results in the fight against organized crime
and in the establishment of key State law enforcement agencies such as the Border
Police or the State Investigation and Protection Agency are a long-term endeavour.
The recent arrests of prominent figures allegedly involved in organized crime
activities represent, however, a significant breakthrough.
The adoption by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
two police reform laws on 16 April 2008 paved the way for the signature of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union (EU) on 16 June
2008. An interim agreement with the European Community, aimed at progressively
establishing a common market, entered into force on 1 July 2008. Furthermore, the
European Commission released a road map for visa liberalization.
These are important steps in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s process of European
integration, but more remains to be done. A key issue will be the timely
implementation of the two police reform laws. EUPM is actively advising and
monitoring the implementation process, and is acting as a facilitator to try to
overcome some of the technical difficulties and different views among local
stakeholders about the scope of the reform.
Under its current mandate, EUPM will continue to focus on a concrete
operational approach, as well as reaching out to the Judiciary and, in particular, to
prosecutors. Improved cooperation between police forces and the prosecutors offices
is a critical factor in the fight against organized crime and other forms of serious
crime. EUPM will also assist the domestic authorities in harmonizing the police
legislation and in implementing the integrated border management strategy.
I propose to provide the Security Council with a written update on the progress
of EUPM. I would be grateful if you would transmit the enclosed report to the
President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

08-62611

S/2008/732

Enclosure
Report of the High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union and Secretary-General
of the Council of the European Union on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
covering the period from April to September 2008
Introduction
1.
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) has been the first operation
undertaken under the European Security and Defence Policy. It started on 1 January
2003 with an initial three-year mandate. In November 2005, the Council decided to
extend EUPM until 31 December 2007. In view of the remaining challenges and the
recommendation by the Secretary-General/High Representative, with Joint Action
2007/749/CFSP of 19 November 2007, the Council decided on another extension of
EUPM until 31 December 2009 with a refocused mandate. Brigadier General
Vincenzo Coppola (Italy) was Head of Mission during the reporting period. His tour
of duty will come to an end on 31 October 2008.
2.
EUPM aims, through monitoring, mentoring and inspecting, to establish in
Bosnia and Herzegovina a sustainable, professional and multi-ethnic police service
operating in accordance with European and international standards. It does so
through an approach based on three strategic pillars: support to the fight against
organized crime, improvement of accountability of local police and support to the
implementation of police reform. The Mission benefits from the local political
guidance and coordination of the European Union Special Representative. EUPM
contributes to the stabilization and association process with the goal to set Bosnia
and Herzegovina irreversibly on track for EU membership by strengthening the rule
of law and developing a police service that is effective and free from undue political
interference.

Staffing and methodology
3.
At the end of September 2008, EUPM had 418 staff (167 international police
officers, 30 international civilian experts and 221 national staff). All 27 EU Member
States contribute to EUPM, as do 6 non-EU countries. The Mission takes due
account of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
in all its activities, as well as the EU operational paper on practical measures for
taking work forward on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in the context of
the European Security and Defence Policy. Together with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, EUFOR and a local NGO, the Mission will promote
gender questions in law enforcement agencies with a project starting in October
2008 and running through 2009.

General situation
4.
Bosnia and Herzegovina made progress on its European integration path. Two
police reform laws were adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and

08-62611

3

S/2008/732

Herzegovina on 16 April 2008. Their adoption opened the way for the signature of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement on 16 June. An interim agreement with
the European Community, gradually establishing a common market, entered into
force on 1 July. In addition, the European Commission released a road map for visa
liberalization. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board welcomed on
25 June positive developments and the progress made by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to deliver on the two conditions and five objectives of the
Office of the High Representative-European Union Special Representative
transition. The Russian Federation was unable to join in the final Communiqué.
5.
These developments contributed to calming the political situation. However,
tensions remained and resurfaced by the end of summer. Several concurrent and
controversial processes dominate the political landscape: the run-up to the municipal
elections, the transition from the Office of the High Representative to a reinforced
EU engagement, the debate about constitutional reform and socio-economic
consequences of an economic slowdown, and inflationary pressure in combination
with the gradual opening of the Bosnia and Herzegovina market to EU competitors.
Municipal elections took place on 5 October 2008.
6.
Police services in Bosnia and Herzegovina improved their capacity to uphold
public peace and order, including in complex situations such as the securing of the
commemoration ceremonies in Srebrenica and eastern Bosnia and the aftermath of
the arrest of Radovan Karadzic.
7.
Mission progress in support of the fight against organized crime continued.
Several high-level investigations were opened by the State Investigation and
Protection Agency (SIPA) and entity police. The investigation of identity fraud cases
in the Citizen Identification Protection System led to the arrest of Republika Srpska
police officials in September and could lead to further arrests and indictments
during the coming period. On 22 September, the main trial against the leaders of a
key organized crime group in Sarajevo was opened.
8.
The European Union Coordination Board met regularly and, as of June, with
the presence of Bosnia and Herzegovina police officials. Bosnia and Herzegovina
police services, supported by EUPM, launched a public awareness campaign on
major and organized crime on 19 September.
9.
The Ministry of Security, advised by EUPM and European Union Special
Representative/Office of the High Representative, started the implementation of the
two police reform laws. Implementation is one month behind schedule owing to
lacking decisions by the Council of Ministers. The harmonization of police
legislation and regulations continued, with the Ministry of Security drafting
amendments to bring existing legislation in line with the police reform laws. The
police reform laws require this exercise to be completed by November 2008.
10. EUPM advised the Ministry of Security and law enforcement agencies on the
implementation of the integrated border management strategy and on the
introduction of measures required for visa facilitation and liberalization. Inspections
continued and confirmed previous observations that internal control mechanisms are
developing to a satisfactory level. Efforts need, however, to be continued.

4

08-62611

S/2008/732

Achievements during the reporting period
Support to police restructuring and police reform processes
11. EUPM progress in support of police restructuring and the police reform
processes has been consistent. The police restructuring efforts included the
implementation of the Law on the Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies and
Agencies for Support of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Law on
Independent and Supervisory Bodies of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(police reform laws). While EUPM can expect the implementation of those laws to
be partially fulfilled by the end of 2008, the full implementation of this first phase,
which foresees the completion of staffing and full functioning of the new
institutions, will most likely take more time.
12. Having in mind that the legislation regulating the institutional aspects of police
matters is not fully harmonized yet, while providing support to the police
restructuring process, EUPM continues the “bottom-up approach” to advocate and
advise the harmonization and development of the legislation to reform the existing
police bodies in the entities, cantons and Brcko District. In this context, EUPM
expects to achieve significant progress in the area of police reform by the end of
2009.
13. Nevertheless, while there are goals that can be achieved by the end of 2009, it
should be noted that, considering the sometimes challenging political context,
delays are likely to occur within the planned time frame.
Police restructuring
Law on the Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies and Agencies for
Support of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Law on Independent
and Supervisory Bodies of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina
14. After their adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
on 16 April 2008, the Law on the Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies and
Agencies for Support of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Law on
Independent and Supervisory Bodies of Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(police reform laws) came into force on 14 May 2008. With the adoption of the
police reform laws, four new coordination and support institutions and three
supervisory and oversight bodies will be established at State level. 1
15. The initiation of the implementation of this process lies with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of
Security.
16. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security established the Selection
Commission in charge of selecting the Directors and the Deputy Directors of the
Agency for Police Support, the Agency for Education and the Agency for Forensic
Examinations and Expertise, as envisaged in the Law on the Directorate for
Coordination of Police Bodies and Agencies for Support to Police Structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Selection Commission completed its task and
__________________
1 Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Agency for Forensic

Examinations and Expertise, Agency for Education and Advanced Training of Personnel, Police
Support Agency, Independent Board, Board for Complaints of Police Officials, Public
Complaint Board.

08-62611

5

S/2008/732

forwarded the ranking lists to the Minister of Security on 25 July 2008, who should
propose it to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers for final
appointment. The Minister’s proposal has not been sent for further procedure yet.
17. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly appointed the ad hoc
Joint Commission for conducting the procedure for appointing the Independent
Board and the Public Complaints Board, as envisaged in the Law on Independent
and Supervisory Bodies of the Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Independent Board shall select the Director and Deputies of the Directorate for
Coordination of the Police Bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although the
establishment of the Commission was done in a timely manner, the ad hoc
Commission failed to complete its task within the set legal deadline (14 August
2008). Moreover, the ad hoc Commission asked for EUPM assistance in drafting the
necessary decisions and fulfilling its task. EUPM will continue to assist the
Commission and further monitor the process.
18. The actual appointments will depend on political will and arrangements
between the political parties. Additionally, decisions on the location and
establishment dates of the newly established agencies will have to be made by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers.
19. The Commission for Harmonization was established by the Ministry of
Security on 1 July 2008 in order to harmonize relevant laws with the Law on the
Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies and Agencies for Support to the
Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Law on Independent and
Supervisory Bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina. According to the Decision on its
establishment, the Commission was tasked to finalize the harmonization process by
31 August 2008. Considering the number of laws that need to be adjusted to the
provisions of the Law on the Directorate for Coordination of Police Bodies and
Agencies for Support to the Police Structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Law on Independent and Supervisory Bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Commission could not finalize the work by the given deadline. Therefore the
Commission has asked to extend its mandate for another 15 days. The Minister
accepted the proposal and passed the Decision on Extension of the Mandate of the
Commission for Harmonization, according to which the Commission is obliged to
finalize the harmonization of the relevant legislation with the newly adopted laws by
15 September 2008. The Commission completed its work and submitted the final
proposals to the Minister for approval. EUPM participates in the work of the
Commission and follows all related developments.
Police reform efforts
20. Besides providing support to the police restructuring process, EUPM is
proactively engaged in harmonizing and developing the existing legislative
framework related to police bodies.
21. At State level, the police reform laws were pivotal in prompting a review of
the SIPA structure and functioning, which led to amending the SIPA Law and
establishing a commission to work on streamlining the structure. EUPM is providing
assistance in the institution-building of the Border Police by monitoring and
advising the police in implementing the integrated border management strategy
funded by the EC CARDs programme. Related to this strategy is the Law on Border
Control which is in the legislative procedure. EUPM assisted SIPA and the Border

6

08-62611

S/2008/732

Police in enhancing relations with competent institutions drafting the Law on
Salaries at the State level, which, among others, regulates the salaries of police
bodies at the State level. EUPM also provided technical assistance to the Ministries
of Security and Finance in harmonizing the Law on Salaries with police-related
legislation. At the entity level, EUPM is steadily engaged in assisting in drafting the
Law on Police Officials and the Law on Internal Affairs of the Republika Srpska,
which ultimately will lead to the harmonization of these key laws related to police
in both entities. In Brcko District EUPM is assisting the local authorities in drafting
the Brcko District Law on Police, regulating the police structure and functioning. At
the cantonal level EUPM is continuously assisting the cantonal authorities in
finalizing the cantonal Law on Internal Affairs, whose process was halted due to
discrepancies on key issues.
Support in the fight against organized crime
22. Supporting the local police in the fight against organized crime is a central
element of the EUPM mandate. Within EUPM two main departments are tasked
with increasing the capacity of law enforcement agencies in the fight against
organized crime: the Anti-Organized Crime Department and SIPA. Additionally,
EUPM Border Police and the regional and field advisers have designated roles in
this area.
23. Support in the fight against organized crime focused on specific cases, which
EUPM monitored and advised upon, as well as on institution-building aspects. The
Mission undertook further steps to transition its targeted approach to local police
bodies, with SIPA performing a lead function. EUPM advised on key operations and
on the development of technical capabilities; essential technical capabilities were
made operational during the reporting period. Relations between police and
prosecutors were further developed through specific case work and through the
development of investigation management and other coordination mechanisms
under the auspices of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. Links between
the police and the penitentiary system were strengthened.
Relations between police and prosecutors
24. The EUPM Anti-Organized Crime Department-Criminal Justice Unit has
monitored cases that involved a significant element of cooperation between law
enforcement agencies and the Prosecutor’s Office. These have ranged from cases at
the appeal level to cases that are problematic and challenging to police and
prosecutors.
25. During the reporting period, the EUPM Criminal Justice Unit has reinforced
its capacities in the regions in order to further strengthen the relationship between
police and prosecutors. It is widely recognized that the relationship between these
two agencies is crucial.
26. The Criminal Justice Unit continues to host a seminar for police and
prosecutors on standardization of police investigation forms. Police and
prosecutorial representatives from Bosnia and Herzegovina established proposals
for standardized versions of a total of more than 20 investigative forms, including
reports on criminal offences, minutes on searches and other investigative measures,
as well as records on suspect and witness examinations. It is anticipated that this

08-62611

7

S/2008/732

will improve the effectiveness of criminal investigations throughout the country and
contribute to enhanced cooperation between the different jurisdiction levels.
27. In April the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council began the process of
implementation of its project on cooperation between police and prosecutors by
initiating the signing of a memorandum of understanding. On 9 April, the
Agreement on Cooperation to implement the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council project “Establishment of enhanced mechanisms of cooperation between the
police and prosecutors’ offices” was signed by the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council President, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Security, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ministry of the Interior and Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior
representatives.
28. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council project implementation process
follows up previous EUPM activities in the area of cooperation between police and
prosecutors. The project benefits from the EUPM achievements and EUPM will
continue to actively support the project and its implementation during the second
half of the year.
29. From May to July, the Mission organized specific media workshops for
prosecutors, helping them to enhance their skills in communicating with the public
on major and organized crime. It was agreed that the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council, in cooperation with EUPM, would organize a fourth conference on
cooperation between police and prosecutors around mid-October, in accordance with
the project development.
Strengthening accountability of the police
30. The Mission carried out general and targeted inspections, including of private
and police duty weapons registration and issuance of licences, registration and
supervision of private security companies, and the use and deployment of donated
equipment by the International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance
Programme. Inspections resulted in a number of observations that are being
addressed by the Mission in cooperation with the relevant police authorities and the
public prosecutors, as appropriate.
31. The Missions has started a thorough review of complaints about police
conduct. The review will be carried out in the coming period.

8

08-62611
