IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Welcoming the considerations and recommendations
contained in the report of the International Law Commission regarding the programme and methods of
work of the Commission with a view to the timely and
effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it,

I
I. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth sesson;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1979;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on state responsibility with
the aim of completing at least the first reading of the
set of articles constituting part I of the draft on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts,
within the present term of office of the members of
the International Law Commission, taking into account
the views expressed in debates in the General Assembly and the observations of Governments;
( b) Continue its work on succession of States in
respect of matters other than treaties with the aim of
completing, at its thirty-first session, the first reading
of the draft articles on succession of States in respect
of State property and State debts;
( c) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles
on treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between international organizations
with the aim of completing, as soon as possible, the
first reading of these draft articles;
( d) Continue its work on the law of the nonnavigational uses of international watercourses;
5. Also recommends that the International Law
Commission should continue the study, including those
issues it has already identified, concerning the status
of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not
accompanied by diplomatic courier, in the light of
comments made during the debate on this item in the
Sixth Committee at the thirty-third session of the General Assembly and comments to be submitted by Member States, with a view to the possible elaboration of
an appropriate legal instrument, and invites all States
to submit their written comments o.n the preliminary
study carried out by the Commission concerning the
status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag
not accompanied by diplomatic courier for their inclusion in the report of the Commission on the work
of its thirty-first session;
6. Further recommends that the International Law
Commission should continue its work on the remaining
topics in its current programme;
7. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to adopt the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
8. Endorses the decision of the International Law
Commission to request Governments to transmit their
observations and comments on the provisions of chapters I, II and III of part I of the draft articles on
State responsibility for internationally wrongful acts;

221

9. Expresses its concern over the necessity of
strengthening the Codification Division of the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and, therefore,
strongly reiterates the recommendation made in General Assembly resolution 32/151;
10. Expresses the wish that seminars continue to
be held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law Commission and that :an increasing number
of participants from developing countries be given the
opportunity to attend these seminars;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission for its attention the
records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirty-third session of the General
Assembly;
II
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the mostfavoured-nation clause and to the Special Rapporteurs
on the topic for their contribution to this work;
2. Invites all States, organs of the United Nations
which have competence in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit, not
later than 31 December 1979, their written comments
and observations on chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its
thirtieth session and, in particular, on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses adopted by the International Law Commission;
( b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on
which the International Law Commission was unable
to take decisions;
and requests States to comment on the recommendation of the International Law Commission that those
draft articles should be recommended to Member
States with a view to the conclusion of a convention
on the subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate,
before the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Consideration
of the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses".
89th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/140.

Implementation by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General20
on the implementation by States of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 21
Recalling its resolutions 3501 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/76 of 13 December 1976,
Noting with satisfaction that the number of States
parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Rela20 A/33/224.
21 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

222

tions of 1961 has increased since the adoption by the
General Assembly of the above-mentioned resolutions,
Convinced of the desirability of the widespread
acceptance of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 and the necessity for strict observance and implementation by States of the provisions consolidated in that Convention in the interest
of maintaining normal relations among them and developing international co-operation,
Concerned both at continuing instances of violations of the generally recognized rules of diplomatic
law and at instances of violations of security of
diplomatic missions and safety of their personnel,
Noting with appreciation the study by the International Law Commission of the proposals on the
elaboration of a protocol concerning the status of the
diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, which could constitute
a further development of international diplomatic law,
1. Requests those States which have not yet become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 to give urgent consideration to
acceding to that Convention;
2. Calls upon all States to observe and strictly implement the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961, especially to ensure
better security of diplomatic missions and safety of
their personnel, provided for in that Convention;
3. Notes the invitation in General Assembly resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978 to States to
submit written comments on the preliminary study
carried out by the International Law Commission concerning the status of the diplomatic courier and the
diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
and observes that, in replying to such a request, States
may also include comments and observations on the
implementation of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 to be submitted to the Assembly at a future session;
4. Reaffirms the continuing interest of the General
Assembly in the implementation by States of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
5. Decides that the General Assembly will give
further consideration to this question and expresses
the view that, unless Member States indicate the
desirability of an earlier consideration, it would be
appropriate to do so when the International Law
Commission submits to the Assembly the results of
its work on the possible elaboration of an appropriate
legal instrument on the status of the diplomatic courier
and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic
courier.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/141.

Registration and publication of treaties
and international agreements pursuant
to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations

A

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the obligations resulting from Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations,

Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on that question, 22
Noting the considerable increase in the number of
international agreements in the past ten years,
Also noting that the delays in registration and publication have at the same time increased to the point
where the implementation of Article 102 of the Charter
may be seriously jeopardized,
Convinced that, taking into account the means
available to the United Nations, the situation cannot
be remedied without reforming the publication procedure currently provided for by the General Assembly
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations 23 in order to adapt it to the
evolution of international treaty activities, with due
respect for the spirit and intent of the Charter,
Recalling that, by its resolution 32/144 of 16 December 1977, it has already approved, as a temporary
measure, the establishment of a priority system for the
publication of treaties and other international agreements in the United Nations Treaty Series,
Amends article 12 of the General Assembly regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of
the United Nations to read as follows:
"Article 12
"1. The Secretariat shall publish as soon as possible in a single series every treaty or international
agreement which is registered or filed and recorded,
in the original language or languages, followed by
a translation in English and in French. The certified
statements referred to in article 2 of these regulations shall be published in the same manner.
"2. The Secretariat will, however, have the option not to publish in extenso a bilateral treaty or
international agreement belonging to one of the
following categories:
"(a) Assistance and co-operation agreements of
limited scope concerning financial, commercial, administrative or technical matters;
" ( b) Agreements relating to the organization
of conferences, seminars or meetings;
" ( c) Agreements that are to be published otherwise than in the series mentioned in paragraph 1 of
this article by the United Nations Secretariat or by
a specialized or related agency.
"3. In deciding whether or not to publish in
extenso a treaty or international agreement belonging
to one of the categories mentioned in paragraph 2
of this article, the Secretariat shall duly take into
account, inter alia, the practical value that might
accrue from in extenso publication. Treaties and
international agreements that the Secretariat intends
not to publish in extenso shall be identified as such
in the monthly statements of treaties and international agreements provided for in article 13 of these
regulations, it being understood that a decision not
to publish in extenso may be reversed at any time.
"4. Any State or intergovernmental organization
may obtain from the Secretary-General a copy of the
22 A/33/258.
23 Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 97 (1).
For the text of the regulations as modified by resolutions 364 B
(IV) and 482 (V), see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 76,
p. XVIII.
