S/2017/597

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 10 July 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
By paragraph 29 of its resolution 2339 (2017), the Security Council requested
me to provide options for the elaboration of benchmarks to assess the measures of
the arms embargo according to progress made in security sector reform, including
with respect to the national defence and security forces of the Central African
Republic and their needs, as well as additional information on the recommendation
by the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic to establish an arms
embargo working group, potentially within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
including composition, tasks, functioning, resource requirements and implications
with regard to the implementation of the Mission’s mandate for such a working
group, with reference to previous similar experiences in other United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
In pursuance of the above request, the Secretariat, through a dedicated
assessment team comprising representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, undertook a review of available
information on the issue, taking into account feedback received during several
rounds of consultations with relevant actors, including MINUSCA, the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) and the Panel of Experts.
The Secretariat also reviewed best practices and lessons learned on the monitoring
of arms embargoes in the context of preparing my upcoming report on small arms
and light weapons, in particular with respect to peacekeeping operations and special
political missions with a mandate to monitor arms embargoes.
On the basis of that assessment, I hereby provide, for the considera tion of the
Security Council, possible options on the elaboration of benchmarks to assess the
implementation of the arms embargo in the Central African Republic, as well as
additional information regarding the establishment of a possible arms embargo
working group.
Elaboration of benchmarks to assess arms embargo measures
The Security Council has requested assessments of arms embargoes and other
sanctions measures in a number of cases. This was done in Somalia in 2014
(S/2014/243) and in Liberia in 2014 (S/2014/707) and 2015 (S/2015/590), as well as
in connection with the situation in Guinea-Bissau in 2015 (S/2015/619) and 2016
(S/2016/720). Such assessments have proved to be a useful tool for the entire United
Nations system for providing the Council with relevant input for its reviews of the
overall sanctions regime and/or specific sanctions measures.

17-11664 (E)

180717

*1711664*

S/2017/597

Previous assessments of arms embargoes and other related sanctions measures
have taken into account, among other factors, the status and relevance of the measures
and their impact on the security situation in the country; their contribution to the peace
process, ceasefire regimes or the cessation of hostilities agreements; the need for
national legislative frameworks on weapons and ammunition management and weapons
management systems; border control and customs issues; and the implementation of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and security sector reform processes.
In the case of the Central African Republic, specific benchmarks have yet to
be elaborated to reassess and/or adjust arms embargo measures. Several options for
developing such benchmarks are presented below.
Option 1: Headquarters-based desk review
One option would involve a Headquarters-based desk review. Such a desk
review would collect, organize and combine available information on existing
lessons learned and my recent assessments on the design, implementation and
monitoring of arms embargoes (see above). Those general findings would be
considered together with the current analysis of arms embargo imple mentation in
the Central African Republic. The results of the desk review may be used by the
Security Council to elaborate a list of benchmarks against which the progress of
implementation at the national level may be assessed. The desk review would take
approximately one month to complete. While this review would be conducted in a
fairly short time frame, it may not be able to provide an analysis comprehensive
enough to reflect the full perspectives and concerns of international, regional and
national actors based in Bangui.
Option 2: Desk review with Headquarters-based remote consultations with the field
Another option would be through a Headquarters-based desk review that
would include videoconference and teleconference consultations with international,
regional and national actors based in Bangui and in the region. These consultations
would allow for a more comprehensive collection of information and perspectives
from relevant actors in the Central African Republic to usefully complement t he
desk review. On the basis of the information gathered, both by the desk review and
through consultations undertaken from New York, the Security Council may
elaborate benchmarks against which progress at the national level in implementing
the arms embargo may be assessed. Consultations would be conducted with
representatives of the relevant Central African authorities, MINUSCA, the European
Union Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, the Panel of
Experts and UNIDIR. This option would take an estimated two months to complete
to allow for consultations among a wide range of relevant actors.
Option 3: Desk review with Headquarters-based remote consultations and
field-based assessment mission
A third option would combine the Headquarters-based desk review and initial
remote consultations with the field with a field-based assessment visit to the Central
African Republic. The visit would allow for consultations with the widest possible
range of national actors on the ground and would provide an opportunity to visit the
weapons and ammunition storage facilities of the national defence and security forces.
The visit would also identify national capacities to effectively manage weapons and
ammunition stockpiles. The assessment team would include representatives of the
Secretariat and MINUSCA and would consult the relevant national authorities
(including the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior), the Mine Action
Service, the European Union Military Training Mission, the Panel of Experts and
UNIDIR. This option could be completed in an estimated three months.
2/5

17-11664

S/2017/597

Arms embargo monitoring
Notwithstanding the significant political milestones achieved since early 2016,
including the holding of presidential and national elec tions, the security situation in
the Central African Republic remains extremely fragile. The ongoing presence of
armed groups and other armed spoilers continues to constitute the greatest threat to
peace and stability, with the illicit transfer and availab ility of small arms and light
weapons enabling combatants to continue to fight and to perpetuate the cycle of
violence and its impact on civilians.
Despite the establishment of an arms embargo by the Security Council in
December 2013, the illicit trafficking of weapons and ammunition into the Central
African Republic has continued, as evidenced by the identification of trafficking
routes from neighbouring States by the Panel of Experts and the seizure of weapons
in violation of the embargo by MINUSCA. In its reports, the Panel has identified a
number of weapons-trafficking routes into the country from several neighbouring
States, such as Béma on the Ubangi River, bordering the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Tisi and Am Dafok in the north-east, close to the border with Chad
and the Sudan. Recent weapons seizures by MINUSCA include 11,275 rounds of
hunting ammunition and 136 machetes confiscated in Bangassou, Mbomou
prefecture, on 11 April 2017.
The national capacity of the Central African Republic to prevent illicit arms
trafficking is extremely limited. It lacks the operational capacity to inspect cargo
entering by land, river and air, particularly given the challenges of monitoring a
country of its size. In this context, the signing, on 14 February 2017, of Presidential
Decree 17.069 on the creation of the National Commission on Small Arms and Light
Weapons is a first step towards the operationalization of a national legislative
framework on weapons and ammunition management, which should be supported by
the international community, including through the provision of technical expertise.
Neighbouring States face their own challenges in terms of controlling their
own borders and preventing weapons from entering the Central African Republic.
According to the Panel of Experts, and as verified by MINUSCA, regional security
mechanisms aimed at addressing transborder threats, including the tripartite force
created by the Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan, are initiatives to
counter arms trafficking that may have an important role to play.
The mandate of MINUSCA with respect to its implementation of the arms
embargo pursuant to resolution 2301 (2016) encompasses a range of activities,
including monitoring the implementation of the embargo in cooperation with the
Panel of Experts; inspecting, as it deems necessary and when appropriate without
notice, all arms and related materiel regardless of location; and advising the
authorities of the Central African Republic on efforts to keep armed groups from
exploiting natural resources. MINUSCA is also authorized to seize and collect arms
and any related materiel in the Central African Republic that violate the embargo
and to record and dispose of such arms and related materiel as appropriate.
In areas where it is deployed, the Mission monitors entry points, illegal
markets and networks for arms and ammunition trafficking and shares its findings
with the Panel of Experts. Taking into account the tentative nature of available
information, MINUSCA regularly seizes various types of weapons.
However, in addition to the physical limitations posed by the lack of
infrastructure, the size of the country and its porous borders, MINUSCA does not
have consistent and regular access to many areas of the country. Because the
Mission cannot be deployed at all locations throughout the country, including in the
proximity of possible arms trafficking routes, it is difficult to obtain solid evidence
17-11664

3/5

S/2017/597

of existing smuggling and/or trafficking routes and to identify the individuals and
groups involved. The Mission is also therefore limited in its capacity to develop an
accurate understanding of the arms trafficking situation. Nevertheless, efforts to
increase aerial surveillance by MINUSCA and its reconnaissance capabilities will
improve the Mission’s capacity to monitor trafficking routes.
Another impediment to the Mission’s embargo-monitoring capability is the
persistently volatile and unpredictable security situation. Restrictions on movement
and limited resources have had a negative impact on the Mission’s ability to carry
out its inspection mandate. The Panel of Experts has, in the past, cited several
examples in which actionable information on major arms trafficking hubs or
potential weapons seizures could have been better acted upon by deploying
MINUSCA peacekeepers to identified locations.
Lastly, the arms embargo regime is highly politicized in the country. Popular
opinion is often manipulated, ignoring the fact that the Committee has never refused
an exemption request by the Government and reflecting the view that, while the
national authorities are constrained by the embargo, armed groups have unimpeded
access to illicit arms.
Additional information on the arms embargo working group
With a view to providing the additional information requested by the Security
Council in connection with the recommendation by the Panel of Experts that an
arms embargo working group be potentially established within MINUSCA, the
paragraphs below describe the possible composition, tasks and functions of such a
working group and the implications for the Mission’s mandate. In line with the
request of the Council, additional information provided draws on the lessons learned
and best practices of mechanisms established within other peacekeeping missions to
support the implementation of arms embargoes.
An arms embargo working group, including staff from various sections in
MINUSCA, could be responsible for coordinating the Mission’s efforts in the
implementation of its embargo responsibilities and assisting the national authorities
in this regard. As the Panel of Experts has no permanent presence in the country, the
working group could also provide the Mission with a forum in which to share
information with the Panel, advise on required action and engage in channelling
capacity-building assistance to the relevant national institutions and agencies crucial
to the implementation of the embargo, and with a view to having those institutions
and agencies progressively assume more responsibility in the monitoring of the
embargo within the context of the broader security sector reform.
The specific tasks of such a working group could include:
(a) Planning, organizing and coordinating monitoring responsibilities and
actions: identify key arms and ammunition trafficking routes and entry points, which
may include M’Poko International Airport, the port of Bangui, Béma (along the
Ubangi River), Am Dafok (on the border with the Sudan) and Tisi (close to th e border
with Chad), and, as appropriate, provide advice on follow-up action, including
inspections, seizures and disposal of weapons and ammunition by the Mission;
(b) Collecting and managing information: gather, analyse and disseminate
information on key arms and ammunition trafficking routes and entry points that have
been identified; share information with the Panel of Experts; enhance cooperation
with relevant government entities and agencies; and share arms-related information
with other relevant peacekeeping missions and United Nations expert panels;
(c) Reporting: report to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic on
4/5

17-11664

S/2017/597

action taken with respect to the inspection, seizure and disposal of arms and
ammunition that are in violation of the embargo;
(d) Providing training and information: promote awareness of the arms
embargo and of the respective roles of the embargo working g roup and the Panel of
Experts; develop standard operating procedures for the collection of embargo related information; organize training of MINUSCA staff, both military and civilian,
and of national security forces so as to enhance the collection and comp ilation of
embargo-related information at the field level; and support the national authorities
in the development of exemption requests.
The effective functioning of the working group would require increasing the
resources of the Mission to perform this coordination function through the inclusion of
two additional arms experts that would only be considered for the 2018/19 budget period.
Observations
On the basis of the above, the Mission’s current information -gathering and
coordination mechanisms could be strengthened, within existing resources, to
monitor the implementation of the arms embargo without the need to establish a
new structure in the form of a working group.
In this connection, early in April 2017, MINUSCA launched monthly meetings
to ensure that its focal point for the monitoring of the arms embargo was aware of
all Mission activities requiring communication with the sanctions committee and the
Panel of Experts. That forum could be responsible for coordinating the collection,
analysis and management of all information pertaining to the arms embargo and
ensuring a single channel of communication with the military and police
components responsible for taking action with respect to inspections and seizures. It
could be formally constituted within the Mission, including by developing
appropriate terms of reference.
Among the tasks that the forum could undertake would be the development of
standard operating procedures for the collection of embargo -related information,
such as a standard arms intake form to document arms seizures, for use by the
military and police components. The forum could also coordinate the training of
rotating mission personnel, including military and police personnel, on the proper
conduct of embargo inspections.
There is a clear correlation between the Mission’s efforts to enforce the arms
embargo and its strategic objective to support the creation of conditions conducive to
the sustainable reduction of the presence of, and threat posed by, armed groups. Every
arms seizure and every weapons-trafficking operation that is dismantled helps to
weaken armed groups, including their ability to prey on the population and control
natural resources, and facilitates the Mission’s efforts to exercise its core mandate to
protect civilians, restore security and extend State authority. MINUSCA will,
therefore, continue to make every effort to ensure that its information -gathering and
coordination mechanisms strengthen the Mission’s overall capacity to monitor the
implementation of the arms embargo, including through inspections and seizures.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-11664

5/5
