A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/163
1 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/630)]
50/163.

International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/105 of 20 December 1993,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/45 of
27 July 1995,
Taking note also of the report of the Board of Trustees of the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on
its fifteenth session, 1/
Taking note further of the analysis done by the Board of Trustees and
its recommendation that the Institute should also report to the Second
Committee of the General Assembly under relevant agenda items, in order to
improve the coordination and synergy of its programmes with other economic and
social issues,
Reaffirming the original mandate and distinct capacity of the Institute
to carry out research and training for the advancement of women, as stipulated
in General Assembly resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,
Stressing the need for independent research to ensure that policy-making
and project implementation address issues and emerging areas of concern to
women, and the role of the activities of the Institute therein,
Noting the recommendation of the Board of Trustees that the Institute
should implement the recommendations emanating from the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, the International Conference on
Population and Development, the World Summit for Social Development and the
Fourth World Conference on Women, especially those related to research and

1/
96-76429

E/1995/80.
/...

A/RES/50/163
Page 2

training needs for the advancement of women, and coordinate effectively with
United Nations bodies and organizations to avoid duplication,
Convinced that sustainable development cannot be achieved without the
full participation of women,
Taking into account paragraph 334 of the Platform for Action adopted by
the Fourth World Conference on Women at Beijing on 15 September 1995, 2/
1.
Expresses its satisfaction with the report of the Board of
Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, and commends the Institute for its efforts to focus on
problems that constitute barriers to improving the status of women and their
full participation in the sustainable development process;
2.
Emphasizes the unique function of the Institute as the only entity
within the United Nations system devoted exclusively to research and training
for the integration of women in development, and stresses the importance of
making its research findings available for policy purposes and for operational
activities;
3.
Commends the efforts of the Institute to address all levels of
poverty that hamper so dramatically the advancement of women, through the
coordination of research and training activities in the areas of empowerment
of women; statistics and indicators in gender issues; communications; women,
natural resources and sustainable development; water, sanitation and waste
management; renewable sources of energy; and issues related to different
population groups, such as older and displaced women, refugee and migrant
women and women in rural areas;
4.
Encourages the Institute to further develop active and close
cooperation with the specialized agencies and related organizations of the
United Nations system and with other institutions, such as universities and
research institutions, so as to promote programmes that contribute to the
advancement of women;
5.
Reiterates the importance of maintaining the level of resources
devoted to independent research and related training activities which are
crucial for the situation of women;
6.
Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and organizations
which have contributed to and supported the activities of the Institute;
7.
Invites Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to contribute, through voluntary contributions and pledges, to
the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, thus enabling the Institute to
continue to respond effectively to its mandate;

2/

A/CONF.177/20, chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/50/163
Page 3

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session a report on the activities of the Institute,
especially on those activities related to research and training needs for the
advancement of women as contained in the follow-up process of the plans and
platforms emanating from the major United Nations conferences, under the item
entitled "Advancement of women".
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
