S/PV.7761

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7761st meeting

Thursday, 25 August 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Thirty-second progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2016/706)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-26917 (E)
*1626917*

S/PV.7761

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Thirty-second progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2016/706)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, and
Mr. Joakim Vaverka, representative of the Chair of the
Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
Sweden to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/706, which contains the thirty-second
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: On 1 July, Liberia crossed a historic
milestone and assumed full responsibility for its security.
I applaud the Government and the people of Liberia for
the successful completion of the security transition, in
keeping with Security Council expectations. I commend
the Liberian institutions and international partners for
their leadership and commitment, which made reaching
that milestone possible.
It is now up to the Liberians to demonstrate full
ownership and responsibility for ensuring that the
significant investment made in building the security
institutions is not lost, that this achievement serves
as a foundation for more a focused and determined
continuation of efforts to strengthen their capacity
and professionalism, and that the execution of the
outstanding activities under the Government’s plan
for the transition of United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) remains on track.
2/7

25/08/2016

Following the security transition, the overall
situation in Liberia has remained calm. UNMIL
has been closely monitoring the performance of the
security institutions and adjusting its own engagement
accordingly. That has also necessitated a review of the
nature and form of the future support and cooperation
between the Government, on the one hand, and UNMIL
and other international partners, on the other, based
on the clear leading role of the Liberian actors and
continued, recalibrated support from international
actors. Accordingly, consultations are ongoing between
the Government and the United Nations and other
stakeholders on the revised institutional framework for
such cooperation.
In the meantime, UNMIL remains engaged with
a view to consolidating the gains of the past years
and advancing the development of the security and
justice structures, frameworks and accountability
mechanisms. That includes the training and mentoring
of senior management, assistance in the drafting of
legislation, policies and standard operating procedures,
and support for the decentralization of security
services. For example, with the technical training and
logistical assistance of UNMIL, the Liberian National
Police has opened five professional standards divisions
in the counties to deconcentrate security services from
Monrovia. UNMIL also provided support in developing
draft administrative regulations to implement the
Liberian National Police and immigration services
acts, once signed into law.
Following the takeover of the security functions,
the Government will need to redouble its focus and
energy in order to sustain the progress and implement
the remaining components of its transition plan. I
am afraid, however, that will not be possible without
continued international support. Challenges are still
complex, and too many for Liberia to successfully
tackle them by itself.
Over the recent period, Liberia has without doubt
continued to achieve progress in security and peace
consolidation. Some key legislation, such as the
firearms and ammunition control act, was adopted and
was enacted by the President. The Liberian National
Police and immigration services acts were also adopted,
but their signing into law has been delayed because of
some continuing disagreements on a number of clauses.
The Government has submitted to the legislature
a draft uniform code of military justice. The draft
code provides for a legal framework for jurisdictional
16-26917

25/08/2016

The situation in Liberia

authority, dispensing justice and the right to due
process within the armed forces of Liberia. I cannot
overemphasize the importance of expeditious approval
and enactment of those critical laws to sustain progress
on the security transition.
Similarly, the domestic violence act, which the
House of Representatives adopted in July, is yet to be
concurred by the Senate. The current version of the act,
regrettably, excludes the provisions that would have
criminalized female genital mutilation. The women’s
legislative caucus continues to lack the majority’s support
in the legislature to outlaw that practice. In addition,
the land authority and land rights acts, which are key
elements of the reconciliation process, still remain to be
adopted into law. In a positive development, the longawaited draft of the local Government act, which is a
key component of implementing the decentralization
programme, reached the legislature in July.
Moreover, the overall political climate in Liberia
continues to be impacted by the fallout from the Global
Witness report issued in May, which implicated some
senior officials in bribery. The allegations triggered
strong public reactions and, among other consequences,
led to a tense stand-off in the House of Representatives,
where the majority of legislators continue to demand the
resignation of the Speaker, who was one of the officials
implicated in the report. The standoff has led to the
boycott of regular House sessions by the opponents of
the Speaker, who, in turn, has accused the President
of plotting to remove him The standoff has in effect
paralysed the normal functioning of the legislature
and resulted in a separate parallel session held by the
opposing camps in the presence of police on the capital
routes. Outside the legislature, supporters have each
camp have held demonstrations, which fortunately have
not led to any serious security incident.
One the potentially serious consequences of the
political infighting within the legislature is the delay
in adopting the national budget for the 2016-2017 fiscal
year, which includes the financing of the National
Elections Commission and preparatory activities,
including those related to the security for the October
2017 presidential and legislative elections. That should
also be viewed against the background of a hardening
socioeconomic environment due to the worsening
economic outlook, which has prompted the Government
to introduce austerity measures, revise downwards the
current year’s budget and introduce an additional 11 per
cent decrease in the proposed budget for the next year.

S/PV.7761

Also, last week the Government announced the
closure of several radio stations — Voice FM, Radio Lib
24 and Shata FM — for failing to comply with tax and
licensing regulations. Opposition groups perceived that
as a Government attempt to muzzle the independence
of the media. One of the opposition parties, the All
Liberia Coalition Party, accused the President and
the Government of seeking an unfair advantage for
the Unity Party — the ruling party — with a view
to influencing the 2017 elections by silencing the
independent media and seeking the removal of political
opponents, in particular the Speaker of the House, for
their critical views. UNMIL has actively encouraged
the early resolution of those cases through equitable
application of the relevant regulations.
The current unsatisfactory situation calls for
ian urgent resolution in order to ensure the focus
and resources on critical national priorities. That is
becoming all the more pressing, as the legislature
is expected to move into recess at the end of the
month. The majority of House members, meeting in
separate session, wrote to the President to request the
postponement of the recess by one month.
In Liberia, as anywhere else in the world, the
prevention of conflict can be only effective in the
context of broader social, political and economic
transformations and respect for the rule of law. I
therefore remain concerned about the overall lack
of progress on addressing the underlying causes of
divisions and exclusion in Liberia. The failure to
robustly pursue reconciliation, and delays in structural
changes, such as land reform and decentralization,
raise a red flag about the future prospects for peace and
security in the country.
Tendencies towards division and exclusion were
manifested again in the constitutional review process,
in the form of Proposition No. 24, to render Liberia
a Christian nation, and Proposition No. 6 ,to grant
Liberian nationality based on race, which have caused
considerable tension despite the President’s rejection
of those propositions, among others. I have been
engaged with legislators and religious and traditional
community representatives to defuse the tension and to
encourage the importance of preserving and building
on Liberia’s diversity and adherence to international
standards and norms.
Over the past months, in my meetings with State
officials, I consistently urged constructive dialogue to

16-269173/7

S/PV.7761

The situation in Liberia

overcome disagreements and to refocus on substantive
national issues. I also engaged with all political parties,
media representatives, religious and traditional leaders
and women’s groups to discuss political, governance
and security issues in the run-up to the 2017 elections.
I also stressed the importance of meaningful political
discourse, national unity and the need for all political
actors to adhere to electoral laws and regulations. I
urged the political parties to demonstrate leadership
and commitment to peaceful campaigning, robust
civic education and promoting equitable women’s
representation in the political decision-making processes.
All parties I met with expressed a strong desire for
the peaceful conduct of the elections and recognized
their responsibility in that regard. Their main concerns
related to electoral transparency and potential for
fraud, the use of Government assets for political party
campaigning and the capacity of the Liberia National
Police to ensure security. The Government has also taken
steps to engage the political parties on the conduct of
the elections. Earlier this month, the Minister of Justice
invited the leaders of all political parties to discuss
their role and responsibility in ensuring peaceful
and credible elections. I will continue to encourage
stronger engagement between the Government and
other political actors to ensure a peaceful environment
in Liberia, particularly during the electoral period.
As the successes of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Liberia is leading to adjustments in
our presence, and as the country is preparing for its
forthcoming important political transition, many
Liberians are expressing concern about the prospects
of UNMIL’s withdrawal and potential lack of United
Nations support during the elections. There is
consensus among national actors that the next elections
will be a critical test for Liberia’s stability, democracy
and development. Therefore, both Liberia and the
international community must not lose sight of the
still arduous path towards sustainable peace in the
country and the region, which will require long-term
robust engagement by all concerned, particularly by the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vaverka.
Mr. Vaverka: I thank you, Madam President, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on behalf
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I will present
the main focus of the Commission’s work over the past
4/7

25/08/2016

couple of months, as well as our upcoming priorities for
the fall of 2016.
Let me first take this opportunity to congratulate
the Liberian Government on the successful resumption
of security responsibilities on 30 June. An important
milestone was reached this summer, and I would also
like to commend the peacekeeping mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), for its
continued support provided during the transition.
In May, the Government of Liberia and the
Peacebuilding Commission launched the revised
statement of mutual commitments on peacebuilding
in Liberia. It encapsulates the priority actions to
be undertaken by the Government and the PBC,
respectively, over the next two years. I feel confident
that the statement of mutual commitments provides a
robust basis for our work in support of peacebuilding
efforts during a crucial period of transition for Liberia.
In the statement of mutual commitments, the
Commission commits to continuing to provide support
in the areas of promoting national reconciliation,
security-sector development and strengthening the rule
of law. I was pleased to note that the statement of mutual
commitments was consistently referred to by Liberian
officials during the recent visit to Liberia by the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau of Kenya. It signalled to us a true sense of
shared ownership and genuine interest in rolling out the
commitments without delay.
In addition to the three areas that I have just
mentioned, the PBC will follow up on conversations
with national interlocutors regarding good governance,
employment-generation, equal treatment of ethnic
and religious groups, as well as the need to build
trust and confidence between the security sector and
citizens. The PBC also came away from the visit with
a renewed commitment to forge stronger collaboration
with the international financial institutions. Allow me
to describe two areas to which the Commission will
devote special attention over the coming months.
First of all, we will pay particular attention
to preparations for the upcoming presidential and
legislative elections in 2017. That will include
engaging with national stakeholders, such as the
National Elections Commission and the Governance
Commission, in supporting efforts by the Government
to ensure that the elections are conducted successfully
and contribute to further democratic consolidation.
16-26917

25/08/2016

The situation in Liberia

S/PV.7761

By addressing critical factors early, the PBC will be
able, we hope, to support preventive measures, ranging
from ensuring that efficient and quick mechanisms for
dispute-resolution are in place to supporting regular
channels for dialogue between the security forces and
the public. In addition, the PBC will emphasize the
importance of the participation of women, youth and
civil society throughout the electoral process.

on Liberia during and beyond the transition period, in
terms of mobilizing both financial support and political
accompaniment. The resolutions on peacebuilding
adopted this spring provide clear guidance and strong
impetus in that regard. The PBC looks forward to
continuing its close collaboration with the Security
Council in supporting Liberia on its path towards
further consolidation of peace over the coming years.

Secondly, the Commission will pay close attention
to reconciliation. As noted in the report (S/2016/706)
of the Secretary-General, there have been delays in
advancing national reconciliation. We know that,
in order to ensure a prosperous and stable Liberia in
the years to come, it will be important to continue
strengthening the social fabric and social cohesion.
The Liberian Government has described reconciliation
as a multidimensional process of overcoming social,
political and religious cleavages, healing the physical
and psychological wounds from the civil war and
confronting and addressing historical and structural
wrongs. The process cuts to the core of addressing the
root causes of the conflict, and we remain committed to
helping the Liberian authorities in that pursuit.

The President: I thank Mr. Vaverka for his briefing.

Later this fall, important decisions will be taken
by the Security Council regarding the future United
Nations presence in Liberia. In preparation for those
deliberations, and in fulfilment of our advisory
mandate, the Peacebuilding Commission looks forward
to providing succinct and targeted advice on the longerterm peacebuilding needs and priorities. The Chair of
the Liberia configuration will be travelling to Liberia
early this fall to consult with the Government, national
stakeholders and international actors.

I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): On behalf of my grateful
President and my nation, permit me to thank the
Security Council for its support for Liberia’s ongoing
transformation. The assistance in the maintenance of
peace and security provided by the Council through the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has been
pivotal to Liberia’s stability and progress, as well as to
the security and stability of the West Africa subregion.
We urge the Council to continue its close attention
and support for Liberia as we strive to consolidate our
cherished peace.
On 1 July, the Liberian Government was proud to
formally resume full security responsibilities for our
country. Scarred by a protracted war and seared by a
long history of mistrust, it can be understood why some
Liberians have not been as enthusiastic and optimistic as
others about the security transition. However, together
we will continue to work for a future of peace, security
and shared prosperity, which we know will ultimately
rest in our own hands.

In the statement of mutual commitments, the PBC
committed to convening a dedicated multi-stakeholder
forum on Liberia to discuss peacebuilding priorities
for that purpose. It is our hope that such advice will
complement the input received by the Council from
other United Nations system entities, and in the end
contribute to helping the United Nations and the
international community in planning strategically and
comprehensively for a smooth and successful transition.

We thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
continued commitment and engagement throughout
this period. Similarly, we thank the representative
of the Peacebuilding Commission for the briefing
delivered on behalf of the Commission. The Liberian
Government appreciates the continued engagement of
the Commission, remains committed to the statement
of mutual commitments on peacebuilding in Liberia
and urges international support for its successful
implementation.

In conclusion, let me reiterate what we have
stated before. There is no excuse for either the United
Nations system or the international community to
provide peacebuilding support based on a fragmented
approach. As UNMIL continues to draw down, we
have a responsibility to sustain international attention

The Liberian Government also wishes to reassure
the Council and the broader international community
of its renewed commitment to taking every measure
necessary to safeguard its peace, security and stability.
We are keenly aware of the invaluable linkages
that we share in that regard with our subregion, and

16-269175/7

S/PV.7761

The situation in Liberia

will therefore continue to act to ensure the security
and stability of our neighbours. We embrace those
responsibilities with unrelenting dedication.
That is why, although the forecasted growth in our
economy has been largely weakened by the devastation
resulting from Ebola and the precipitous decline in
the prices of our main exports, we have continued to
prioritize and provide, within the limits of our means,
support to the relevant security institutions, challenging
them to work together with the various communities
in ensuring the continuing peace and security of
the country.
To that end, the Liberia National Police and
the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization have
continued, among other security measures, to recruit,
train and deploy in many parts of the country. The
judicial system is being reformed so as to improve
access and public confidence and is also being extended
to other parts of the country.
As we move ahead on rebuilding our
nation — grateful, as always, for the support of
our partners — we know that the resolve of the
Government and the resilience of the Liberian people
are indispensable to our ability to continue along our
chosen path of consolidating peace. The Government
has continued to demonstrate its political will, and the
Liberian people continue to be highly motivated in
that regard.
However, the current economic downturn has
had the effect of undermining our ability to fully
implement some of the programmes that could further
advance our efforts towards achieving those objectives.
They include accelerating the pace of the securitysector reforms as well as advancing programmes of
reconciliation, decentralization, youth employment
and local Government reforms. In response to the dire
economic constraints, we have continued to adopt a
number of austerity measures, while intensifying our
fight against corruption so as to curb waste and abuse,
ensure transparency and accountability and identify and
reallocate our meagre resources so that we can continue
the reforms and implement the needed programmes.
In October 2017, Liberia will conduct legislative
and presidential elections. A successful election — one
that is seen to be free, fair and credible by Liberians
and by the international community — will be critical
to consolidating Liberia’s peace and its democratic
transformation. The Liberian Government understands
6/7

25/08/2016

the significance of those elections and is determined
to deliver a process and an outcome that are inclusive,
participatory, credible, free and fair. We also urge the
Council to support those critical undertakings.
Currently, there are 23 registered political
parties, each of which is a member of the Inter-Party
Consultative Committee, a growing forum of political
parties committed to working with the National
Elections Commission and other relevant stakeholders
to continuously explore avenues of cooperation and
problem-solving in furtherance of maintaining a
conducive and peaceful atmosphere before, during and
after the elections.
Meanwhile, a speedy resolution can be expected
to the ongoing impasse in the Lower House of the
legislature, largely brought about by the indictment of
the Speaker of the House on charges of corruption, so
that much-needed legislative focus and attention can
be returned to the passage of a number of crucially
enabling pieces of legislation affecting the elections and
our overall peace consolidation efforts. Two of them
include the possibility of a referendum on proposed
changes to the Constitution, as well as a redefinition
of land ownership and its associated rights, which will
ensure, for the first time for indigenous families and
communities, their right to the lands on which they
have always lived — a right that extends beyond those
of squatters.
Today, growing pains notwithstanding, Liberia is
safe and stable. The country is progressively changing.
From a past of war, we are working for peace; from fear,
we are experiencing freedom; and from hopelessness,
we are becoming hopeful. Difficult as it often is, we
are finding the strength to come to terms with, and are
committed to working to avoid, the tragedies of our
dark past. We are determined to embrace the promise
of a brighter future of togetherness.
Let there be no doubt: we are grappling with
numerous anxieties and complexities, so that we can
deepen a culture of democratic governance and change.
That is made even more challenging by strains on
available human and institutional capacities. Yet we are
hopeful, increasingly and reassuringly at peace with
ourselves and with our neighbours, unwavering in our
determination and blessed with a resilient spirit to rise
even when we were predicted to fall.
In obvious recognition of Liberia’s rising, for the
first time since the establishment of our subregional
16-26917

25/08/2016

The situation in Liberia

S/PV.7761

organization, the Economic Community of West
African States recently honoured the Government and
the people of Liberia with the current chairmanship
of its Authority of Heads of States and Governments.
The Mano River Union has also conferred its current
chairmanship upon our nation. We do not take those
responsibilities lightly.

freer, more just, more equitable, more tolerant, more
accountable and more democratic — an emerging
society that respects differences in gender, religion,
tribe and political association, and yet provides
opportunities to all without discrimination. We have,
no doubt, a long road to travel. But, as a people, we are
determined to get there.

And yes, we stand in need of the Council’s
understanding and support, as well as the understanding
and support of our international partners, especially
as we strive to recreate our society into one that is

The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

16-269177/7
