A/55/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

88th plenary meeting
Thursday, 21 December 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

Agenda item 30 (continued)

Agenda item 173 (continued)

Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, including
measures and recommendations agreed upon at its
mid-term review

Towards global partnerships
Draft resolution (A/55/L.71)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this item at its
45th plenary meeting, on 31 October 2000.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.71.
Before action is taken on the draft resolution, I
should like to announce that since its publication the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/55/L.71: Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
Hungary, Japan, Kenya, Lithuania, Namibia, Norway,
the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Slovenia and South
Africa.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.71?
Draft resolution
(resolution 55/215).

A/55/L.71

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 173?
It was so decided.

Draft resolution (A/55/L.68)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on this item at its 57th
plenary meeting, on 10 November 2000.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Madagascar to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.68.
Mr. Bakoniarivo (Madagascar) (spoke in
French): The debate held on 10 November 2000 on
agenda item 30 highlighted the fact that, although
progress had been made since the Secretary-General’s
1998 progress report on this item, several factors
continue to hinder Africa’s development. The situation
is eloquently described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/55/350.
Draft resolution A/55/L.68, which I have the
honour to introduce to the General Assembly on behalf
of the members of the Group of African States and the
sponsors, is designed to continue the high-priority
attention being given to Africa until the continent
achieves a level of growth conducive to sustainable
development. In addition to the countries listed in
A/55/L.68, India and Singapore have also joined the
draft resolution as sponsors.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-81116 (E)

*0081116*

A/55/PV.88

In its preambular part, the draft resolution recalls
that while the primary responsibility for the
development of Africa remains with African countries,
the support and assistance of the international
community are essential to the continent’s economic
recovery.
While the General Assembly welcomes in the
draft resolution international and bilateral efforts and
initiatives on behalf of Africa, it also notes its grave
concern at the limited progress, particularly with regard
to poverty eradication. Despite considerable efforts
made by African countries to establish an economic
and political environment conducive to development,
Africa continues to face serious problems as a result of,
among other things, the debt burden, the drop in
official development assistance, the HIV/AIDS
pandemic and other infections diseases, and its
diminished share of world trade.
In the draft resolution the Assembly also urges
the immediate implementation of debt relief
programmes, particularly for heavily indebted poor
countries. It also calls for Africa’s full integration into
the world economy, as well as for increased financial
resources to the continent. The Assembly also calls for
the entire international community, the Bretton Woods
institutions in particular, to pursue with renewed vigour
and as a matter of urgency the realization of the goals
and objectives of the New Agenda.
The draft resolution also stresses the need to
strengthen the coordinating mechanism to harmonize
initiatives on behalf of Africa so as to make them more
effective. In that connection, the draft resolution
proposes the adoption by the United Nations of an
integrated approach to Africa.
Finally, by this draft resolution the General
Assembly would, in preparation for the final review
and appraisal scheduled for 2002, stress the importance
of a judicious and independent high-level evaluation of
the New Agenda based on a set of performance
indicators to measure the progress made.
Africa is again looking to the international
community for solidarity in order to attain the
objectives set forth in the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa. The adoption of this
draft resolution would certainly serve to encourage
Africa to intensify its own efforts to enter successfully
into the new millennium. It is now time for Africans to
reap the fruits of their efforts and move from a still

2

fragile state to more solid foundations so that they may
have a more certain future.
In conclusion, we thank all the delegations that
participated in the consultations on this draft resolution
and those that joined the African countries as cosponsors. The Group of African States and the cosponsors of the draft resolution hope that it will be
adopted by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/55/L.68.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Perfiliev (Director of General Assembly and
ECOSOC Affairs): Before they take action on draft
resolution A/55/L.68, I should like to inform members
that, by operative paragraph 14 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral to submit an independent and objective
evaluation of the New Agenda to the General
Assembly not later than 31 May 2002.
It is the intention of the Secretary-General to
entrust the preparation of the evaluation to a team of
experts, which would be composed of an eminent
person to oversee the evaluation and of six high-level
experts — three from donor countries, two from Africa
and one from other developing countries. It is expected
that the team of experts would carry out the evaluation
during a period of five months and would travel to
Africa, Asia, Europe and North America for
consultations.
The preliminary cost of this task is estimated to
amount to $360,000. Of this amount, $240,000 would
be required in 2001 and $120,000 in 2002. It is
considered that the amount of $240,000 needed for
2001 could be absorbed from the resources
appropriated from the current biennium and that the
amount of $120,000 required for 2002 would be
reflected in the proposals for the biennium 2002-2003.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.68, entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa in the 1990s”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.68?
The resolution was adopted (resolution 55/216).

A/55/PV.88

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 30?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 50 (continued)
Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/55/37/Rev.l and Corr.l)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 50 at its 47th
and 48th plenary meetings on 1 November 2000.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Madagascar
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/55/L.37/Rev.l.
Mr. Bakoniarivo (Madagascar) (spoke in
French): I have the honour, on behalf of the Group of
African States and the sponsors, to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/55/L.37/Rev.l. The
following countries have joined as cosponsors:
Australia, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Greece, India,
Italy, the Netherlands and Portugal. The draft
resolution, entitled “Causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable and sustainable development in
Africa”, falls under agenda item 50.
The debate we held on this item on 1 November
led to a general recognition that the development of
Africa depends, inter alia, on preventing conflicts. This
concept is reflected in the preamble to the draft
resolution, wherein the General Assembly would
reaffirm the close linkage between peace, security and
development and the need for a comprehensive
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, contained in his report in document
A/52/871.
The report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of
Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,
contained in document A/55/45, pointed to the lack of
political will as one of the major obstacles to the
implementation of those recommendations. Thus, in the
preamble to the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would emphasize the need to strengthen further the
political will that is indispensable for the successful
implementation of the recommendations of the

Secretary-General and the proposals of the Working
Group.
Considering that the proposals made by the
Working Group in paragraphs 25 to 57 of chapter IV its
report would help to promote peace and development
in Africa, the General Assembly, in operative
paragraph 3, would encourage Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant international and regional institutions, within
their respective mandates, to take necessary measures
to fully implement the proposals made by the Openended Ad Hoc Working Group.
The General Assembly would also stress the role
of the Security Council in ensuring a coordinated and
integrated implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General in the
areas of peace and security. It would request the
Economic and Social Council, at its substantive session
of 2001, to consider the proposals of the Working
Group contained in chapter IV of its report.
With a view to enabling the Group to carry out its
tasks under resolution 54/234, the Assembly would
decide to extend the mandate of the Working Group
until the fifty-sixth session, and would request the
Secretary-General and the Working Group to submit
progress reports to the General Assembly at its fiftysixth session.
The Assembly is in a unique position to make the
dream of peace and development come true for Africa.
Our belief in that leads the African Group and the
sponsors of draft resolution A/55/L.37/Rev.1 to hope
that the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution by consensus in order to realize the
commitment made in chapter VII of the Millennium
Declaration.
I wish in conclusion to thank all delegations, in
particular our development partners, for their valuable
assistance in preparing this draft resolution, which is of
paramount importance to Africa. We wish also to thank
all the countries that have been kind enough to join in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/55/L.37/Rev.1.
Before calling on the representative of the United
States, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote or
position, I remind delegations that explanations of vote

3

A/55/PV.88

are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Snyder (United States of America): The
United States participated in the discussions
concerning the draft resolution entitled “Causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa” in a spirit of
compromise. We would like to clarify our position on
specific measures set out in the report of the General
Assembly’s Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on
that topic (A/55/45). While we agree with many of the
report’s observations and proposed actions, we have
reservations about some of its proposals.
First, we are convinced that aid under the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative should
not be wasted on States still engaged in conflicts.
Secondly, our position is that official bilateral
debt relief should not be de-linked from the HIPC
process of the international financial institutions, either
unilaterally or through the Paris Club. That would
reduce the leverage of the international financial
institutions to encourage economic reform.
Thirdly, at present only the international financial
institutions arbitrate the extent to which external debt
is sustainable. We do not agree that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development should be given
a role in making that assessment.
Fourthly, United States Government policy
opposes expanding HIPC debt relief to middle-income
countries. That would have significant budget
implications.
Finally, the United States has not agreed to the
0.7 per cent target for official development assistance.
Despite those concerns, the United States is
willing to join consensus on this draft resolution.
The President: Before proceeding to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, Ireland
and Sweden have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/55/L.37/Rev.1.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.37/Rev.1. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/55/L.37/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/217).

4

The President: Before calling on the
representative of Japan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position, I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Maruyama (Japan): My delegation did not
join in sponsoring the draft resolution on causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, as it has a few
problems with some paragraphs in the report of the
Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on that issue, for
the same reasons as relate to agenda item 30,
“Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, including
measures and recommendations agreed upon at its midterm review”, and agenda item 27, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity”.
Nevertheless, the Government of Japan continues
to work to achieve tangible results in international
efforts to bring about poverty eradication, economic
growth, the integration of African economies into the
world economy and human-resource development,
based upon the Tokyo Agenda for Action, which was
adopted at the Second Tokyo International Conference
on African Development. The Government of Japan
wishes to call upon the international community and
the United Nations to commit themselves to the further
development of Africa.
The President: I should now like to make an
announcement concerning the Open-ended Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Causes of Conflict and the
Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable
Development in Africa.
We have just adopted draft resolution
A/55/L.37/Rev.1, and have thereby extended the
mandate of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group
until the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
In that regard, I have conducted intensive
consultations, and it is now a great pleasure to
announce, as already indicated to all regional groups
on 4 December, my decision to appoint his Excellency
Mr. Shamshad Ahmad, Permanent Representative of
Pakistan, and to reappoint his Excellency Mr.
Inocencio Arias, Permanent Representative of Spain, as
the two Vice-Chairpersons of the Open-ended Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Causes of Conflict and the

A/55/PV.88

Promotion of Durable
Development in Africa.

Peace

and

Sustainable

Mr. Rahmtalla (Sudan): I am taking the floor,
Mr. President, to respond to your announcement in my
capacity as coordinator of the African group of experts
on economic matters — the Second Committee African
representatives.
We are grateful to you for the appointment of the
Permanent Representative of Pakistan and the
reappointment of the Permanent Representative of
Spain to chair the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group
on the causes of conflict in Africa and also to take this
opportunity to express our profound appreciation and
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of
Singapore, the outgoing co-Chairman.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
50.
Agenda item 27
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity
Draft resolution (A/55/L.67)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held its debate on this item at its 53rd
plenary meeting, on 7 November 2000.
I give the floor to the representative of Togo to
introduce draft resolution A/55/L.67.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (spoke in French):
Following the debate which the General Assembly held
on 7 September on agenda item 27, which concerns
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), it is my honour
to introduce, on behalf of the States members of the
OAU, the draft resolution contained in document
A/55/L.67.
In its preambular part, the draft refers to the
report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between
the United Nations and the OAU and emphasizes the
events that have occurred this year directed towards
strengthening regional and international cooperation.
First, at the thirty-sixth ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU, held in Lomé last July, a number of decisions

were adopted that reflect the determination of the
States of the continent to continue to promote peace,
stability and sustainable development in Africa despite
the enormous difficulties they are facing.
Also, at the Millennium Summit, more than 100
heads of State or Government reaffirmed the need to
find appropriate solutions to the many challenges
facing our world, and in particular the specific needs of
Africa.
With regard to the particularly difficult situation
of the African countries, which is characterized by a
considerable lack of stability, a pronounced weakening
of national economies and the ongoing deterioration of
health conditions, the draft emphasizes the need for the
OAU to continue to work, in partnership with the
United Nations, to strengthen African capacities in the
area of the maintenance of peace and to establish a
foundation for sustainable development in Africa.
In its operative part, the draft resolution notes
with satisfaction the level of cooperation between the
two organizations and encourages the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Liaison Office in Addis
Ababa. The Secretary-General is also invited to closely
involve the OAU in the implementation of the
commitments contained in the Millennium Declaration,
especially those that relate to meeting the special needs
of Africa.
Moreover, the Secretary-General is requested to
take the necessary measures to implement the
recommendations of the most recent annual meeting of
the two organizations, in particular those relating to
priority programmes of the OAU, as specified in
section III of the report of the Secretary-General.
With regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security in Africa, the text invites the United
Nations to intensify its assistance to the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) in strengthening its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution in Africa, and to continue to work to
strengthen African capacities with regard to the
maintenance of peace.
Concerning the socio-economic area, the draft
resolution requests the competent United Nations
agencies to include in their national, subregional and
regional programmes activities to support African

5

A/55/PV.88

countries in their efforts to enhance regional economic
cooperation and integration.
The draft also calls upon the United Nations
agencies to intensify the coordination of their regional
programmes in Africa to ensure the effective
harmonization of their programmes with those of the
African
regional
and
subregional
economic
organizations and contribute to creating a positive
environment
for
economic
development
and
investment. It calls upon the United Nations to actively
support the efforts of the OAU to increase official
development assistance. The draft also emphasizes that
the question of African indebtedness should be given
greater attention by the donor community.
Lastly, it reaffirms the need to provide additional
assistance to the Organization of African Unity and to
African States to enable them to cope with the
problems of refugees, displaced persons and returnees.
Last-minute discussions, particularly among
certain African delegations — unfortunately, I was
unable to consult all African delegations; I hope that
they will not take it amiss — held in a spirit of
compromise, enabled us to agree, on behalf of the
African States, to the proposed revision of paragraph
11. Paragraph 11 has been revised to read as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Calls upon the United Nations to actively
support the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity in urging the donor community and, where
appropriate, multilateral institutions to strive to
meet the agreed target of 0.7 per cent of gross
national product for official development

6

assistance, to implement fully, speedily and
effectively the enhanced programme of debt relief
for the heavily indebted poor countries, and to
achieve the goal of securing debt relief in a
comprehensive and effective manner in favour of
African countries through various national and
international measures designed to make their
debts sustainable in the long term”.
(spoke in French)
The draft resolution, as revised and submitted to
the General Assembly for its consideration, has the
advantage of being more concise than last year’s text
and reflects the concerns of both the African States and
Africa’s partners, as the result of lengthy discussions
with those partners.
Accordingly, I should like to express the sincere
hope of the African States that the text will be adopted
without a vote by the General Assembly.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.67, as orally
revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.67, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/55/L.67, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 55/218).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.
