‘UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

MJ UmtARY
Mw
w=

1842””

MEETING:

26 SEPTEMBER

2 1984

~UcmlN

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... .... .. .. ... ... .. ... .. .. .... .. ... . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1826) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1842)

S/PV.1842

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officicrl Records of the Security Council.
The date
-of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance -with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1842nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
Mr. Moulaye

President:

EL HASSEN

26 September

(Mauritania).

expressed their points of view, in particular, in a letter
which reached me yesterday afternoon in which the
representative
of the United States expressed his
conviction that the agenda for the next meeting should
include the request of the Republic of Korea for admission to membership in the United Nations, and in the
aforementioned letter from the President of the General
Assembly of 19 September 1975 containing the text
of General Assembly resolution 3366 ‘(XXX) entitled
“Admission of new Members to the United Nations”.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania
and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1842)

1.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11826)

3.

Note by the Secretary-General
transmitting
,a
letter dated 21 September 1975 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/11828)

.

The meeting

1975, at 3 p.m.

3. I am certainly aware of the fact that the provisional agenda is not entirely in accordance with the
wishes of’every member of the Council, but it is, of
course, for the Council itself, to adopt the agenda at
each meeting, as stated in rule 9 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I therefore suggest that we proceed
now to the adoption of this provisional agenda, and
I intend, for my part, to put items 2 and 3 of the provisional agenda to the vote separately. If there is no.
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
that procedure.

of the agenda

4. I recognize
Kingdom.

was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

the representative

of the United

of the agenda

5. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
I am not
disagreeing with that procedure but, on a point of
clarification
and order, I assume that .we shall be
following the same procedure as we followed when
similar matters were considered last time, namely
that you will put items 2 and 3 to the vote as you suggested, and that there will then be a vote on the provisional agenda, ‘if it has been amended, as a whole.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The provisional
agenda for this meeting has been
distributed to Security Council members in document
S/Agenda/1842.
In this connexion, I should like to
recall that two communications
dealing with the
question of the admission of new Members have
recently been received. The first is a letter dated
I9 September 1975 from the President of the General
Assembly [S/11826] in which he transmits the text
of resolution 3366 (XXX), which the General Assembly
had adopted that same day. The second is a note by
the Secretary-General
dated 22 September
1975,
transmitting a letter dated 21 September 1975 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
[S/11828]. Both these communications
have been
made available to all members of the Security Council
in accordance with rule 6 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
1.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interbretafion from French):
Since there is no objection, it is my intention to proceed
in that way.
/t was so decided.

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance with the procedure we have just
adopted, I shall first put to the vote -item 2 of the
provisional
agenda: “Letter
dated 19 September
1975 from the President of the General Assembly to
the President of the Security Council (S/11826)“.

2. The provisional
agenda for this afternoon’s
meeting was drawn up in accordance with the provisions of rule 7 of the provisional rules of procedure
and takes into account the wishes expressed in my
presence by some members of the Security Council
during earlier consultations.
Those members clearly

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
1

Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
United Republic
of Cameroon,
United’ Republic of Tanzania.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:

United

States of America.

The inclusion of item 2 in the agenda was approved
by I4 votes to none, with I abstention.
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I shall now put to the vote item 3 of the provisional
agenda, which is entitled “Note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting a letter dated 21 September 1975
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea
addressed
to the Secretary-General
(S/l 1828)”
A vote was taken by show of hands.

10. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules of
procedure, applications for membership are referred
by the President of the Security Council to the Committee on the Admission of New Members for consideration, unless the Council decides otherwise.
11. Members of the Council wil recall, however,
that a short time ago, at its 47th and 48th meetings,
held on 7 and 8 August, the Committee on the Admission of New Members considered the membership
applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and submitted
a report to the Security Council [S/f 17941. For that
reason I propose, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX),
that the Council agree to reconsider those applications for membership
without referring them once
again to the Committee
on the Admission of New
Members. If there is no objection, I shall consider
that the Security Council agrees to this procedure.
It was so decided.

In favour: Costa Rica, France, Italy, Japan, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

12. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
A number of representatives of Member States that
are not members of the Council have addressed letters
to me requesting that they be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question before the Security
Council. They are the .representatives
of Algeria,
Cuba,
Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey,
the German
Democratic
Republic,
India, Poland, Senegal and
Yugoslavia.
In conformity
with the provisions of
Article 31 of the Charter and in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and the
usual practice of the Council, I propose to invite the
representatives I have just mentioned to participate
in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.
In view of the limited number of seats available at
the Council table, I request the representatives
I
have mentioned to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber. They will be invited
to take places at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.

Against: Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Guyana, Iraq,’ Mauritania,
Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Republic of Tanzania.
Abstaining:

United

Republic

of Cameroon.

The result of the vote was 7 in favour,
and I abstention.

7 against

The inclusion of item 3 in the agenda was not
approved, having failed to obtain the affirmative vote
of nine members.
9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I suggest that members of the Council now proceed
to vote on the adoption of the provisional agenda as
amended by the preceding votes.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria), Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Adjibade
(Dahomey),
Mr. Florin
(German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Fall (Senegal) and Mr. Job
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

In fuvow:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Republic of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

13. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Security Council has been convened urgently
-despite
the many pressing commitments
of all its
members-in
order to respond to the urgent request
addressed to it by the.General Assembly. In his letter
dated 19 September 1975 [S/11826], which is on the
agenda for today, the President of the Assembly submitted to the Council the text of resolution 3366 (XXX),
in which the Assembly requests the Council to recon-

and

The agenda us a whole, as amended, was adopted
by 13 votes in favour, none against, with 2 abstentions.
Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President of
the General Assembly to the President of the Security
Council (S/11826)
2

18. In doing this, we are of course laying aside the
simplistic interpretation
of seeing in the attitude of the
United States an arbitrary gesture made in response
to a subjective motivation,
rather than to considerations of justice and legality as the world-wide responsibilities of a permanent member of the Security
Council require. Hence from the very outset we will
make the assumption that the arguments adduced by
the delegation of the United States are based exclusively on the principles of the Charter and the rules
deriving therefrom which determine the way in which
the Organization should function.

sider immediatelv
and favourablv the aoolications of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
for membership
in the United
Nations, in strict conformity
with Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations.
14. Members of the Council will recall that the
Security Council considered those requests last month
[1834th-1836th
meetings]
and that it submitted
a
special report to the General Assembly on this subject.’
The Security Council will now examine once again
the question on its agenda, and I shall call on those
speakers who have inscribed their names for this
afternoon’s meeting.

19. When the Security Council first considered the
requests for admission of the two Vietnamese States,
none of its members challenged the view that those
States satisfactorily met the conditions laid down in
Article 4 of the Charter. Not even the delegation of
the United States did so, since that delegation gave
as the reason for its negative attitude only that the
Council had refused to discuss the request for admission of the Republic of Korea.

15. The first name on my list is that of the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
16.

Mr.

RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
Mr. President, I am particularly grateful to.
you and to the other members of the Council for
having made it possible for me to participate in today’s
discussion. There are several reasons why we are
pleased at seeing you presiding over the deliberations
of the Council on a subject which is so important to
all of us, namely, the admission to the United Nations
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
We are convinced that, as
the representative of Mauritania, you are in a position
to have the clearest possible understanding
of this
problem. Your personal qualities and the effective
and able way in which you have exercised them in
your delicate role assure us in advance of your ability
to discharge the responsibilities
incumbent
upon
you particularly in a debate such as this one, in which
patience and wisdom are not sufficient to ensure
success. Paraphrasing
Article 4 of the Charter, of
which the Council will surely be reminded more than
once, I shoud like to add that you, Mr. President,
“are able and willing to carry out these obligations”.
That gives us hope that our discussions, under your
competent
guidance, will achieve the satisfactory
outcome that we are awaiting.

French):

20. By establishing a conditional
link between the
admission of the Vietnamese States, on the one hand,
and the admission of the Republic of Korea, on the
other hand, this attitude has a certain tinge of illegality, which is further borne out by the advisory
opinion of 28 May 1948 of the International
Court of
Justice,* which makes it abundantly clear that the
admission of a new Member shall not be made contingent upon conditions other than those provided in
Article 4 of the Charter. We are all aware of the circumstances in which the International
Court of Justice
was requested to render that opinion. And for us,
members of the third world, which for the most part
were at that time still outside these bad games of
international
politics, it appears to us an ill omen that
one of the most important
protagonists of detente
should today attempt to revive the ways that were
deserving of criticism even during the period of the
cold war.
21. I do not think I need to expatiate on the immorality involved in making the merits of one State to
become a Member of the Organization dependent on
recognition of the claims of some other State to the
same favour. In the case of both Vietnamese States,
this immorality
becomes such a flagrant and blatant
injustice that it is scarcely possible to believe it. We
shall refrain from cast.ing any judgements about the
behaviour of any parties involved, but we cannot let
the occasion go by without stating how much we
regret this lack of generosity on the part of a country
which could a easily behave magnanimously
and that
justice finally be done to a people which so richly
deserves it.

17. The Council once again has before it the question of the admission to the United Nations of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
Resolution
3366 (XXX), in
which the General Assembly requests that the Council
reconsider this question immediately
and favourably,
was adopted by such a majority-and
without any
opposition-that
it no longer seems necessary here
to prove the justice of the right of the two Vietnamese
States to become Members
of the Organization.
Since it was owing to the opposition of the United
States of America-an
isolated opposition
but one
fraught with consequences-that
the requests for
admission were rejected, it would doubtless be more
appropriate to turn to the arguments presented by
the representative of the United States and to discuss
their true basis.

22. But it was by referring to the principle of universality that the representative of the United States
explained his position. We should say in passing that
we do not grasp how that principle can be served by
3

rejecting the admission of the .two Vietnamese States
to-the Organization.
However, we would like to give
this argument, which is at present being more and
more widely used, the importance it deserves.

Democratic Renublic of Viet-Nam Lee 1836th meetFar be it from us to deny the United .States the
right, which it enjoys together with. every Member
of the United Nations, to say “no” to a proposal
that does not meet with its -approval. But when that
“no” has the force of a veto,’ in other words, when it
may run counter to an opposing view, even one held
by a large majority, it cannot be treated with the same
leniency.

ing].

23. The first condition for it to be proved valid is
that its application
should not depend on transitory
circumstances,
because in that case it would be a
purely circumstantial
argument devoid of any legal
content. Now if the United States today invokes the
principle of the universality of the United Nations,
why-one might ask oneself-were
they so little convinced of it when for more than 25 years they spared
no effort to prevent the People’s Republic of China
from taking its legitimate
place within the Organization?

27. We all know the reasons for which the permanent
members of the Security Council were given the right
of veto, and, without wishing to go into those reasons
today, I merely wish to stress the fact that, in its
spirit if not in its.letter, the Charter did not intend to
make of the right of veto a tool for absolutely arbitrary action by the great Powers. Furthermore,
in
their quadripartite statement of 8 June 1945, the great
Powers gave certain assurances regarding the use
of that excessive privilege. In paragraph 8 of that
statement they declared, in effect, that they would not
resort ‘to their right of veto with the deliberate purpose of obstructing the operation of the Council.3
The veto used by the United States during the meeting
of the Council held on 11 August last was, therefore,
in open contradiction
with the spirit of the Charter
and of the commitments
undertaken by the great
Powers themselves, including the United States.

24. That being so, it would be erroneous to conclude
that we are opposed to the idea of the universality of
the United Nations. On the contrary, we hav,ebeen
constant and convinced defenders of that idea, since
we are certain that it is only by embracing the.entire
membership of the international
community
that the
Organization
can effectively discharge the .mission
which has been entrusted to it by the Charter. But
that presupposes one essential condition which is,
furthermore, explicitly stated in the Charter, namely,
that the Members of the Organization should accept
the obligations of the Charter and that in their conduct
they should contribute to its strengthening and not to
its destruction. In the same way as all human societies
preserve their cohesiveness by eliminating
all elements which act against their laws, the universality
of the Organization
cannot include those who contravene its fundamental principles and whose actions
run counter to its .most important decisions.

28. The right of veto was granted to the permanent
members of the Security Council by virtue of their
particular
responsibilities
in the maintenance
of
international
peace. The position they occupy in the
world .and the superiority they enjoy over the rest of
the international community in all fields made it completely pointless to grant them the advantage of a new
privilege which confirms their primacy. The right of
veto is therefore abused when it enables a Member
of the Organization, however important it may be, to
go against all ‘the other Members. Such use of the veto
arises unquestionably
from the most absolute arbitrariness, condemnation of which is rightly one of the
very.foundations
of the Charter.

25. -Furthermoce,
the principle
of <the absolute
universality, of the Organization
is not written into
the Charter of the United Nations. If that -had been
the case, why should restrictive conditions for’adherence have been included, why should provisions
also have been made for steps to suspend or exclude
Members? Of course;the
circumstances are not the
same as those which prevailed when the Charter was
actually .drawn up. The traumas of that era have
been mitigated,
the distrust that was felt has been
transformed or displaced. The desire for universality
of the United Nations is without doubt a sign of
progress, which we welcome in .relations
among
nations. But if it is to be inscribed in the Charter, then
it will be necessary to accept the idea, which we
support, that a revision of the Charter is essential.
But this is quite obviously a different problem and one
which I do not think it opportune to take up in the
course.,of this discussion.

29. The fact that the General Assembly adopted
resolution 3366 (XXX)
without opposition-which
is the reason for the convening of this meeting of the’
Council-is
a reflection of the will of the internationai
community.
30. Even if we leave out of account all the legal
considerations that I have put forward, how can we
hope to maintain a minimum
of harmony among
nations. if such a unanimous decision can be thwarted
by a single one of them? No one can be right against
everyone else. It is for that reason that we wish to
continue to hope that the delegation of the United
States will, at the end of this debate, find it possible
to give concrete form to the keen awareness it must
have of the primary responsibilities
its country bears
in -strengthening solidarity, among nations and understanding among peoples.

26. Having thus discussed-I
would not dare to say
refuted-the
line of argument of the United States
delegation, I must say something about its attitude:
in other words, the veto that it exercised against the
admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
4

cratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam,
after the General Assembly, by.an
overwhelming majority, expressed itself on the subject
favourably
and without objection,
just one week
ago. Once again, we are attempting
to gauge the
degree of sensitivity that this body can display in view
of the unanimity of the international community. Thus,
this is not merely a search for a just solution of a
question on which this body of the United Nations
must take a decision but also a debate which will help
to strengthen or weaken the image of the Security
Council and its ability to fulfil the responsibilities
incumbent
upon it under the Charter. Hence, the
watchful eyes of the entire world are on the debate
which is taking place.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpritution
from French):
I thank the representative
qf Algeria for the very
kind words he was good enough to address to me.
Mr. Rahal knows the great esteem, friendship and
respect I feel for him. He also knows that the relations
between us reflect the relationship of close fraternity
and co-operation
that exists between Algeria and
Mauritania.
32. Before calling on the next speaker on my list,
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I
have just received letters from the representatives of
Hungary and Sri Lanka requesting that they be permitted, under the terms of Article 31 of the Charter,
to participate, without the right to vote, in the Council’s
discussions. If there is no objection,
I intend, in
accordance with the practice of the Council and rule 37
of the provisional
rules of procedure, to invite the
representatives
of Hungary and Sri Lanka to participate, without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussions. There being no objections,
I now invite
those representatives
to take the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, it being
understood that they will be invited to take a seat at
the Council table when their turn comes to speak.

37. First, it is fitting to recall the precise nature of
the matter to be considered by the Council. The
Council is meeting today specifically and exclusively
at the request of the General Assembly and in response
to its resolution 3366 (XXX) the text of which, adopted
by 123 countries with not a single vote.against, could
not be clearer.
38. The General Assembly has said, in unequivocal
terms, that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and
the Republic of South Viet-Nam should be admitted
as Members of the United Nations. It has requested
the Council to reconsider immediately and favourably
their applications
for admission.
The Assembly
specified something which would perhaps be unnecessary were it not for the obtuse- strength of one
member of the Council, namely, that this matter
should be taken up in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter, the only legitimate standard
for determining the eligibility of any applicant, which,
in the opinion of the vast majority of the Assembly,
makes it possible to state that the representatives of the
Vietnamese people fully meet the necessary requirements for membership in the Organization.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Hollai
(Hungary) and Mr. Amerasinghe
(Sri Lanka) took
the seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.
33. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Cuba, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and ‘tq make his statement.
34. Mr. ALARC6N
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, just I should like to thank
you and the members of the Security Council for
having given me this opportunity to participate in the
imp&ant
discussions that the Council has now begun.
It is a particular pleasure for me to take part in this
meeting of the Council under your wise and competent
guidance. It is particularly gratifying because of the
close ties of friendship and co-operation which exist
between Mauritania and Cuba, joined as our countries
are by a common dedication
to the cause of the
peoples struggling for their emancipation.
The fact
that the representative
of Mauritania
is serving as
President augurs well for the Council’s desire to
reach a just settlement of the important problem the
consideration
of which we are once more taking up
today.

39. The Council must, therefore, reach a decision
with regard to the requests of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
which now, strictly speaking, are not merely the
requests of those States but, rather, come before the
Council in the form of a stated petition of the General
Assembly.
40. The General Assembly did not include in its
resolution any reference whatsoever to any other
application or any oth& question except the admission of the Vietnamese States. The Council, therefore,
does not have before it, in this debate, any other
request. .Hence, it would not be right to attempt to
make any connexion whatsoever between these two
requests and any claims to membership, whether real
or imaginary, that other States might advance.

35. I should also like to express our support for the
very clear statement just made to the Council by
M. Rahal, the representative
of Algeria. He i’s a
capable and worthy spokesman of the non-aligned
countries in the United Nations.

41. Furthermore, as the Assembly recalled, requests
for membership
are governed by Article 4 of the
Charter, which clearly indicates that each request

36. The Council is once again discussing the request
for admission to the United Nations of the Demo5

for admission must be examined on its own merits
to determine whether the applicant meets the requirements spoken of therein. Nowhere does it suggest the
appropriateness
or the legality of connecting the
request of one applicant to that of any other, nor does
it recognize as valid the attempt to impose upon the
applicant conditions other than those established by
the Charter.

45. With its boundless heroism, its unlimited selfdenial, its spirit of tested sacrifice, the Vietnamese
people pursued a struggle of historic significance for
all mankind. The solidarity of the socialist countries
was always behind it in its struggle; it was supported
by the non-aligned countries; and it roused the understanding and sympathy of millions of people fhroughout the world, including those in the United States.

42. Article 4 of the Charter refers to three requirements: the first, that the applicants be “peace-living
States”; the second, that they “accept the obligations contained in the present Charter”; and, the third,
that “in the judgement of the Organization, [they] are
able and willing to carry out these obligations”.
The
applicants-the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and
the Republic of South Viet Nam-have
formally and
solemnly demonstrated
that they accept the obligations embodied in the Charter and that they are ready
to fulfil them. The Organization, by the vote of almost
all its Members, has already said that, in its judgement,
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Name are able to fulfil these
obligations. It has gone further and has indicated to
the Council that the applicants meet the other requirements and are sufftciently qualified to become Members of the Organization.

46. The peoples of the world have contracted an
immense debt of gratitude with the courageous people
of Viet-Nam. For many people, the outstanding resistance of the Vietnamese people meant that they too
could preserve their own independence and live in
peace. Had the Vietnamese been vanquished, other
peoples also would have been victims of the ferocious
imperialist aggression. Each one of the bloody struggles in the heroic land of Viet-Nam was fought in the
name of the independence and peace of all peoples of
the third world. Each one of its fighters fought for all
of us. Each one of its martyrs died for all of us. Their
blood was shed generously for us all.
47. We therefore rejoice with them in the hour of
their glorious victory, which we shall always think of
as ours as well. In the new phase that begins today,
in order to heal the wounds and to build a Viet-Nam
10 times more beautiful that the one President Ho Chi
Minh had hoped for, the Vietnamese people must
also be able to count upon the full and effective help
of all peoples of the world.

43. With regard to the first requirement, it should be
said that no one has demonstrated a deeper or more
unselfish love of peace than has the Vietnamese
people; no one has defended the right of all peoples
to true peace as has, with unparalleled heroism, the
Vietnamese people; no one has done as much for the
cause of liberty, independence
and peace. For 30
years, with unequalled
self-denial, the Vietnamese
people faced up to colonialist and imperialist aggression, it met all tests, it resisted all obstacles, it made
sacrifice upon sacrifice, until it won its sacred right to
liberty and independence.

48. The question of admitting to the United Nations
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam is of great importance to all progressive forces. It will also define the future of the
Organization. The position taken by the Government of
the United States when it cast its veto to impede
the decision of the Council, has been categorically
rejected by the international
community
in General
Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX). The pretext given
by the United States delegation as it attempted to link
the acceptance of the Vietnamese
request to the
simultaneous admission of the so-called “Republic of
Korea” is absurd, inadmissible
and contrary to the
Charter.

44. During the last decade the struggle of the Vietnamese people acquired particularly edifying dimensions. Against it the American imperialists unleashed
the most barbarous and cowardly aggression. On its
small territory more bombs were dropped than all
those used during the Second World War. Its cities
were demolished
by gunfire; its rice fields and its
forests destroyed by defoliants and herbicides; its
women and children grew familiar with the effects of
napalm, anti-personnel
bombs and toxic chemical
substances which formed the daily news of a cruel war
of genocide. But no one was able to bend its indomitable will to struggle. It resisted, it was able to fight
and it won in the most difficult circumstances. Guided
by the inspiration of the immortal example of President Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese people was able
to persevere in its struggle until it won a complete
victory. Thus, it became the most exalted symbol of
the liberation movements in Africa, Asia and Latin
America-their
most cherished banner..

49. Above all, it must be recognized that the question
of Korea has nothing whatsoever to do with the admission of the two Vietnamese States to the United
Nations. The Korean problem has been and will be
studied in its various aspects and at the appropriate
time by the General Assembly. In no way whatsoever
is it related to the discussion taking place in the Council
today or to the decision which the Council must adopt
in regard to the admission of Viet-Nam to the United
Nations. Therefore, my delegation will refrain from
expressing views now on the so-called request for the
admission of the alleged Republic of South Korea. But
we would like it recorded that we understand the
effort to relate the two topics as a capricious attempt
to distort logic and a proof a disrespect for the se6

riousncss that should characterize
of the Security Council.

that happened we could not just sit with our arms
folded waiting until the Washington authorities were
prepared to adopt a more rational position.
The
General Assembly would have to examine the question once again and decide what steps should be taken
to strengthen and expand international
solidarity with
the Vietnamese people and put an end to the imperialist hostility against it.

the deliberations

50. There is something much more serious in the
position taken now by the Government of the United
States. Its opposition to the admission of Viet-Nam
to the United Nations would seem to indicate that
Washington still maintains the same hostility that led
to an unjust war and that, among other things, seriously damaged the true interests of the American
people. The public has ample reason to suspect that
the United States veto seems to be an attempt to
pursue in the diplomatic sphere a war which was lost
once and for all on the field of battle. That can only
lead to a greater degree of isolation for the United
States and the estrangement of broad sectors of the
world public. This battle in the end will also conclude
with a great defeat for.imperialist
policy.

54. Those who hold positions of privilege which
enable them to assume arrogant attitudes on the
margin of history and of the unanimous will of peoples
should not involve themselves in the sterile exercise
of transitory power. The veto cannot get for them in
this room what they were unable to get with billions
of dollars, half a million soldiers and immeasurable
tons of bombs on the battlefield. It is simple to raise
one’s hand in the Council chamber to cast a negative
vote, but no one, and nothing, can veto the peoples’
will to fight. It is high time that it-be understood that
the peoples of the world have used their veto, against
which there is no appeal, against the imperialist policy,
and it is they, the peoples, who wi1.l count in the final
vote.

51. This irrational attitude can be contrasted with
the generous offer of the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to
normalize their .relations with the United States on
the basis of the Paris Agreements.4 The American
authorities would do well to accept that noble message from a people which, while its wounds are still
fresh, is able to judge history with a wisdom and an
objectivity
that one might also expect from the authorities of a powerful nation which is preparing to
celebrate the bicentenary of its independence.
The
United States should recognize that its aggressive
policy against the Vietnamese people is already a total
failure.

55. The PRESIDENT
(int~vywetcrtion
Jiom French):
I have just been told that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Byelorussian SSR and .the Minister of
External Relations of the Republic of Costa Rica are
present. I should like to welcome them to the Council.
1 am certain that the Council can only benefit. from
their contributions to our discussions.
56. I now invite the representative
of the %erman
Democratic Republic to take a place at .the Coui~il
table and to make his statement.

52. The international
community
for its part has
the duty to co-operate with the Vietnamese people
throughout this new stage of national reconstruction
it is embarking on. The United Nations has an important role to play in this phase by offering its brdadest,
unconditional
and unreserved co-operation.
Public
opinion throughout the world, including the United
States, must be mobilized
and must maintain solidarity through permanent vigilance until all manifestations of the policy of imperialist
aggression
against the people of Viet-Nam
have been totally
eliminated.
Thus, we must unswervingly and energetically condemn the embargo imposed by the United
States upon Viet-Nam and the prohibition on American
religious organizations giving humanitarian
aid to the
Vietnamese people. The United States should abide
by article 21 of the Paris Agreements dn Viet-Nam
concerning the contribution
.of the United States
towards healing the wounds of war in Viet-Nam and
throughout lndo-China.”

57.

Mr.

Democratic
RepubJi’c)
Mr. President)
I
should like to thank you for having given t!ne an opportunity to speak before this important organ of the
United Nations. On behalf of my delegation, may I
congratulate you, Mr. President, as the representative
of a country with which the German Democratic Republic enjoys friendly relations, on your assumption
of your important and responsible position.

(intrrprctcrtion

FLORIN

from

(German

Russim):

58. My delegation has already had frequent opportunities to explain the position of the German Democratic Republic on the question of the admission of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the
United Nations. We are particularly gratified that the
applications of these States are being reconsidered,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX),
adopted-by an overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations. This resolution confirmed
the legitimate
right of the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to
become full Members of the United Nations’, and
consequently
requested the Security Council to ‘reconsider immediately
and favourably the applications
of those two States.

53. We know that members of the Security Council,
without ideological distinctions, are ready to adopt a
favourable decision on the admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
to the United Nations. The only
obstacle which the Council might meet in carrying out
its duty would be a new veto by the United States. If
7

..

59. The Government
and people of the German
Democratic Republic are linked with the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam by ties of deep friendship. The people of
Viet-Nam,
throughout a struggle lasting many years
and costing them many victims and sacrifices, defended
their right to social and national self-determination
an’d emerged victorious over foreign intervention.
60. The German Democratic
Republic. and other
States belonging to the socialist community
have
always stood squarely on the side of the Vietnamese
people and have given them active and total support
in their just struggle. It gave us great satisfaction and
great joy to welcome the historic victory of the South
Vietnamese patriots. That victory has opened before
the entire population of South Viet-Nam the road to a
bright future, peace, democracy and social progress.
The significance of that victory far transcends national
boundaries and is indeed an important contribution to
the consolidation
of peace and security in South-East
Asia and in the entire world. This fact alone should
give reason for all States which believe in peace in
Asia and throughout the world to support.the immediate admission’of
the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Republic,‘of South Viet-Nam to, membership in the United Nations.,
”
/
61. In, supporting the admission of both Vietnamese
States to membership
in the Organization
we are
advocating
the implementation
of the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the’ United Nations in
favour of improving and increasing the universality of
the Organization and of the further strengthening
of
international peace and security in order to encourage
an,d develop co-operation
on a basis of equality
between all States. The applications of the Governments of the ‘Democratic Rep&lid
of VietiNam
and
the’ Republic of’ South Viet-‘Nam for admission to
membership
in the ,United Nations are in full conformity with the Charter. Both of those States pursue
a policy of peace and have frequently expressed their
readiness and ability
to fulfil all the obligations
involved in membership in the United Nations.
62. The result of the relevant discussions at “the
thirtieth session of the Genera1 Assembly is striking
proof of the fact that both Vietnamese States are
morally, politically and juridically-entitled
to become
full Members of the Organization.
For, those who so
far have been impeding the membership of the two
Vietnamese
States, such a ,clear and unequivocal
manifestation of sympathy for the people of Viet-Nam
should give them cause ,to review their position. One
cannot be in favour of peace and international detente
and at the same time ignore resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly.
63. In this connexion,
the Minister
for Foreign
Affairs of the German Democratic Republic, Mr. Oskar
Fischer, stated on 24 September this year, during the
general debate in the Genera1 Assembly:

“We object to any blocking of the admission of
the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
‘Republic
of South Viet-Nam
to membership,
whatever the excuses may be. The German Democratic Republic expects the Security Council to
-consider again and approve the applications
of
both States for membership,
in ‘accordance with
the resolution adopted on 19 September last. Who
could seriously dispute the right of these two States
to membership
in the United Nations? And by
admitting these States, would the United Nations
not be reinforcing its peace-keeping’ mission and
encouraging co-operation among peoples?“6
64. In the course of the general debate, representatives of a number of States at the thirtieth session
of the Genera1 Assembly made it quite clear that the
admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam to membership
in the United Nations would serve both to consolidate
peace and international
security and to enhance the
universality
and authority of the Organization.
We
fully subscribe to that view.
65. In the past, and particularly in recent years, the
process of international detente has made considerable
headway. That was very clearly illustrated
in the
solemn signing ,at HeIsinki of the Final’ Act of the.
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
by the leaders of 33 European States, the United
States and Canada. Thus in Europe, after a lengthy
period of overt confrontation and cold war, a historic
turning point has been reached. We are profoundly
convinced that this process of detente should be
extended to other areas of the world as well. The
admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and
the Republic of South VietGNam to membership in
the United Nations would also strengthen international
security in South-East Asia and on the Asian continent,
which would undoubtedly have a beneficial influence
on other parts of the world.
66. I should like to reiterate that my delegation
considers it absolutely
inadmissible
arbitrarily
to
connect with other matters the consideration of ap’plications received from the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to
membership in the United Nations. Such stratagems
are completely devoid of logic and in the final analysis
are directed against the Charter of the United Nations,
a point which has been made by previous speakers.
67, In the matter before us we ‘are not discussing
the right of veto as such. The principle of the unanimity of the permanent members of the Security
Council is a fundamental
one for the Organization,
corresponding as it does to the need for co-operation
among States with differing social systems on the
basis of the application of the principles of peaceful
coexistence. Rather, .what we are talking about today
is whether all States are observing the Charter and
whether there are any abuses of the right pf veto.

:.

How can we describe a-position which is absolutely
inconsistent, in that, on the one hand, in statements
made, in the General Assembly it is asserted that
there are no Qbjections to the’admission
of both Vietnamese States to membership in the United Nations
and, on the other hand, we hear threats that a veto
will be used in the Security Council against approving
the applications of the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam for admission to membership?
68. The question is,. has not the Vietnamese people
already suffered immeasurably
because it has been
treated in a way which violates the most elementary
principles of international law? One of the conclusions
that should be drawn from the tragic events of recent
decades in Indo-China is that an end must finally be
put to all efforts to create obstacles to both Vietnamese States’moving
forward to broad international
co-operation.
69. ‘The beginning ‘of the thirtieth
session of the
General .Assembly has been a striking illustration
of
the new major changes which have occurred in the
world. The activities of the United Nations should be
in accordance with the public opinion which has
emerged as a result of those changes. The admission of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and
the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in
the United Nations is a moral, political and juridical
requirement
of our times. At the same time it is a
requirement expressed by.the world community:
We
are convinced that, sooner or later, all Member States
must meet these .dematids. For the sake of present
and future generations, ‘it would be advisable to do
so as soon as possible, here and now.
70. On behalf of the Government
of the German
Democratic Republic, I would appeal io all members
of the Security Council to approve the admission of
the Democratic
Republic of. Viet-Nam
and of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the
United Nations.
71. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker iS the representative of Dahomey,
whom.1 invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
72. Mr. ADJIBADl?
(Dahbmey) (inferpretution
from
French): Mr. President, the delegation of Dahomey
feels real satisfaction at seeing Mauritania,
a sister
country of Africa and of the third world, guiding the
work of the Security Council this month, at a time
when the Council has been requested to reconsider
the important question of the admission of the two
Viet-Nams to the United Nations. Being familiar with
your personal qualities and talents, my delegatiqn is
convinced that your perfect mastery of the question
upon the Council’s agenda; and your tact and negotiating ability will be major assets ,that will help the
Council in its deliberations
and enable it ‘not to dis-

._

abpoint thk hope placed in it by millions of Vietnamese
and, above all, by the General Assembly.
73. By an overwhelming
majority,
the General
Assembjy has requested the body over which you are
presiding to take up this issue once again. It has done
so in the hope that .the .Council will have the wisdom
to reconsider its earlier decision, which was patently
anachronistic,
unfair, and contrary to the spirit and
letter of the Chart&-.
,. .
74. But fiist; Mr. President, my delegation could
not fail to tell you personally and, through you, all
the members of the Council how grateful we are for
giving us this opportunity
to participate in the work
of the Council as an observer and thereby to make
our modest contribution
to your discussion.
75. The entire third world was impressid and moved
by the gesture made by the United States during the
seventh special session of the General Assembly
when, departing from its customary practice, it made,
plain to the international
community
its desire for
dialogue and co-operation
and to that end offered
concrete pioposals, thanks to which the proceedings
of that session were brought to an outstandingly
successful conclusion. In my delegation’s view; that
gesture on the part of the United States marks a
turning point in the history of international
economic
relations, and hence in international political relations
as well. That is why Dahomey believes that the requested reconsideration’ by the Council of this question of the admission of the two Viet-Nams should
fall within the framework of the new era which we
have just mentioned.,
‘,
’
76. Moreover, one peed only refer to the statements’,
made by the rep&entatives
of the parties concerned.
during the discussion of this matter in the General
Assembly’ to be convinced that, if political ‘&iii can
only be made to prevail over all other conqiderations,
there is no reason why the Council cannot conclude
its work successfully to the satisfaction of all parties
concerned.
.
77. During ‘the General ASsembly debate on this
matiter on 19 Se’ptember, the observer for’ the Republic
of South Viet-Nam provided a better illustration
of
the fact that the peoples of the third world, are capable
not only of achieving victory btit also of benefiting
from that ;vi&iry, when. he said:
“The Re$ublic of South Viet-Nam
has always’
pursued a foreign policy of peace and non-alignment.
It is always willing to establish with all countries,
without any distinction
as to political
or social
rkgime, relations of friendship based on mutual
respect for independence and sovereignty and reciprocal non-intervention
in the internal affairs of
either side.
“With respect to the United States, in spite of
the neo-colonial
war wtich that country waged

against the people of South Viet-Nam, with all that
that war entailed in terms of suffering, mourning,
destruction and wounds still unhealed, after the war
the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
like the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
declared that it was
ready to establish normal relations with the United
States on the basis of the Paris Agreements on VietNam and to develop friendly relations between the
[two] American and Vietnamese peoples.“’
78. For his part, the Observer for the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam on the same day stated:
“We are establishing and expanding normal economic, cultural, scientific and technological relations
.with all the other countries on the basis of the principles of mutual respect for independence
and
sovereignty,
non-interference
in internal affairs,
equality and mutual advantage. In that spirit, the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
is prepared to
establish normal relations with the United States
on the basis of the Paris Agreements. There can be
no doubt that the majority of the American people
.and broad segments of political circles in the United
States will support that positive trend”.’

are to be seen in a desire to link the admission of
South Korea with the admission of the two Viet-Nams
to the United Nations. As a friendly country, I should
like to say to the United States that its position is
erroneous and that to insist on that position would be
tantamount
to compromising
all the possibilities
of
the dialogue which the United States Government is
constantly seeking. First, it should not be forgotten
that Korea is a divided country and that for the request
for the admission of one or other of the Koreas to be
received it has to be based on the common consent
of both parties, which is not the case in this particular
instance.
83. Secondly, the United States warned the world
public at a certain time to protect itself from the socalled tyranny of the majority. If the United States
maintained its original position now in the Security
Council, it would be tantamount
to imposing on
practically
all the States Members of the United
Nations the tyranny of the veto. There is no good
tyranny. Any form of tyranny must be avoided. Hence,
although the Charter gives it this right, the United
States Government must avoid the abuse of the veto
which in the case of most Member States could simply
cause frustration.

79. Knowing as we do the catastrophes the peoples
of both Viet-Nams suffered in the war, we can only
welcome the conciliatory
attitude shown by their
delegations towards the country that bears the heaviest
responsibility for the wars which were neither wished
nor hoped for by the Vietnamese people. Members
of the ,Security Council must be mindful of’ these
facts and call upon the United States not to refuse to
shake the hands ‘that have been stretched out to it.

84. Thirdly,
to attempt to link the admission of
Korea with the admission of the two Viet-Nams
recalls actions of the cold war worthy of the 1960’s,
and such practices are no longer in accordance with
the realities of 1975.
85. Fourthly, to block once again the admission of
the two Viet-Nams might be construed as indicating
resentment on the part of the United States Government against the Vietnamese people. We believe that
the United States is not anxious to expose itself to
such facile criticism.

80. Dahomey might have detected a favourable
response to the appeals of the Vietnamese peoples in
the ‘statement
of the representative
of the United
States that “the United States is not opposed to the
admission of the two Vietnamese ,States,“’ were it not
for the following “but”, which actually is the very
crux of the problem.

86. It is for all these reasons that my delegation
reiterates its appeal to the delegation of the United
States and asks it to support the admission of the two
Viet-Nams,
thus displaying that magnanimity
which
is worthy of the drafters of the Constitution
of the
United States. My delegation also reiterates its appeal
to the other members of the Council to vote unreservedly in favour of the admission of the two VietNams, in accordance with the wish of almost all the
members of the General Assembly.

81. The admission of the two Viet-Nams must be
viewed in the light of the conditions laid down in the
Charter, and also bearing in mind that they form a
divided country. Both Viet-Nams have met the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter. In
the case of the admission of divided States, the only
example which we have is that of the two Germanys.
For them to be admitted to membership, the request
for the admission of the two Germanys had to be based
on the consent, the joint agreement of both parties.
All those conditions which accompanied the precedent
that we have in such a matter are, amply met here.
Therefore,
objectively
speaking,
nothing
should
stand in the way of a favourable decision being taken
by this body.

87. Mr. FACIO (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from
Spanish):
Costa Rica hopes that all independent
States of the world will become Members of the United
Nations. Our adherence to the ideal of universality
within the Organization allows for no exceptions other
than those set out in the Charter relating to the exclusion of Governments
which persistently violate its
principles. Therefore, my delegation voted in favour
of General Assembly resolution
3366 (XXX) requesting the Security Council to reconsider the applications of the two Vietnamese States for admission
to membership.

82. However, the United States has its own views
on the question, views which we respect and which
10

88. I could conclude my statement on this question
with those words, in which case I would certainly earn
the gratitude of many delegations. But I do not believe
that I would be fully carrying out the duty of my delegation if I did not spell out precisely our concern with
respect to the discriminatory
way in which the ptinciple of universality has been applied. In the past the
colonial system was the greatest obstacle to the universality of the United Nations. But now that, fortu-’
nately, colonialism is undoubtedly coming to an end,
the principle of universality
is being threatened by
the intolerance of those who do not practise ideological
and political pluralism honestly and who, when it is
in their own interests, claim that it is indispensable
to peaceful coexistence. Detente made it possible for
rival Powers to reach agreement on the simultaneous
admission of the Federal Republic of Germany and
the German Democratic Republic. That gave rise to
hopes that a similar position would be taken with
regard to other divided nations, one State being procommunist
and the other pro-capitalist..
Unfortu;
nately, that hope was not fulfilled.
89. While South Viet-Nam
had a different system
of government
from that in North Viet-Nam,
the
North Vietnamese and their supporters opposed the
entry of the two States because they argued that that
would perpetuate the division of the Vietnamese
people. But now that the Government
in the south
has the same ideological orientation
as that in the
north, the two States and their supporters have forgotten the argument about perpetuating the division
and are fervently requesting the admission of the two
pro-communist
States to the United Nations,
90. Although my delegation points out this inconsistency, we favour now, as we did before, the admission of the two Vietnamese States to membership in
the United Nations. We do so because we do not apply
the principle
of universality
selectively.
As true
partisans of that principle, we do not link the admission of a new Member to its having the same ideology
or the same political system as we have in Costa Rica.
91. For that very reason we favoured and shall
continue to favour the admission of the two States into
which Korea has been divided. We know that North
Korea uses and has used the same argument which
was earlier used by North Viet-Nam
to oppose the
simultaneous admission of the two Korean States, that
it would perpetuate the division. However, the fact
that North Korea does not yet wish to enter the United
Nations is not a good reason to prevent the entry of
South Korea. The attitude of the .members of the
Security Council that prevented the inclusion of the
request for membership of the Republic of Korea in
the agenda constitutes a discriminatory
act and runs
counter to the principle of universality. Consequently,
Costa Rica expressed its disagreement
with that
attitude by abstaining in the vote-a position which
we do not feel it is necessary to repeat.

92. The peaceful coexistence spoken of so frequently
in relations among great Powers must be reflected in
the positions taken by members of the Council as
well as in the positions taken in the General Assembly.
It cannot be effective until the principle of political
and ideological pluralism is sincerely applied. That is
a principle based on the recognition of the right held
by each State to choose the form of Government
it
deems most appropriate and to adopt the economic
and social policies which’ it believes are most consonant with its historical reality. There can be no true
legal equality nor can there be any effective implementation of the principle of non-intervention
until ideological and political
pluralism
are respected in
international
life. For that principle to be effective it
must be fully applied, without any capricious discrimination.
93. In Costa Rica we note with alarm the trend
towards the application
of the principle of political
pluralism to assist and accept States that tend to
totalitarian socialism, while it is not applied in regard
to States which, with disrespect, are tailed appendages of capitalist imperialism.
I believe that,
particularly with regard to many countries in the third
world, this situation originates in .a confusion of
concepts which should be clarified.
94. The solidarity of countries of the third world
-of which Costa Rica is an active partner-is
indispensable to us. Only by means of that solidarity shall
we be able to pursue the struggle which has already
successfully begun to establish a new international
economic order. But this struggle does not in any
way whatsoever require the rejection of and-even
less-attacks
on the political system of representative
democracy
that prevails in the most’ developed
countries of Europe, the Americas and Asia.
95. Freedom and democracy are not incompatible
with economic development
and social justice. Nor
would their existence in each of the countries of the
third world in any way ‘hamper the union of efforts
needed to achieve a more just international
economic
order. For those of us who believe in representative
democracy, the only legitimate source. of power for
the State is the people’s will, periodically
expressed
in free elections. However, we do respect the principle of international
political
pluralism,
and this
means that we have never tried to impose our democratic view of things on the legitimate origin of any
Government.
We have not done this here nor have
we done it in our direct relations with other States.
On the same basis, we believe that those who do not
practise ideological and political piuialism
internally
-although
they proclaim the need for it for peaceful
international
coexistence-should
not attempt
to
impose their systems upon us. They should not attempt
to adjust the principle of universality
to their own
anti-democratic
political views; even less should they
attempt using those criteria’ to pass any judgement on
the legitimacy
of Governments
represented in the
United Nations.

I

96. If we wish to have a stronger United Nations,
we must admit as a Member, any independent State
which desires membership,
without
odious discrimination
as regards its form of Government or its
political tendencies. For those reasons, Costa .Rica
will vote in favour of the Security. Council’s recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
the States of North and South Viet-Nam. In the same
spirit, we express the hope that the discriminatory
positi,on ‘which has injustifiably
prevented the admis:
sion to the Organization of the Republic of Korea will
be speedily ret tified.
97. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&on
from French):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Mongolia
and Madagascar requesting that they be
invited, under Article 31 of the Charter, to participate
in the Council’s debate on the item ,.on its agenda
without the right to.vote. If there are no objections,
and in conformity
with the Council’s ,practice and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose
to invite those representatives
to take the. places
reserved for them at the side of‘the Council chamber.
They will be invited to take places ‘at the Council
table when their turn comes to address the Council.

~

fully qualified State be admitted to the United Nations
forthwith, and that its desire to ,do so not be linked
to the case of North Korea.
zL
100. We are, of course, prepared to see North Korea
enter the .United Nations along ‘with the Republic of
Korea: Equally, it is North -Korea’s privilege to stay
outside the United Nations community if it does not
wish to assume the obligations of membership at this
time. However, the one third of the Korean people
living in North Korea have no right to stand in ,the
way of the desires of the two thirds of the Korean
people who live in the Republic of Korea to assume
the privileges and the duties and the .responsibilities
of United Nations membership; Niether, in’our view,
is the Security Council entitled, authorized or wise
in linking those two matters in the face of the judgement
of the Court and, indeed, of our recent well-established
practice.
101. The principle of universality
is, not divisible.
My delegation is not prepared to see it flouted in the
case of the Republic of Korea only to be hailed in the
case of the Viet-Nams.
It is not my Government’s
desire in any way to stand in the way of admission of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet Nam,, but my Government ‘will continue
to support in every feasible way the desire of the
Republic.of Korea to participate as asMember in the
United Nations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. +win’Chhuk
(Cumhodiu),
Mr. Ruhetufiku
~(Muduguscur)
and
Mr. Puntsugnorov (Mongolia) took the places reserved
from them at the side o;f the Council chamber.

102. The General Assembly has on four separate
occasions found the Republic of Korea qualified for
United Nations membership.
At the ,request of the
Assembly{ the Security Council has repeatedly considered the application of the Republic of Korea, but
its admission has been prevented by repeated,vetoes.
Now, with the Security Council about to reconsider,
after a parallel finding and request from the Assembly,
the applications
of .the two Vietnamese Republics,
my Government must insist. that all three applicants
be treated equally. If this necessitates a second ,veto
of the applications of the two Viet-Nams; my Government, though with regret, can only act accordingly.’

98. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I could not hope in my remarks to
equal the intellectual
vigour or the authority with
which the Minister of External Relations of Costa Rica
has just spoken. I would only hope it.be understood
that .I wholly endorse what he said. This de’rives from
an understanding of the nature of democratic societies
which, I think, is shared by some members ,of the
Council and about which we do not have to consult
with one another in advance in order to know that
we agree on fundamental principles. We have heard
them from a man of authority and conviction and, if
little else was to be hoped for from this meeting of the
Security, Council, that at least has been gained. Nor
need I recapitulate the statement I made to the Council
on 11 August [18.36th meeting]. I only wish to assure
the members that there has been no change in my
Government’s
basic position on the applications
before us.

103. ‘Allow me, Mr. ‘President, to emphasize one
more point. We believe that the ,goal of unification
can best be sought through the framework of the United
Nations. We find it hard to follow the argument that
to assume the responsibility
of membership
in the
United Nations would somehow diminish the prospect
for peaceful reunification.
On the,contrary,
it should
enhance that prospect.

99. In 1948 the United States sought a ruling from
the International
Court of Justice on the propriety of
“linkage”
of applications
for membership
in the
United Nations. The reply of the Court* made it clear
that “package deals”-as
they were termed-are
not
in order. Each application”should
be considered on
its merits, on the basis of established criteria. In our
view the Republic of Korea fully meets these criteria.
Justice and procedure-procedure
perhaps being the
more important
of those matters-require
Ithat this

104. Finally, let me simply refer to the thought which
I left with the General Assembly in my comments on
the occasion on which the resolution before us was
adopted. It may have come to pass that the United
Nations is made up principally
of one-party States,
but it cannot come to pass that we shall have a oneparty United Nations. I accept, Mr. President, that
there may be members of the Council that do not
12

,-

/

believe that the behaviour of liberal -democracies
derives from firmly-held principles. But they are wrong
in this, and I fear that before this issue is resolved
they will have learned just how wrong they are.

‘“i

proud of having had the privilege
of that resolution.

of being a sponsor

109. The General Assembly resolution
met the
wish and the expectation of all those who want to see
the spirit and the letter of the Charter implemented,
and justice done to the two States, the heroic people
of which fought for three decades to be able to live
in peace and independence. Not only does the request
for admission of the two Vietnamese States deserve
the support of all of us here, but, I would add, the
prestige of the United Nations could only be strengthened by the admission of those two States.

105. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I invite the representative of Hungary to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
106. Mr. HOLLAI
(Hungary):
May I thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
giving the opportunity to my delegation to participate
in the discussions of the Security Council on this
important question of the admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam to membership in the United Nations. It
is a matter. of great satisfaction to me and to my
delegation that you, Sir, are presiding over these
deliberations and discussions in which a great issue is
at stake. I.regret to note, at the outset, that from the
position of the United States which we have just
.heard from Mr. Moynihan we can foresee the probable
outcome of this discussion.

110. We know very well the negative effects of such
tactics which until now have prevented the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam. The past history and the
political roots of those tactics were correctly recalled
by the representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Malik,
.*
in the General Assembly on 1.9 September.
111. Today we .look forward to the decision of the
Security Council in the conviction that, history and
progress cannot be halted and that justice will always
prevail, as is reflected in the annals of the Organization. We firmly believe that the members of the
Security Council should make their decision on the
admission of the two Vietnamese States in full awareness of their great responsibility,
as the resolution to
be adopted should be in strict conformity
with the
relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United
Nations.

107. We. have had the privilege of expressing our
viewpoint on the question of the admission of the two
Vietnamese States here’ in the Security Council at
its 1836th meeting on 11 August 1975, and in the
General Assembly on 19 September of this year.’ The
reasons why the Hungarian
delegation
requested
to speak again at this time are well known to all members of the Council. I feel bound, however, to state
once again before this august body, the highest organ
of the United Nations, that the Government and the
people of the Hungarian
People’s Republic firmly
support and urge the immediate
admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of. South Viet-Nam to the United .Nations.

The meeting

rose at 5.50 pm:
Notes

’ Official
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Annexes,
agenda item 22, document A/10179.
2 Admission
of a State to the United
Nations
Advisory
Opinion:
I.C.J.
Reports
1948, p. 57.

108. We welcome whole-heartedly
the convening
of the Security Council to reconsider its decision on
the question of the admission of the two Vietnamese
States on the basis of General Assembly resolution
3366 (XXX), adopted with the support of the overwhelming.majority
of the Member States and with no
vote against it. The Hungarian People’s Republic is

.i United Nations Conference
111/l/37.
4 United Nations, Trqaty Series,

Thirtieth

Session,

(Charter

Art.

on International

Organization,

vol. 935, p. 2.
5 Ibid.,
vol. 935, p. 16.
6 See Official
Records
of the General
Assimhl~,
Thirtieth
Plenary
Meetings,2360th meeting.
’ Ibid..
Plenary
Meetings,
2354th meeting.

Session.

,

._(.

,,

..’

1

13’

4).

,,

‘.’
.1 i /

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adrefsez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

‘.

COMO

CONSEGUlR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes &I mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

82-61202-November

1983-2.200
