Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee

in General Assembly resolution 39 (I) of 12 December

1946;
2. To revoke the recommendation intended to debar
Spain from membership in international agencies established by or brought into relationship with the
United Nations, which recommendation is a part of the
same resolution adopted by the General Assembly in
1946 concerning relations of Members of the United
Nations with Spain.

304th plenary meeting,
4 November 1950.
387 (V). Libya: Report of the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya; Reports of the administering Powers in Libya

The General Assembly,
Having resolved by its resolution 289 A (IV) of
21 November 1949 that Libya shall be constituted a
united independent and sovereign State,

Having noted the report 2 of the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya, prepared in consultation with
the Council for Libya, and those of the administering
Powers,3 submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV), as well as the statements•
made by the United Nations Commissioner and the
representatives of the Council for Libya,
Having noted in particular the confidence expressed
by the United Nations Commissioner that the aim
of the General Assembly, namely, that Libya should
become an independent and sovereign State, will be
attained within the time-limit prescribed, with the increasing co-operation of the administering Powers with
the United Nations Commissioner and the mutual coordination of their activities toward that end,
Having noted the statements in the above-mentioned
report of the United Nations Commissioner regarding
the needs of Libya for technical and financial assistance
both before and after independence, if such assistance
is requested by the Government of Libya,
l. Expresses confidence that the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya, aided and guided by the advice
of the members of the Council for Libya, will take the
necessary steps to discharge his functions toward the
achievement of the independence and unity of Libya
pursuant to the above-mentioned resolution;
2. Calls upon the authorities concerned to take all
steps necessary to ensure the early, full and effective
implementation of the resolution of 21 November 1949,
and particularly the realization of the unity of Libya
and the transfer of power to an independent Libyan
Government; and, further,
3. Recommends:
(a) That a National Assembly duly representative
of the inhabitants of Libya shall be convened as early
as possible, and in any case before 1 January 1951 ;
2
. Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 15.
8
See documents A/1387, A/1390 and A/1390/Add.I.

17

( b) That this National Assembly shall establish a
Provisional Government of Libya as early as possible,
bearing in mind 1 April 1951 as the target date;
( c) That powers shall be progressively transferred
to the Provisional Government by the administering
Powers in a manner which will ensure that all powers
at present exercised by them shall, by 1 January 1952,
have been transferred to the duly constituted Libyan
Government ;
( d) That the United Nations Commissioner, aided
and guided by the advice of the members of the Council for Libya, shall proceed immediately to draw up a
programme, in co-operation with the administering
Powers, for the transfer of power as provided in subparagraph (c) above;

4. Urges the Economic and Social Council, the specialized agencies and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to extend to Libya, in so far as they
may be in a position to do so, such technical and
financial assistance as it may request in order to establish a sound basis for economic am! social progress ;
5. Reaffirms its recommendations that, upon its establishment as an independent State, Libya be admitted
to the United ~ations in accordance with Article 4
of the Charter.
307th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
388 (V).

Economic and financial provisions relating to Libya
A

W hcreas, in accordance with the provisions of article
23 and paragraph 3 of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace
with Italy, the question of the disposal of the former
Italian colonies was submitted on 15 September 1948 to
the General Assembly by the Governments of France,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America,
W hercas, by virtue of the above-mentioned provisions,
the four Powers have agreed to accept the recommendation of the General Assembly and to take appropriate
measures for giving effect to it,
Whereas the General Assembly, by its resolutions~ of
21 November 1949 and of 17 November 1950, recommended that the independence of Libya should become
effective as soon as possible, and in any case not later
than 1 January 1952,
Whereas paragraph 19 of annex XIV of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, which contains the economic and
financial provisions relating to ceded territories, states
that "The provisions of this annex shall not apply to
the former Italian colonies. The economic and financial
provisions to be applied therein will form part of the
arrangements for the final disposal of these territories
pursuant to article 23 of the present Treaty",
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Ad Hoe Political Committee, 7th-17th meetings inclusive.
~ See resolutions 289 (IV) and 387 (V).

General Assembly-Fifth Session

18

Whereas it is desirable that the economic and financial
provisions relating to Libya should be determined before
the transfer of power in that territory takes place, in
order that they may be applied as soon as possible,
The General Assembly
Approves the following articles:
Article I
1. Libya shall receive, without payment, the movable
and immovable property located in Libya owned by the
Italian State, either in its own name or in the name of
the Italian administration of Libya.
2. The following property shall be transferred immediately:
(a) The_ public property of the State ( demanio
pubblico) and the inalienable property of the State
(patrimonio indisponibile) in Libya, as well as the
relevant archives and documents of an administrative
character or technical value concerning Libya or relating to property the transfer of which is provided for by
the present resolution;
( b) The property in Libya of the Fascist Party and
its organizations.
3. In addition, the following shall be transferred on
conditions to be established by special agreement between Italy and Libya:
(a) The alienable property ( p(ltrimonio disponibile)
of the State in Libya and the property in Libya belonging to the autonomous agencies ( aziende auto no me) of
the State;
( b) The rights of the State in the capital and the
property of institutions, companies and associations of a
public character located in Libya.
4. Where the operations of such institutions, companies and associations txtend to Italy or to countries
other than Libya, Libya shall receive only those rights
of the Italian State or the Italian administration which
appertain to the operations in Libya. In cases where the
Italian State or the Italian administration of Libya
exercised only managerial control over such institutions,
companies and associations, Libya shall have no claim
to any rights in those institutions, companies or associations.
5. Italy shall retain the ownership of immovable
property necessary for the functioning of its diplomatic
and consular services and, when the conditions so
require, of the schools necessary for the present Italian
community whether such property is owned by the
Italian State in its own name or in the name of the
Italian administration of Libya. Such immovable property shall be determined by special agreements concluded between Italy and Libya.
6. Buildings used in connexion with 110n-\1ns1,.111
public worship and their appurtenances shall he tr:in~ferred by Italy to the respective religious conummittes.
7. Special agreements may be concludrd lwtw .. ,.11
Italy and Libya to ensure the functioning of hospit:i 1s
in Libya.
·
Article II
Italy a:1? Libya shall determine by special ag-reements
the cond1t10ns under which the obligations of ltalian

public or private social insurance organizations towards
the inhabitants of Liby" and a proportionate part of the
reserves accumulated by the said organizations shall be
transferred to similar organizations in Libya. That part
of the reserves shall preferably be taken from the real
property and fixed assets in Libya of the said organizations.
Article III
Italy shall continue to be liaLle for the payment of
civil ur military pensions earned as of the coming into
force of the Treaty of Peace with Italy and owed by it
at that date, including pcnsion rights not yet matured.
Arrangements shall be concluded between Italy and
Libya providing for the method by which this liability
shall he discharged.
.drticle IV
Libya shall be exempt from the payment of any
portitln of the Italian public debt.
Article V
Italy shall return to their owners, in the shortest
possible time, any ships in its possession, or that of its
nationals, which are proved to have been the property
of former Italian nationals belonging to Libya or to
have been registered in Libya, except in the case of
ships acquired in good faith by Italy or its nationals.
Article VI
1. The property, rights and interests of Italian nationals, including Italian juridical persons, in Libya,
shall, provided they have been lawfully acquired, be
respected. They shall not be treated less favourably
than the property, rights and interests of other foreign
nationals, including foreign juridical persons.

2. ltalian nationals in Libya who move, or who have
since 3 September 1943 moved, to Italy shall be permitted freely to sell their movable and immovable
property, realize and dispose of their assets, and, after
settlement of any debts or taxes due from them in
LilJya, to take with them their movable property and
transfer the funcls they possess, unless such property
and funds were unlawfully acquired. Such transfers of
property shall not be subject to any import or export
duty. The conditions of the transfer of this movable
property to Italy will be fixed by agreement between
the administering Powers or the Government of Libya
upon its establishment on the one hand, and the Government of Italy on the other hand. The conditions and the
time-periods of the transfer of the funds, including the
proceeds of above-mentioned transactions, shall likewise
be determined.
3. Companies incorporated under Italian law and
having their siL'gc social in Italy shall be dealt with
under the provisions of paragraph 2 above. Companies
incorporated under Italian law and having their siege
social in Libya and which wish to remove their siege
social to Italy shall likewise be dealt with under the
provisions of paragraph 2 above, provided that more
than 50 per cent of the capital of the company is owned
by persons usually resident outside Libya and provided
also that the greater part of the activity of the company
is carried on outside Libya.

Resolutions adopted on reportis of the Ad Hoe Poiitieal Committee

4. The property, rights and interests in Italy of
former Italian nationals belonging to Libya and of
companies previously incorporated under Italian law
and having their siege social in Libya, shall be ~espected
by Italy to the same extent as the property, nghts and
interests of foreign nationals and of foreign companies
generally. Such persons and companies are authorized
to effect the transfer and liquidation of their property,
rights and interests under the same conditions as may
be established under paragraph 2 above.
5. Debts owed by persons in Italy to persons in Libya
or by persons in Libya to persons in Italy shall not be
affected by the transfer of sovereignty. The Government
of Italy and the administering Powers or the Government of Libya after its establishment shall facilitate the
settlement of such obligations. As used in the present
paragraph, the term "persons" includes juridical per!50ns.

Article VII
Property, rights and interests in Libya which, as the
result of the war, are still subject to measures of seizure,
compulsory administration or sequestration, shall be
restored to their owners, and, in cases submitted to the
Tribunal referred to in article X of the present resolution, following decisions of that Tribunal.
Article VII I
The former Italian nationals belonging to Libya shall
continue to en joy all the rights in industrial, li'cerary
and artistic property in Italy to which they were
entitled under the legislation in force at the time of the
coming into force of the Treaty of Peace. Until Libya
becomes a party to the relevant international convention
or conventions, the rights in industrial, literary and
artistic property which existed in Libya under Italian
law shall remain in force for the period for which they
would have remained in force under that law.

Article IX
T!1e following special provisions shall apply to concessions:
1. Concessions granted within the territory of Libya
by the Italian State or by the Italian administration of
Libya, and concession contracts ( patti colonici) existing between the Ente per la Colonizzazione delta Libia
or the Istituto della Previdenza Sociale and the concessionaires of land to which each contract related shall
be respected, unless it is established that the concessionaire has not complied with the essential conditions
of the concession.
2. Land placed at the disposal of the Ente per la
Colonizzazione delta Libia and of the colonization department of the Istituto delta Prcvidenza Sociale by
the Italian State or the Italian administration of Libya
and which has not been the object of a concession shall
be transferred immediately to Libya.
3. Land, buildings and their appurtenances referred
to in sub-paragraph ( d) of paragraph 4 below shall be
transferred to Libya in accordance with the arrangements to be made under that sub-paragraph.
4. Special agreements between Italy and Libya shall
provide for:
(a) The liquidation of the Ente per la Colonizzazione
delta Libia and of the colonization department of the

19

I stitutu dclla I'rc,,idenza Sociale, the interim status of
those institutions for the purpose of enabling them to
fulfil their obligations towards concessionaires whose
contracts are still in operation, and, if necessary, the
taking m·er of their functions by new organizations;
( b) The repayment by those institutions to financial
concerns of the quotas subscribed by the latter in the
establishment of the Ente per la Colonizzazione della
Lihia, and, in the case of the Istituto della Previdenza
Socialc, the reconstitution of that part of its reserves
invested hy that institution in its colonization department;
( c) The transfer to Libya of the residual assets of
the institutions to be liquidated;
( d) Arrangements relating to land placed at the
disposal of these institutions and to the buildings on and
appurtenances to that land, in which, after their abandonment bv the concessionaires, no further investment
could he n;ade by the institutions ;
( e) Payments in amortization of the debts of concessionaires owed to those institutions.
5. In consideration of the renunciation by the Italian
Government of its claims against those institutions, the
latter shall cancel the debts of the concessionaires and
the mortgages securing those debts.

Article X
I. A united Nations Tribunal shall be set up, composed of three persons selected by the Secretary-General for their legal qualifications from the nationals of
three different States not directly interested. The Trilmnal, whose decisions shall be based on law, shall have
the following two functions:
(a) It shall give to the administering Powers, the
Libyan Government after its establishment, and the
Italian Government, on request by any of those authorities, such instructions as may be required for the
purpose of giving effect to the present resolution;
( b) It shall decide all disputes arising between the
said authorities concerning the interpretation and application of the present resolution. The Tribunal shall be
seized of any such dispute on the unilateral request of
one of those authorities.
2. The administering Powers, the Libyan Government after its establishment and the Italian Government
shall supply the Tribunal as soon as possible with all the
information and assistance it may need for the performance of its functions.
3. The seal of the Tribunal shall be in Libya. The
Tribunal shall determine its own procedure. It shall
afford to the interested parties an opportunity to present
their views, and shall be entitled to request information
and evidence which it may' require from any authority
or person whom it considers to be in a position to
furnish it. In the absence of unanimity, the Tribunal
shall take decisions by a majority vote. Its decisions
shall be final and binding."
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
6 For the explanation of certain points in the above resolution, as drafted by Sub-Committee 1 of the Ad Hoe Political
Committee, see document A/1726.

General Assembly-Fifth Session

B
The General Assembly
Authorizes the Secretary-General, in accordance with
established practice,
1. To arrange for the payment of an appropriate
remuneration for the members of the United Nations
Tribunal set up under article X above and to reimburse
their travel and subsistence expenses ;
2. To assign to the United Nations Tribunal such
staff and provide such facilities as the Secretary-General
may consider necessary to carry out the terms of the
present resolution, utilizing the existing United Nations
staff of the Libyan Mission in so far as possible.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
389 (V).

Technical and financial assistance to
Llhya

Whereas Libya as a result of the war has suffered
extensive damages to private and public property, both
movable and immovable, as well as to its system of
communications,
Whereas the existence of these war damages and the
necessity of repairing them represents one of the major
economic and financial problems to be taken into consideration in order that an independent Libya may be
established with a sound basis for economic and social
progress, which is one of the avowed purposes of the
United Nations in accordance with paragraph 4 of
the resolution 7 adopted by the General Assembly on
17 November 1950,
The General Assembly,
Instructs the Secretary-General to study the problem
of war damages in connexion with the technical and
financial assistance which Libya may request from the
Economic and Social Council, the specialized agencies
and the Secretary-General, and to report on the subject to the sixth session of the General Assembly.
326th plenary meeting,
15 December 1950.
390 (V). Eritrea: Report of the United Nations
Commission for Eritrea; Report of the
Interim Committee of the General Assembly
on the Report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea

A
Whereas by paragraph 3 of Annex XI to the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, 1947, the Powers concerned have
agreed to accept the recommendation of the General
Assembly on the disposal of the former Italian colonies
in Africa and to take appropriate measures for giving
effect to it,
Whereas by paragraph 2 of the aforesaid Annex XI
such disposal is to be made in the light of the wishes and
welfare of the inhabitants and the interests of peace and
security, taking into consideration the views of interested
governments,
7

See resolution 387 (V).

Now therefor1
The General Assembly, in the light of the reports 8 of
the United Nations Commission for Eritrea and of the
Interim Committee, and
Taking into consideration
(a) The wishes and. welfare of th~ inhabi!ants '?f
Eritrea, including the views of the va~10us racial, religious and political groups of the provmces of the territory and the capacity of the people for self-government,
( b) The interests of peace and security in East Africa,
( c) The rights and claims of Ethio_pia based ~n geographical, historical, ethnic or economic reasons, mcluding in particular Ethiopia's legitimate need for adequate
access to the sea,
Taking into account the importance of assuring the
continuing collaboration of the foreign communities in
the economic development of Eritrea,
Recognizing that the disposal of Eritrea should be
based on its close political and economic association with
Ethiopia, and
Desiring that this association assure to the inhabitants
of Eritrea the fullest respect and safeguards for their
institutions, traditions, religions and languages, as well
as the widest possible measure of self-government, while
at the same time respecting the Constitution, institutions,
traditions and the international status and identity of
the Empire of Ethiopia,
A. Recommends that:
I. Eritrea shall constitute an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown.
2. The Eritrean Government shall possess legislative,
executive and judicial powers in the field of domestic
affairs.
3. The jurisdiction of the Federal Government shall
extend to the following matters: defence, foreign affairs,
currency and finance, foreign and interstate commerce
and external and interstate communications, including
ports. The Federal Government shall have the power to
maintain the integrity of the Federation, and shall have
the right to impose uniform taxes throughout the Federation to meet the expenses of federal functions and
services, it being understood that the assessment and the
collection of such taxes in Eritrea are to be delegated
to the Eritrean Government, and provided that Eritrea
shall bear only its just and equitable share of these expenses. The jurisdiction of the Eritrean Government
shall extend to all matters not vested in the Federal Government, including the power to maintain the internal
police, to levy taxes to meet the expenses of domestic
functions and services, and to adopt its own budget.
4. The area of the Federation shall constitute a single
area for customs purposes, and there shall be no barriers to the free movement of goods and persons within
the area. Customs duties on goods entering or leaving
the Federation which have their final destination or
origin in Eritrea shall be assigned to Eritrea.
5. An Imperial Federal Council composed of equal
numbers of Ethiopian and Eritrean representatives shall
meet at least once a year and shall advise upon the corns See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplements, N os. 8 and 14.
