VI.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

concerned to monitor the implementation of the World
Programme of Action,
Mindful that, since developing countri~s are e~periencing difficulties in mobilizing resourc~, mt~rnattonal c?operation should be encouraged to ass1st nahonal ~fforts m
implementing the World Progr~mme o_f Actton and
achieving the objectives of the Umted Nattons Decade of
Disabled Persons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General. on
the implementation of the World Program~e of Ac~1on
concerning Disabled Persons and the Umted Nat1ons
Decade of Disabled Persons, so
l. Once again invites Member States to reinforce national committees as focal points for the United Nations
Decade of Disabled Persons, to stimulate activities at the
national level, to mobilize public opinion on behalf of the
Decade, to participate in the implementation of di~ability
projects with regard to the International Year of Dtsabled
Persons and to assist in monitoring and evaluating the implementation ofthe World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons;
2. Renews its invitation to all States to give high priority to projects concerning the prevention of disa~i~ities,
rehabilitation and the equalization of the opportumtles of
disabled persons within the framework of bilateral assistance;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to administer donated funds, using them for projects under the
present structure of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons, 51 and, in addition, to
continue to make new provisions in order to offer a selection of projects to donor countries that might be willing to
finance a particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
4. Reaffirms that the resources of the Voluntary Fund
should be used to support catalytic and innovative activities in order to implement further the objectives of the
World Programme of Action within the framework ofthe
United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons, with priority
given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of the
least developed countries;
5. Invites Governments and non-governmental organizations to continue their contributions to the Voluntary
Fund and calls upon Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund;
6. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Sweden to
act as host in 1987 to a meeting of experts, consisting
largely of disabled persons, in conformity with the relevant provisions of resolution 39/26 of 23 November 1984;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the status of preparations for the forthcoming meeting of experts;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution and on the out come
of the meeting of experts;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "lmplementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled

50 A/41/605 and Corr. L

51 Formerly known as the United Nations Trust Fund ti.>r the
Intt'rnational Ycar of Disabled Persons.

Persons and United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/107.

Crime prevention and criminal justice

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the need for concerted and systematic efforts by the international community towards more effective crime prevention and criminal ju_stice strateg~es and
policies and, in particular, for _co-ordmated practica!_ action to give effect to the conclustons and recommendatl<;ms
ofthe Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevent1on
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 52
Recognizing the pivota) role of the United Nations,
through its programme activities and congresses ?n the
prevention of crime and the treat'!1ent of offendt:rs, m promoting the exchange of experttse and expenence and
closer international co-operation in this field,
Recalling its resolution 40/32 of 29 November 1985 and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1986/10,
1986/11 and 1986/12 of 21 May 1986,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
crime prevention and criminal justice; 53
2. Urges Member States and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to translate into action, as appropriate,
the respective recommendations, policies and conclusions
stemming from the Milan Plan of Action and other relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted unanimously by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention ofCrime and the Treatment ofOffenders 52 and
to ensure that they are adequately followed up;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations
congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of
offenders and of adequate and timely preparations for
such congresses by the Secretary-General and by Member
States at national, regional and interregional levels;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
first regular session of 1987 to examine in ~epth th~ fun~tioning and programme of work of the Umted Nattons m
crime prevention and criminal justice, taking into account
the results of the review undertaken by the SecretaryGeneraJ;S4
5. Invites Member States and the Secretary-General to
ensure timely preparations for the Eighth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders;
6. Also invites Member States and the SecretaryGeneral, in the performance of his duties, in implementing
the results of the Seventh Congress, to accord priority attention to the forms of crime identified in the Milan Plan
of Action;
7. Requests the United Nations Development Programme and the Department of Technical Co-operation
and Development of the Secretariat to maintain effective
support to the United Nations regional cri_me pr~vent!on
institutes and, in this regard, takes note w1th satlsfact10n

52 See Seve11th United Natio11s Congress on the Preventio,1 ofCrime and
the Treatme111 of Ojfender.1, Milan. 26 August-6 September 1985: report
prepared by 1hr Secretaria/ (llnitcd Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IV.J).
5J A/41 /618.
54 See Official Records of the Economic a11d Social Council, 1986,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1986/25), chap. IV.

170

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

of the measures taken to establish an African regional institute for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, and requests all those concerned to co-operate
fully so that this project may be put into effect as soon as
possible;
8. Invites Member States to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence in order to facilitate appropriate technical co-operation and ~xchange of
information and experience in the field of cnme prevention and control;
9. Requests the Secretary-Ge~eral to_ report to ~he
General Assembly, at its forty-thtrd sesston, on the tmplementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to consider at its forty-second session that
part of the report of the Economic_ and Social Co1;1ncil co~cerning its examination ofthe revtew, under the 1tem entttled "Crime prevention and criminal justice".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/108.

Convention on the Elimination of AH Forms of
Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the Un_ited
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and SS ofthe Charter, ts to
promote universal respect for h~~an _rights and _fun~amental freedoms for all without d1stmct1on of any kmd, mcluding distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should part1c1pate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of AII
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of 3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983, 39/130 of 14 December 1984 and 40/39 of 29 November 1985,
Recalling the decision of the third meeting of the States
parties to the Convention on the Elimination of AII Forms
of Discrimination against Wornen to request the Secretary-General to seek the views ofStates parties to the Convention on reservations which could be considered to
come within the scope of article 28, paragraph 2, of the
Convention, to request him to include these views in his
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
and to place on the agenda of their next meeting the question of reservations to the Convention,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its fifth
session, 55
1. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status ofthe Convention;
55 Ojjicial Record., of the General As,embly, Forly-first Se.ssio11,
Supplemcnr l'iu. 45 (A/41/45 and Corr 1).

4. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention; 56
5. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its fifth
session;
6. Emphasizes the importanc~ of t~e s!rictest compliance by States parties with thetr obhgattons under the
Convention;
7. Urges States parties to make all po~ible ~fforts to
submit their initial reports in accordance wtth arttcle 18 of
the Convention and the guidelines of the Committee;
8. Notes with concern the account by the Committee of
the present constraints within which it operates with regard to the backlog of reports awaiting consideration 57
and encourages a continuing discussion on ways and
means of dealing with this problem, including possible adjustment of the reporting system;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ~ake all ~fforts
to ensure adequate servicing for the effecttve functtonmg
of the Committee;
10. Takes note of the general recommendation and
suggestion adopted by the Committee pursuant to i_ts discussion at its fifth session on ways and means of tmplementing article 21 of the Convention; 58
11. Requests the Secretary-G~n~ral !º trans~it !h~ reports of the Committee on the Eh~m~tton of Dtscnmtnation against Women to the Comm1ss1on on the Status of
Women at its session in 1988, for information.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/109.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the C~ar~er of
the United Nations to maintain peace and secunty m the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Reca/ling that the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations_ Decade !ºr
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, m adoptmg
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women5 9 for the period up to the year 2000,
recognized that women should participate fully in ali efforts to strengthen and maintain international peace and
security and to promote international co-operation,
Expressing the need for equal participation of women in
the decision-making process, including that related to
peace, disarmament and security at national, ~egional and
international levels, including the United Nattons system,
Convinced that the International Year of Peace, proclaimed for the year 1986 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 40/3 of 24 October 1985, could give new impulses for safeguarding international peace and security.

56 A/41/608 and Add. l.
57 See Ojjicial Records of 1he General Assembly,

Forly-jir.,r Sessio11.
Supplement No. 45 (A/41/45 and Corr. l), chap. 11.
58/bid., chap. IV, paras. 362 and 363.
.
s• Repon of rhe World Conference ro Review and Appra1S<' rhe
Achievemenrs of rhe Uniled Nalions Decade for Women: Equa_luy.
Development and Peace. Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
puhlication. Sales No. E.85.IV. IO), chap. l. sect. A.
