III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

73

space, including the desirability of establishing relevant
machinery for that purpose, and to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session;

40/88. Implementation of General Assembly resolution 39 /60 on the immediate cessation and
prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests

6. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as
the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, has
the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the intensification of the
nuclear-arms race and the growing threat of nuclear war,
Recalling that over the past three decades the need for
cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapon testing has
been in the focus of attention of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the conclusion of a multilateral treaty on the prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests by
all States would constitute an indispensable element for
the success of efforts to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms
race and the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons,
and to prevent the expansion of existing nuclear arsenals
and the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries,
thus contributing to the achievement of the final goal of
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons under appropriate verification,
Stressing once again that the elaboration of such a treaty
is the task of the highest priority and should not be made
dependent on the attainment of any other measure in the
field of disarmament,
Welcoming the proposals contained in the Delhi Declaration issued on 28 January 1985 by the heads of State or
Government of six States Members of the United
Nations 24 - Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden
and the United Republic of Tanzania - and their joint
message of 24 October 1985 addressed to the leaders of the
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 25
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject, in particular resolutions 39/52 and 39/60 of 12 December 1984,
by which it called for a moratorium or moratoria on all
nuclear-test explosions and for the negotiation of a treaty
for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests,
Deeply deploring that the Conference on Disarmament
has been unable to carry out negotiations with a view to
reaching agreement on such a treaty,
1. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to negotiations on all aspects of this matter,
including adequate measures of verification, with the aim
of preparing without delay a draft treaty that would effectively ban all test explosions of nuclear weapons by all
States everywhere and would contain provisions, acceptable to all, preventing the circumvention of this ban by
means of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes;
2. Resolutely urges all States, and especially all
nuclear-weapon States, to exert maximum efforts and
exercise political will for the elaboration and conclusion
without delay of such a treaty;
1. Welcomes the unilateral cessation by one major
nuclear-weapon State of all its nuclear explosions, effective
6 August 1985, as well as the proposal for the suspension
of all nuclear tests for a period of 12 months, with the possibility of its extension, contained in the joint message of
24 October 1985 addressed to the leaders of the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics by the Heads of State or Government of six
States Members of the United Nations;
4. Expresses its hope that all other nuclear-weapon
States will also consider joining in such a moratorium;
S. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Implementation of

1. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider as a matter of priority the question of preventing an
arms race in outer space;
8. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to
intensify its consideration of the question of the prevention of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects, taking
into account all relevant proposals including those
presented in the Ad Hoe Committee on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space at the 1985 session of the Conference and at the fortieth session of the General Assembly;

9. Further requests the Conference on Disarmament to
re-establish an ad hoe committee with an adequate mandate at the beginning of its session in 1986, with a view to
undertaking negotiations for the conclusion of an agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
10. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America to pursue intensively their
bilateral negotiations in a constructive spirit aimed at
reaching early agreement for preventing an arms race in
outer space, and to advise the Conference on Disarmament periodically of the progress of their bilateral sessions
so as to facilitate its work;
11. Calls upon all States, especially those with major
space capabilities, to refrain, in their activities relating to
outer space, from actions contrary to the observance of the
relevant existing treaties or to the objective of preventing
an arms race in outer space;
12. Invites Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 April 1986, their views on the
scope and content of the study being undertaken by the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research 23 on
disarmament problems relating to outer space and the consequences of extending the arms race into outer space, and
requests the Secretary-General to convey the views of the
Member States to the Advisory Board on Disarmament
Studies for consideration in order to enable it, in its capacity of Board of Trustees of the Institute, to give the Institute such possible guidance with respect to the elaboration
of its study as it may derive from those views;
13. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report on its consideration of this subject to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at
its fortieth session;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Prevention of an arms
race in outer space".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985
23 See A/40/725, paras. 47-54.
24 A/40/114-S/16921, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records of
the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for January, February and
March I 985, document S/ 16921, annex.
•

25 A/40/825-S/l 7596, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records of
the Securrty Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October. November and
DPCember 1985. document S' 17596. annex.

Genenl Assembly-Fortieth Session

74

General Assembly resolution 40/88 on the immediate cessation and prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests''.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/89. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearimtion of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa26 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to
21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolution 1652 (XVI) of 24 November
1961, its earliest on the subject, as well as its resolutions
2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, 31/69 of 10 December
1976, 32/81 of 12 December 1977, 33/63 of 14 December
1978, 34/76 A of 11 December 1979, 35/146 B of 12
December 1980, 36/86 B of9 December 1981, 37/74 A of
9 December 1982, 38/ l 8 I A of 20 December 1983 and
39/61 A of 12 December 1984, in which it called upon all
States to consider and respect the continent of Africa and
its surrounding areas as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Recalling that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously condemned any overt or covert attempt by South Africa to
introduce nuclear weapons into the continent of Africa and
demanded that South Africa refrain forthwith from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent or elsewhere,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research entitled ..South Africa's
nuclear capability", 27 undertaken in co-operation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat
and in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, as well as the report of the Disarmament Commission, 28
Expressing regret that despite the threat South Africa's
nuclear capability constitutes to international peace and
security and, in particular, to the realization of the objective of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
the Disarmament Commission has, once again, in 1985,
failed to reach a consensus on this important item on its
agenda,
l. Strongly renews its call upon all States to consider
and respect the continent of Africa and its surrounding
areas as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Reaffirms that the implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity would be an important
measure to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to promote international peace and security;
3. Expresses once again its grave alarm at South Africa's possession and continued development of nuclearweapon capability;
4. Condemns South Africa's continued pursuit of a
nuclear capability and all forms of nuclear coHaboration
by any State, corporation, institution or individual with
the racist regime that enable it to frustrate the objective of
26 Official Records of the General Assembly. Twentieth Session. AnnexPs,
agenda item 105, document N5975.
27 N39/470.

the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, which
seeks to keep Africa free from nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to desist from further collaboration with the
racist regime that may enable it to frustrate the objective
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa;
6. Demands once again that the racist regime of South
Africa refrain from manufacturing, testing, deploying,
transporting, storing, using or threatening to use nuclear
weapons;
7. Appeals to all States that have the means to do so to
monitor South Africa's research on and development and
production of nuclear weapons, and to publicize any information in that regard;
8. Demands once again that South Africa submit
forthwith all its nuclear installations and facilities to
inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance that the Organization of African Unity may
seek towards the implementation of its solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa;
I 0. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled .. Implementation of the
Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

B
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/76 B of 11 December 1979,
35/146 A of 12 December 1980, 36/86 A of9 December
1981, 37/74 B of 9 December 1982, 38/181 B of 20
December 1983 and 39/61 B of 12 December 1984,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 26 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to
21 July 1964,
Recalling that, in paragraph 12 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 it
noted that the accumulation of armaments and the acquisition of armaments technology by racist regimes, as well
as their possible acquisition of nuclear weapons, presented
a challenging and increasingly dangerous obstacle to the
world community, faced with the urgent need to disarm,
Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 of 14 December 1978, it vigorously condemned any overt or covert
attempt by South Africa to introduce nuclear weapons into
the continent of Africa and demanded that South Africa
refrain forthwith from conducting any nuclear explosion in
the continent or elsewhere,
Taking note of resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442 on
South Africa's nuclear capabilities, adopted on 27 September 1985 by the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency during its twenty-ninth regular session,
Having taken note of the report of the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research entitled ..South Africa's nuclear capability"/' undertaken in co-operation with
the Department for Disarmament ,\tfairs of the Secretariat
28 Official Records of the <ieneral Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement
No. 42(N40142).
