United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9299th meeting

Thursday, 30 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Ms. Jornada
Mr. Xu Yuanzhou
Mr. Gross Pozo
Mr. Murugasu
Mrs. Kambangoye Ankassa
Mrs. Corquaye
Mr. Tamaura
Ms. Cassar
Mr. Chumakov
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Alshamsi
Mr. Brady
Ms. Cameron

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The impact of development policies in the implementation of the Silencing the
Guns initiative
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of
Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2023/148/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-09061 (E)
*2309061*

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collar of the
microphone will prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We fully agree
with your analysis, Mr. President, that a greater focus
on socioeconomic factors is key to conflict prevention,
and that, in doing so, we must take into consideration
the political history of the continent. Today we
would like to highlight the importance of inclusive
and, where appropriate, decentralized governance in
conflict prevention.
The artificial imposition of borders has left one of
colonialism’s most problematic and complex legacies.
The policies that led to those borders were driven
by geostrategic interests, without any interest in the
diverse identities and aspirations of those living within
them. The viability of any future State was at best an
afterthought. Furthermore, centralized mechanisms of
governance created in order to facilitate the exploitation
of colonial possessions made it more difficult for
post-colonial States to institute sustainable forms of
self-governance. The decision of the Organization of
African Unity to set out in its Constitutive Act the
principle of respect of borders existing on achievement
of independence undoubtedly spared the continent
the bloodshed of secessionist conflicts. But it also
confronted newly independent States with complex
questions on the relationship between social diversity
and peace and stability.
The link between diversity and peace is an
understudied but vital one for ensuring sustainable
peace. In addressing such questions, the relevant
United Nations entities should encourage States to
uphold the human rights of minority communities
as a means of enhancing conflict prevention. Many
conflicts have their roots in the inequitable exclusion
of minority communities from power, opportunity,
services and security — inequalities that were designed
during colonial times. By upholding the human rights
of minorities, it is possible to spur development and
prevent conflict today. The recent report of the Special
Rapporteur on minority issues on the link between
2/30

30/03/2023

conflict prevention and the protection of the human
rights of minorities (A/HRC/49/46) is an important
contribution to this conversation.
Relevant conversations within United Nations
bodies, including the Peacebuilding Commission,
should also consider the positive effects of internal
governance arrangements that meet the aspirations of
relevant communities and international human rights
standards. Forms of self-governance, decentralization
and the devolution of powers contribute to upholding
Sustainable Development Goal 16 and, as the United
Nations-World Bank Pathways for Peace report notes,
have proven effective in many cases in reducing local
violent conflict. By meaningfully devolving power, we
deprive marginalized communities of the grievances
that would otherwise help armed groups grow in
power and influence to challenge peaceful forms
of governance.
Together with academic partners at the
Liechtenstein
Institute
on
Self-Determination,
Liechtenstein has for many years explored the
possibilities of decentralization and devolution for
relevant communities within States, often referred to
as “internal forms of self-determination”. To that end,
we have produced the Handbook on the Prevention and
Resolution of Self-Determination Conflicts, which sets
out a range of practices for States, mediators and others,
as well as case studies of relevant conflicts and peace
processes. It highlights the importance of governance
structures that uphold the human rights of minorities
and discusses how power can be exercised locally as a
measure to prevent conflict and to end it in sustainable
ways. We look forward to follow-up discussions to
today’s important debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): We thank
Mozambique for convening and chairing this important
open debate.
A conflict-free world is a dream we all share — a
dream we all want to realize. We join today’s open debate
to reiterate, in the context of Africa, the strong support
of the Philippines for that dream, Silencing the Guns,
for a peaceful, stable and conflict-free Africa, to rid
the continent of wars, civil conflicts, human rights
violations, humanitarian disasters and violent conflicts
and to prevent genocide.
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

We are pleased to note that the economic forecasts
for Africa are good. Addressing conflict is indeed a
means to fuel economic transformation, especially after
the pandemic. According to the African Development
Bank, African economies remain resilient, with a
stable outlook in 2023 and 2024, despite the tightening
global financial conditions. The Bank estimates that
Africa’s average gross domestic product will stabilize
at 4 per cent in the next two years, up from 3.8 per cent
in 2022, adding that the continent could benefit from
high demand for its commodities, as countries seek
alternatives for food and energy.
The challenges related to achieving a conflict-free
and progressive Africa are enormous and complex. We
therefore laud the ongoing efforts by the African Union
(AU), in partnership with the United Nations and the
international community, for a conflict-free Africa to
strengthen democratic institutions as building blocks
to promote peace and stability and enhance sustainable
economic development.
We commend the AU’s determination to transform
Africa with its visionary Agenda 2063: The Africa
We Want into an integrated, prosperous and peaceful
Africa, driven by its own citizens and representing a
dynamic force in the international arena. Realizing the
aspiration of a conflict-free Africa lies in the AU, its
member States and their people and institutions.
We also appreciate the strong support of the United
Nations for the AU’s Silencing the Guns initiative,
through resolution 2457 (2019), which welcomed the
AU’s determination to rid Africa of conflicts and
create conditions that are favourable to the growth,
development and integration of the continent. We
recognize the important contribution by the United
Nations of its wide-ranging political, technical and
logistical support for the AU’s mediation and peace
agreement implementation efforts in the Central
African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, South Sudan
and the Sudan. We also note the coordinated efforts of
the United Nations and the AU to address instability
in Somalia. We note that half of the dozen United
Nations peacekeeping missions around the world are in
Africa — in Abyei, an area contested by the Sudan and
South Sudan, the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei; in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic; in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Republic of the Congo; in Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali; in South Sudan, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan; and in Western Sahara, the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
Normalization is a crucial component of Agenda
2063 and the Silencing the Guns initiative. In the
Philippines, normalization is an important factor for
the peace and development process in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, in the southern
Philippines. It aims to achieve a smooth transition for
the members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces
to become productive members of society, through the
provision of socioeconomic development programmes
and other peace dividends. The Philippines believes
that sustainable people-centred peace and security can
be achieved only when the basic needs and aspirations
of all individuals, including those in conflict-affected
areas, are met. The Philippines is ready to exchange
with the AU its best practices on normalization, based
on its experience in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao, including the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front graduated programme for the
decommissioning of its forces, so that they are put to
further use. Normalization, including decommissioning,
contributes to enhancing security and stability in the
region by reducing the proliferation of illicit weapons
and preventing potential spoilers from undermining
the peace process. However, normalization also faces
many challenges, such as delays due to the coronavirus
disease, the insufficient delivery of promised assistance
to members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces,
the lack of trust among rival groups and the gendered
impacts of climate change.
We are pleased to note that, in the 60 years of the
peacekeeping tradition of the Philippines, we have
sustained our commitment to peace, including by
contributing to the cause of peace in Africa. Since
we first sent our peacekeepers to the Congo in 1963,
Filipino peacekeepers have also served in Abyei,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur, Liberia, South Sudan
and the Sudan. Today a modest number of Filipino
peacekeepers serves with United Nations missions in
the Central African Republic and South Sudan. We
are committed to increasing the Philippine footprint
in United Nations peacekeeping operations with the
increased participation of women. It is a commitment
on which we plan to deliver as part of our contribution
towards realizing a conflict-free Africa. I would like

23-090613/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

30/03/2023

to conclude by emphasizing that the Philippines will
always be a partner of Africa for people-centred peace
and development.

African-owned and African-driven and pursues a
comprehensive approach seeking to achieve durable
peace and security in Africa, for Africans.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.

Secondly, Thailand believes that a good
understanding of the peace-sustainable developmenthuman security nexus is important for overcoming
challenges in any region, including in Africa — from
having effective political institutions to promoting
sustainable development; from having good governance
to strengthening resilience and unity in societies;
and from promoting and protecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms to ensuring respect for
diversity and tolerance. All those factors contribute
to engendering conditions that are conducive to
sustainable peace and security. Without progress in the
fight against hunger, poverty and disease, there is less
chance for enduring peace and for the guns to be silent.

Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): First of all, we
commend Mozambique, as President of the Security
Council, for organizing today’s timely open debate on
this important issue.
The Silencing the Guns initiative is just one
important example of the achievements of the African
Union (AU), which remains a leading example of a
regional organization that has successfully promoted
regional approaches to addressing peace, security and
other challenges within the continent. In that connection,
Thailand wishes to congratulate the African Union,
which will be celebrating its sixtieth anniversary
this coming May. This initiative is reflective of an
important, common-sense but often understated axiom,
which is that, for matters related to Africa, it is Africa
that knows best how to address them. And flowing from
that is the bigger picture — the firm belief that each
region, with its unique historical and cultural contexts,
is best placed and best informed on how to best address
the challenges of that particular region. For it has long
been Thailand’s view that regional ownership is the
key to generating a long-term, sustainable solution to
regional problems.
One must also underscore that the international
community also has a supportive role to play, which
is to provide the necessary advice, when sought,
and the necessary support, when requested, by the
affected region. And if mutually agreed to by all sides
concerned, it is often partnerships involving States
of the region and regional organizations, on the one
hand, and States outside the region and international
organizations, such as the United Nations, on the other,
that help lay the foundation and generate momentum
for sustainable solutions. It is within that context that
Thailand wishes to make the following four points with
regard to the theme “Peace and security in Africa: the
impact of development policies in the implementation
of the Silencing the Guns initiative”.
First, Thailand welcomes the Silencing the Guns by
2030 initiative and the African Union Master Roadmap
of Practical Steps on the matter, both of which were
welcomed by the Security Council in its resolution
2457 (2019). We support the fact that the initiative is
4/30

Thirdly, addressing the needs of the people
through people empowerment — economic, social and
political — is key to achieving sustainable solutions,
via education and skills development, better access to
financing and health care and enhanced participation in
decision-making at the local, subregional and national
levels. The empowerment of people makes it more likely
for the intertwined processes of peace, sustainable
development and human security to endure, whether at
the community or the national level. It is for that reason
that Thailand, either through the Thailand International
Cooperation Agency or through its peacekeepers
in United Nations missions, such as in South Sudan,
integrates people-centred technical cooperation and
capacity-building in its programmes with African
countries. And those programmes are always driven by
the needs of the local community, such as in the areas
of agriculture, water and land management, because
it is what they want, not what we want, which is as it
should be.
Fourthly and lastly, a strong regional, multilateral
interface, complementing national efforts in addressing
peace and security challenges, will be helpful. The
AU-United Nations partnership has proven to be a
successful example, as are international cooperation
in support of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and international partnerships in support
of subregional organizations in Africa. More could be
done at the United Nations to enhance coordination
in the Organization between such key bodies as the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Economic and Social Council and the General
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Assembly, for example, and with other organizations
such as international financial institutions when needed.
In conclusion, Thailand believes that international
support for the Silencing the Guns initiative and
partnerships with the African Union and various
initiatives from Africa should be continued and indeed
reinforced in order to help secure sustainable solutions
to peace, security and other challenges within Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland welcomes
Mozambique’s proposal to hold an open debate on the
impact of development policies in the implementation
of the Silencing the Guns initiative.
Our discussion today brings us all to reflect upon
concrete measures that need to be taken in order to
achieve the noble goal of bringing various African
conflicts to an end, so as to make a substantial
difference in the lives of ordinary people across the
continent. With this in mind, I would like to underscore
five central points.
First, we need to get back on track to meeting the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063. These two complementary and
mutually reinforcing blueprints provide the only
realistic way of addressing the root causes of conflicts.
The study presented at the African Union summit last
month found that Africa must sustain annual growth
rates of at least 7 to 10 per cent if sustainable development
is to be achieved. This means that we urgently need to
come up with novel approaches to double the current
numbers. The Sustainable Development Goal Summit,
to be held in September this year, will present a unique
opportunity to give renewed impetus and demonstrate
our collective commitment in this regard.
Secondly, we need to build resilience. We note with
concern that in recent years the global environment
has changed dramatically. Existing vulnerabilities
have only increased, while new challenges have
emerged, especially in Africa. Poland believes that
one way to bring more stability is to enhance resilient
connectivity and restore trust in multilateralism and
international partnerships.
To that end, we have proposed a General Assembly
resolution entitled “Building global resilience and
promoting sustainable development through regional
and
interregional
infrastructure
connectivity”

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

(A/77/L.59), which is scheduled for adoption by
consensus in the coming weeks. In order to ensure a
better response to potential future shocks, it is crucial
to invest in quality and resilient infrastructure and to
support the capacity-building of developing countries
in their efforts to address the ongoing challenges of
various kind, especially in the areas of global health,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction, as
well as climate change.
The need for a long-term support to reduce
vulnerabilities of developing countries to external
crises, like food, energy and climate, was stressed by
the President of the Republic of Poland, Mr. Andrzej
Duda, in his statement at the fifth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in Doha
just a few weeks ago.
Thirdly, we must address climate-related security
risks. The African continent is arguably the region of
the world most vulnerable to the detrimental impacts of
climate change. There can be no realization of a conflictfree Africa without acknowledging the undeniable link
between climate, peace and security.
Last week we had the opportunity to participate in
the first United Nations Water Conference in almost
five decades, where we could hear first-hand about such
water stress and hazards as droughts and floods. The
competition over scarce natural resources is arguably
one of the drivers of conflicts, intercommunal violence
and food insecurity. We call on the Security Council to
recognize and properly assess the security implications
of climate change. Only then will we be able to truly
address the problem of the scarcity of resources from a
conflict-prevention perspective.
Fourthly, the significance of the triple-nexus
approach — strengthening the interlinkages between
the humanitarian, development and peace aspects
in building peace and responding to climate-related
threats. As peace and development are closely
connected, building effective resilience to natural and
human-made disruptions is of paramount importance.
It is obvious, but still worth mentioning: without
sustainable development, there can be no peace, and
vice versa, without peace, there can be no development.
Finally, we must build State capacities. In that
regard, we would like to stress the importance of
strengthening State institutions and governance
structures, upholding the rule of law and promoting
dialogue between local communities. We also wish

23-090615/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

to emphasize the need to prevent non-State actors,
including terrorists, organized-crime groups and
private mercenaries, from bypassing conventional
State supervision and spreading their influence. Strong
State institutions that are capable of providing basic
social services, protecting national borders, delivering
justice and controlling arms flows should be seen as a
prerequisite for bringing back stability and safeguarding
long-term development.
In conclusion, allow me to reassure the Security
Council that Poland will remain committed to
supporting peace and security in Africa. Progress in
the implementation of the Silencing the Guns initiative
remains the essential condition for ensuring equitable
and inclusive development. This in turn will move us
closer towards a peaceful and secure world, in a future
we all want.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Mozambique for convening today’s
open debate.
For Mexico, it is especially important that the
Security Council continues to analyse the negative
consequences of the trafficking and diversion of small
arms and light weapons. These weapons fuel armed
conflicts and organized crime. They exacerbate waves
of violence around the world, destroy the social fabric
and undermine peace, security and development. We
regret that Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean
are the two regions that suffer most from this scourge,
with the highest rates of violence and deaths from these
weapons, despite the fact that the main producers of
these weapons are not located in those regions and
do not always seem willing to assume their share
of responsibility.
Mexico recognizes the progress achieved through
the Silencing the Guns initiative as a key element in the
African continent’s quest to eradicate armed conflict.
We applaud the fact that this initiative will be extended
until 2030 and will remain one of the pillars of the
African Union’s Agenda 2063. The Security Council
has much to do in support of this and similar initiatives.
Addressing the challenges associated with such
weapons requires greater commitment from all actors,
including the industry that manufactures them, which
also engages in negligent practices. Greater regulation
of these weapons is required to prevent their being
6/30

30/03/2023

illegally trafficked, thus making it possible to address
the phenomenon in a comprehensive manner that takes
into account the entire life cycle of the weapons and
their ammunition and, of course, to promote actions in
all relevant forums.
We must keep in mind that the Security Council
adopted two historic resolutions on the matter:
resolution 2220 (2015) and, more recently, resolution
2616 (2021), promoted by Mexico. The latter places
special emphasis on the respect that arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council deserve. Violating
the provisions of the embargoes translates into more
weapons available in conflict situations with which the
Council has to deal. In other words, these weapons are
the tools for maintaining conflict.
These situations are not unique to the African
continent; we need only look to Haiti, which is facing
just this type of critical situation. For this reason, in
October 2022, Mexico co-sponsored an initiative to
prevent the supply of arms to the actors responsible
for the violence in Haiti, which the Council adopted
as resolution 2653 (2022). Both that resolution and
resolution 2616 (2021) highlight the need to promote
regional cooperation by land, sea and air to address
arms trafficking and diversion.
We reiterate that it is the responsibility of all States,
but especially of producer States, to strengthen existing
international frameworks on arms control, if we really
want to advance the common goal of having societies
that are free of violence. Without these frameworks, no
development is possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to sincerely express my thanks and appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to Mozambique for convening
this important meeting. I also congratulate you for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month.
The Silencing the Guns initiative embodies a
practical application of the principle of African solutions
to African problems. It represents a tireless African
effort to establish peace and security in the continent
and reflects awareness by African States about the
importance of establishing stability, peace and security
in order to create conditions conducive to achieving
economic development, implementing the Agenda
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

2063 of the African Union (AU) and 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The initiative will ensure that
the African peoples that long suffered from conflicts to
benefit from Africa’s wealth and tremendous resources.
The Silencing the Guns initiative is also the cornerstone
of the AU’s Peace and Security Architecture.
In that regard, I would like to refer to some Egyptian
efforts to implement the initiative and achieve security
and stability in the continent.
First, Egypt has supported the initiative since it
was launched, in 2013, and has supported extending
its implementation until 2030. We took practical steps
at the institutional level; most important, the proposal
to establish an institutional unit to support mediation
and conflict prevention within the AU. Egypt also
contributed to promoting the foundations of peace in
the continent through its membership of the AU Peace
and Security Council for four times since its inception,
and we seek membership for the fifth time for the
period 2024 to 2026.
Secondly, during its presidency of the AU in 2019,
Egypt announced the annual convening of the Aswan
Forum for Sustainable Peace and Development to
discuss the close relation between achieving security
and stability, on one hand, and sustainable development,
on the other, including discussing the root causes of
conflicts based on the principle of African solutions to
African problems. Given that Egypt is keen to support
efforts to achieve stability in Africa, President Al-Sisi
is overseeing the post-conflict reconstruction dossier
within the AU, as well as the peacebuilding dossier.
Egypt also hosts the African Union Centre for Postconflict Reconstruction and Development, as well as
the Sahel-Sahara Counter-Terrorism Centre.
Thirdly, during its chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission for the period 2020 to 2021, Egypt paid
great attention to peacebuilding efforts in Africa and
mobilized support to address the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and recovery in countries on
the Commission‘s agenda, as well as promoting the
Commission’s role in the Security Council and the
General Assembly, particularly regarding African
issues. We also expanded the scope of African countries
that are addressed by the Commission to include regions
that were not addressed before, such as Gulf of Guinea,
in addition to promoting the role of women and youth in
peacebuilding in Africa.

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Our African continent faces many multidimensional
challenges, as we are living in a complex world and
rapidly changing political reality. Many African
countries have not yet fully recovered from the
COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, they have to deal
with the new situation following the war in Ukraine and
the war’s impact on their food security. Furthermore,
Africa is also facing challenges related to terrorism,
illegal trafficking in natural resources, climate change
and other causes of conflict, as was mentioned by other
speakers. The international community must make more
efforts to support Africa to achieve peace and security
in the continent as per the Silencing of Guns initiative.
I would like to mention some of measures proposed
by Egypt.
First, we need to enhance cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
concerning African issues, particularly those related to
United Nations missions in Africa. That will benefit the
Security Council from the experiences of the Peace and
Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa, in addition to ensuring that the Security
Council can adopt resolutions based on accurate
assessments of the situation on the ground.
Secondly, we need to consider once again the issue
of funding African peace missions through United
Nations assessed contributions to support their tasks
and responsibilities and provide sustained funding for
such missions.
Thirdly, in the light of the multiple issues related to
Africa on the Security Council’s agenda, the Council
should develop its mechanisms and working methods
so as to allow African country missions to play a
greater role when it comes to African issues that are
on its agenda. Consultations must intensely take place
with such missions to understand their concerns about
draft resolutions to be adopted that greatly affect them.
The Council must be more interactive with African
countries, while penholders must constantly consult
with African missions in relation to African issues
across the board.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
first thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
highly important debate, which has been enhanced by

23-090617/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

the participation of His Excellency Mr. Filipe Nyusi,
President of the brotherly Republic of Mozambique.
The joint African Union (AU)-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the joint United Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security represent a solid
basis for cooperation between the two organizations,
which can effectively silence the guns in Africa over
the long term.
In the same context, the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns initiative lists actions and objectives in order
to put an end to conflicts in Africa. The Kingdom of
Morocco is convinced that the Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative represents a strategic framework
for stability, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
development on the continent.
Morocco, which is currently a member of the AU
Peace and Security Council, remains convinced that
there can be no security without development and
no development without security. In that context, my
country focuses its actions on the three pillars of peace,
security and development to ensure the prevention and,
more important, the management of conflicts and postconflict reconstruction. Allow me to mention some of
my country’s actions and initiatives in that regard.
First, Morocco hosted the first AU Policy
Conference on Promoting the Peace, Security and
Development Nexus in Tangier from 25 to 27 October
2022, which allowed for a ground-breaking debate to
be held on the challenges that still plague Africa’s path
towards development, particularly food, health and
security challenges.
Second, in the context of AU capacity-building
in the area of political governance and democratic
practices, in collaboration with the African Union
Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security, the
Kingdom of Morocco organized the first specialized
training workshop for AU short-term election observers
in June 2022.
Third, convinced of the need to support
women’s participation in peace processes, during its
chairmanship of the Peace and Security Council in
October 2022, the Kingdom of Morocco organized a
commemorative meeting on the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. On
that occasion, the Peace and Security Council stressed
8/30

30/03/2023

the importance of women’s effective and meaningful
participation in peace processes, including with regard
to early-warning and conflict prevention.
Fourth, the Kingdom of Morocco presented its
national report for the year 2022 on progress made in
implementing the AU Master Roadmap of Practical
Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2030. The report
documents my country’s achievements and progress in
the various priority areas of the Roadmap’s monitoring
and evaluation mechanism.
Fifth, aware that there can be no peace without
development or development without peace, in
accordance with the noble directives of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, the Kingdom of Morocco
made the development of our continent a priority of
its foreign policy. Morocco therefore has more than
1,000 partnership agreements with brotherly African
countries in the context of effective and proactive
South-South cooperation.
Sixth, the Mohammed VI Institute for the Training
of Imams, Morchidines and Morchidates provides
training to African preachers in order to counter
dogmatic thinking and violent extremism.
Seventh, and last, Morocco has participated in
United Nations peace operations on the continent since
the 1960s, aimed at ending conflicts and establishing
lasting peace in Africa.
If our vision of an Africa where the guns are silenced
by 2030 remains a realistic objective, the international
community must redouble its efforts to achieve that
goal. Let me make a few specific proposals.
First, it is necessary to tackle and resolve the root
causes of conflict. Our actions must address the security,
economic, climate, religious and cultural challenges
and other aspects of the security and stability needs on
the African continent.
Secondly, it is crucial to put in place strategies
to combat the proliferation, circulation and illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons in Africa.
Thirdly, conflicts in Africa have shifted from a
traditional pattern to one where terrorist and separatist
groups are involved, threatening the territorial integrity
of States, as well as international peace and security.
We therefore need to prevent and respond to such
threats to increase the chances of silencing the guns in
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Africa by 2030, in particular by dismantling terrorist
recruitment, financing and indoctrination structures.
Fourthly, it is necessary to combat poverty, hunger
and social exclusion. The African Continental Free
Trade Area is an ideal framework for strengthening
economic integration and development in Africa.
Fifthly, climate change has direct and devastating
effects on peace and security and must be taken into
account in all national, continental and international
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
sustaining
peace strategies.
Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco remains firmly
committed to the principle of the indivisibility of
security in Africa. My country therefore reiterates its
commitment to supporting peace, security, development
and prosperity so that by 2030 no one will be left behind,
and by 2063 we will be able to achieve the goals that we
have set for our continent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I thank Mozambique
for convening this debate and the briefers for
their interventions.
Italy aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Croatia on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
Over the years, the Security Council has identified
the causes of conflict that are prolonging violence on the
African continent. It was therefore only natural for the
Council to welcome the Silencing the Guns initiative,
which focuses on the drivers of conflict in Africa and
acknowledges the urgent need to address them. The
initiative remains extremely relevant, as it recognizes
that there can be no sustainable development without
peace and no peace without sustainable development.
Our support for the African Union pledge to achieve
the goal of a conflict-free Africa must be stated once
again in the light of the ongoing crises that are heavily
impacting the development perspectives of many
countries and communities on the continent.
Through multilateral action and bilateral support,
Italy therefore remains committed to contributing to the
ongoing international and regional efforts to silencing
the guns in Africa. We deem it important to pursue a
comprehensive approach that encompasses development

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

cooperation, conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
International support should not be limited to addressing
the ongoing emergencies, but should also tackle the
structural challenges and root causes of conflict, such
as poverty, food insecurity, social exclusion, absence of
the rule of law and violent extremism. In that context,
I would like to highlight three issues that could benefit
from a more concerted action.
First, on the eradication of poverty and hunger,
we wish to emphasize the importance of supporting
key initiatives to foster inclusive socioeconomic
development in Africa. The African Continental Free
Trade Area, for example, has the potential to catalyse
the economic transformation of the African continent
and promote the creation of more and better jobs. We
would also like to highlight the essential role played by
resilient food systems in combating food insecurity and
enabling sustainable growth. To that end, Italy, together
with the United Nations, will host the stocktaking
moment of the Food Systems Summit in Rome next July.
Secondly, on achieving peace through justice
and strong institutions, it is paramount to promote
participatory decision-making, increase transparency
and accountability and restore trust in public institutions.
Accelerating the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 16 also means engaging
civil society, women and young people in promoting
a culture of peace. In that regard, Italy is engaged
with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
and the International Development Law Organization
in promoting an inclusive dialogue within the United
Nations system through the annual SDG 16 conference
in Rome.
Furthermore, and lastly, on combating violent
extremism, strengthening regional cooperation and
institution-building to counter the terrorist threat is of
crucial importance. The evolving threat of terrorism
remains a grave concern and constitutes a major obstacle
to the building of a peaceful and prosperous Africa.
Italy, together with Morocco, the Niger and the
United States, is currently co-chairing the Africa Focus
Group of the Global Coalition against Daesh, a civilianfocused counter-terrorism effort intended to enhance
the capabilities of African members of the Coalition.
Italy also supports the activities of the regional offices
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
in Africa.

23-090619/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

I would like to conclude by congratulating
Mozambique on its successful term as President of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea): I would first like
to commend you, Mr. President, for having convened
this timely and important debate. Let me also thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks this morning.
The Silencing the Guns initiative of the African
Union (AU) Agenda 2063 aspires to end all wars,
conflict and gender-based violence. In 2020, the African
Union extended that initiative until 2030 as a result
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, but the current
global geopolitical context, together with the food and
energy insecurity, as well as emerging challenges, such
as the climate crisis, seem to have exacerbated the
already dire situation in the region.
For Africa to truly achieve the aspirations set out in
the initiative, simply ending war and conflict will not be
enough. Rather, it is more important to lay foundations
that will lead to consolidating peace and fostering
sustainable development. Against that backdrop, I
would like to focus on the following three aspects.
First, there should be a greater focus on building
resilient institutions and strengthening governance,
which underpin the peacebuilding framework.
Security sector reform is one of the critical measures
to strengthen and consolidate peace in post-conflict
situations. Transitional justice initiatives that address
accountability are also essential to bringing together
communities affected by conflict in order to take a step
forward towards sustaining peace.
In that regard, the crucial role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
cannot be overemphasized. As a long-standing member
of the PBC, Korea is delighted about the increased
coordination between the PBC and the Security Council,
and we stand ready to support such interaction.
Secondly, my delegation would like to highlight the
importance of an inclusive approach as an enabler of
peace and development. Indeed, the diverse and unique
voices from each and every corner of our society,
including women, young people, other marginalized
populations and civil society, will inevitably contribute
to, strengthen and enrich the path towards, sustainable
peace and development.
10/30

30/03/2023

The empowerment of women and young people is
one of the priority areas of cooperation between Korea
and Africa stipulated in the Korea–Africa Framework
of Cooperation 2022–2026. Korea will continue to
work alongside the African Union to support regional
programmes in that regard.
Lastly, the efforts I mentioned simply cannot
bear fruit without adequate, predictable and
sustained financing. That is why we need to advance all
options, including the use of assessed contributions, to
finance the Peacebuilding Fund, as well as AU-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
The Republic of Korea has been a consistent
contributor to the PBF since 2006, with this year’s
contributions culminating in $4.3 million. We have
also proudly contributed more than $17 million to the
African Union’s peace and security activities, including
$1.2 million to the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia this year to narrow the financing gap it
is facing.
There is a reason that humanitarian elements,
development and peace are a nexus. They are inherently
intertwined, and each pillar cannot be advanced
without the other amid the complex and interconnected
challenges in the region. The Republic of Korea renews
its commitment to actively joining international efforts
to enhance development and sustain peace in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, and Mozambique for convening this
open debate on the Silencing the Guns initiative.
We welcome the focus on preventing conflict,
promoting transformative conflict resolution and
ensuring sustainable peace through development
policies. Recent years have shown the interlinkages
of global challenges. The coronavirus disease
pandemic and the consequences of climate change
have exacerbated many causes of conflict, as well as
inequalities, tensions and violence. And over the past
year, we saw how geopolitical tensions and conflict
further derailed our efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. Those challenges
especially affect the African continent but should not be
faced by Africa alone. We need more collective efforts
and solidarity towards a more peaceful world, and we
need to bring the SDGs back on track.
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

One of the fundamental tenets of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development states that there can be no
sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development. That sounds good,
but it also makes a lot of sense. To address the root
causes of conflicts we need to adopt a holistic approach
to peacebuilding, as well as effective development
programmes. The Austrian Government, committed
to implementing the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus, supports inclusive and democratic governance
and operationalizes its development policy coherently
through a whole-of-Government approach. I thought it
would be best to give three concrete examples.
First, Austria cooperates with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to enhance its Conflict Early
Warning and Response Mechanism systems in the
Horn of Africa to strengthen the prediction, prevention
and response to transnational security threats and to
increase capacities for preventive diplomacy, mediation
and civilian peacebuilding, thereby benefiting more
than 10,000 participants in total.
Secondly, through the Local Development
for Peace Consolidation programme, Austria
cooperates with partners to improve the livelihoods
of rural communities in conflict-affected districts in
Mozambique. More than 400,000 people benefit from
improved access to markets, public infrastructure and
professional training.
Thirdly, Austria also participates in the European
Union mission in Mozambique, which provides training
and support to protect the civilian population and
restore security in the Cabo Delgado region.
Our commitment to the triple nexus is also the basis
of our work to enhance coherence within the United
Nations system, both through strategic guidance and
a strong Resident Coordinator system. In addition, we
must redouble our efforts to promote the rule of law,
democracy and the resilience of institutions to foster
the cohesion of societies and promote inclusion and
democracy, as well as human rights, to strengthen
resilient communities that are built on trust. It is
therefore no surprise that Austria places particular
focus on SDG 16 and the women and peace and
security agenda.
As a country committed to disarmament and a
champion of responsible trade and export control,
Austria also understands silencing the guns in a more
literal way. Eradicating the illicit trade in small arms

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

and light weapons, eliminating the exorbitantly high
number of such arms and tackling the challenges of
ammunition storage and ammunition diversion are
all key to limiting the spread and use of weapons that
account for most casualties worldwide. Clearly, that
requires international cooperation and assistance.
Austria has therefore partnered with Senegal to improve
weapons and ammunition logistics. And we look
forward to expanding that project regionally in Africa.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that sustainable
peace and development need to be addressed though
collective action. Austria therefore stresses the need for
stronger partnerships at the international, regional and
local levels. We particularly advocate strengthening
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the field of peace and security and look
forward to contributing to that, among other objectives,
in the discussions on the New Agenda for Peace.
In all those efforts, full implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development remains the goal
and purpose. We look forward to the SDG summit this
September and call for an ambitious and action-oriented
outcome, reflecting our resolve to create the foundations
for sustainable and lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): I thank the briefers for
their valuable contributions earlier today.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. I would also like to share some
additional remarks in our national capacity.
Sustainable development is essential to achieving
long-lasting peace and stability. With its wealth of
natural and human resources, the African continent
in particular possesses enormous potential for
economic growth and development. A comprehensive
and integrated approach, focusing on socioeconomic
development and addressing the root causes of conflict
and violence, is therefore vital.
Allow me to make three points.
First, with regard to building resilient societies,
development policies play an important role in
addressing poverty, inequality and marginalization.
By promoting economic growth, creating jobs and
ensuring access to quality education, health care
and clean water, our development policies help build

23-0906111/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

30/03/2023

inclusive and resilient societies. Moreover, investing
more in intercultural dialogue, human rights education
and enabling a vibrant civil society are the necessary
building blocks for a strong community that embraces
diversity and provides a sense of belonging for all.
Integrating sustainable development in peacebuilding
is a foundation for reconciling and rebuilding
peaceful communities.

economic recovery in line with the goals and targets
of Agenda 2063. We remain committed to cooperating
with African countries in achieving lasting peace and
security for all their citizens by also strengthening our
cooperation in accelerating the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

My second point is on inclusivity. Development
policies should be tailored to the specific needs of
the local communities and must be inclusive and
sustainable. Only when all segments of society are
given a voice in the development processes can a
sense of belonging and local ownership be achieved.
Achieving sustainable peace and security builds trust
and social cohesion.

Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Türkiye, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

Women and youth play a critical role in promoting
sustainable development and peace. It is essential
to invest in their empowerment by also supporting
initiatives that promote education, economic
empowerment and full, equal and meaningful political
participation for women and youth.
Thirdly, climate change has a devastating impact
on human security, peace and development in Africa. It
aggravates poverty, food insecurity, water scarcity and
displacement and intensifies the drivers of conflict.
Development policies therefore need to prioritize
climate action and promote renewable energy,
sustainable land use and natural resource management
to ensure environmentally sustainable and climate
resilient economies and communities.
In conclusion, Slovenia continues to support
sustainable development initiatives in post-conflict and
fragile settings, in particular in sustainable water and
environmental management, food and water security
and, importantly, on women’s and young people’s
empowerment. We have prioritized our cooperation
in areas that enable more sustainable water and food
management, support the transition to a circular
economy, fight against climate change and, more
generally, support the humanitarian-development nexus.
The African Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative
is an important step towards achieving lasting peace,
stability and sustainable development in Africa. The
African Union’s efforts in that regard are commendable
and deserve our full support to address issues that
lead to fiscal deficits and indebtedness and to increase
African countries’ own capacity to invest in their
12/30

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.

First of all, I want to thank the President and
Mozambique for hosting today’s open debate on a
topic that we often return to, and which remains one
of the core concerns for us at the United Nations: how
to invest in sustainable development to foster peace
and security. We all know that in order to silence the
guns, we must create prosperous, resilient and inclusive
societies where no one is left behind. This is why we
must maintain a laser focus on achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
I would like to focus on two aspects in this rich
discussion: first, the importance of investing in
sustainable development to address the root causes of
conflict, and secondly, the need to promote greater
connectivity and integration across the African
continent to improve access to basic services and
economic opportunities. On both topics, we in the EU
believe that we are delivering on our commitments, and
always in close coordination with the African Union
and its members. Further, through both strands of
work, we are supporting the achievement of Africa’s
own Agenda 2063.
On addressing the root causes of conflict, with
almost half of all terrorism-related deaths globally
occurring in sub-Saharan Africa, the region has emerged
as the new global epicentre of violent extremist activity.
Supporting initiatives to prevent radicalization and the
spread of violent extremism, particularly among young
people, is key. For the effective implementation of
these initiatives, it is crucial to understand the motives
for joining terrorist organizations, be they political,
religious, economic or by coercion.
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

The study by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) entitled “Journey to Extremism in
Africa: Drivers, Incentives and the Tipping Point for
Recruitment” demonstrates that to silence the guns, we
have to break the vicious circle of poverty and exclusion.
One example where the EU is providing such support is
Mozambique: in that country, together with the UNDP,
the United Nations Population Fund and local authorities
in the project ResiNorte-Resilience for the North, we
are enhancing social cohesion and reinforcing peace
and stability through the interconnected humanitarian,
development and peace spheres, and very much with
local ownership.
Another example is through the updated EU
integrated strategy in the Sahel, which focuses on
the need to strengthen governance and provide basic
services to the population as crucial factors in stabilizing
the region. Limited State presence and public services
can lead to a sense of isolation or neglect, which can
result in mistrust between population groups and public
authorities and increase the risk of conflict. The EU
is addressing these issues, for example, by supporting
mediation efforts between local communities and
security forces in Kenya, and by training security
forces in protection of civilians and engagement with
local communities in Nigeria. In our experience, the
inclusion of women, youth and marginalized groups is
particularly crucial for such efforts to be successful.
We know that investments in prevention and
peacebuilding can have a positive return: every United
States dollar invested in peacebuilding could save $16
on the cost of conflict and violence. The international
community must make this sensitive investment and
direct resources towards addressing the root causes
of conflict. We encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to find consensus soon within the Fifth
Committee in order to ensure the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 76/305 on financing for
peacebuilding. More broadly I want to reiterate the
EU’s commitment to continuing to support Africanled peace support operations, including by making
urgent progress in the ongoing discussions to use
United Nations assessed contributions for operations
authorized by the Security Council.
On the second point, a regional approach is
crucial. The EU is in itself an example of how greater
connectivity and integration have fostered peace across
our own continent, and we stand ready to support
African regional integration as well. We recently

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

adopted a renewed Great Lakes regional strategy and
are committed to supporting the countries in that
region in moving from tensions to trust and from
trafficking of natural resources to trade and sustainable
development. To this end, we will contribute to
improved natural-resources management, cross-border
cooperation and cross-border infrastructure.
The EU is Africa’s closest partner. Together with
our 27 member States, as Team Europe, we are the
largest provider of official development assistance,
the largest investor in Africa and Africa’s number one
trade partner. Through the Global Gateway AfricaEurope Investment Package, the EU is mobilizing at
least €150 billion by 2027 in such sectors as transport,
education, health, energy and digitalization. Part of
the Global Gateway package is support for Africa’s
regional integration process, for example, through the
implementation of the African Continental Free Trade
Area. Another area is climate adaptation, where the
EU is supporting the African Union Great Green Wall
initiative to combat the effects of climate change.
These investments will bring people closer
together through 11 strategic transport corridors that
will facilitate trade, and which will also bring people
closer to services, education, health care and economic
opportunities. These investments are fully in line with
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), creating
resilience in societies and ultimately contributing to
silencing the guns. In all these stable investments,
we underline the importance of accountability,
transparency and conflict sensitivity.
Finally, let us not forget that the 2030 Agenda is
indivisible. Peace and security go hand in hand with
sustainable development, human rights and gender
equality. That is why progress in achieving the SDGs is
key in setting us on the path towards silencing the guns
in Africa by 2030.
We thank Mozambique again for its initiative
in convening today’s meeting, and we reiterate
our strongest support for investing in sustainable
development to foster peace and security in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I want to share a story from the Turkana and
Pokot regions of Kenya. Long-standing disputes over
agricultural land erupted in violent conflict when the

23-0906113/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

local sugar industry — the main employer — collapsed
due to corruption and embezzlement. With climate
change, resource extraction and dwindling reserves of
arable land, the situation worsened. Faced with poor
job prospects, young people dropped out of school.
They turned to livestock theft to pay dowries and start
families. Increasingly available firearms replaced
spears and arrows, and livestock theft became an
increasingly deadly activity.
At first, some women supported this practice
through song, joining in the smuggling of weapons, and
in the end insisting on marrying wealthy rustlers, even
if that wealth was the result of theft. But as the saying
goes, “if you live by guns, you die by guns”. Many
young men died trying to steal cattle. Many young
brides became young widows in the care of devastated
and traumatized families.
In response, in 2016, the POTUMA Women’s Forum
was created. Although traditionally excluded from
political decision-making, women began to challenge
gender norms. They boycotted ceremonies that paid
homage to rustlers. They reached across community
boundaries to create spaces for dialogue. Although
instability continues, the POTUMA Women’s Forum
has resolved disputes on several occasions. Their
challenge is a common one across civil society: lack of
funding for local initiatives.
What lessons can we draw from this story?
First, we must address the widespread proliferation
of small arms and light weapons in communities.
Small arms and light weapons continue to represent a
challenge that affects peace and security, human rights,
gender, sustainable development and other areas. To
silence weapons, we need to prevent and eradicate the
illicit trade and diversion of conventional weapons
through effective implementation of international and
regional arms-control instruments.
Secondly, we need to provide financial and human
resources at the local level to mitigate armed violence, end
conflict and achieve peace and sustainable development.
But in addition to the international sphere, we must
work at the national and regional levels, to the extent
possible, together with civil society organizations. In
that regard, the African Union’s Silencing the Guns
initiative is an important framework.
Thirdly, we must engage young people and adopt a
long-term approach to addressing security threats. The
14/30

30/03/2023

average age of African citizens is under 20 years. We
must therefore ensure that Governments, international,
regional, civil society organizations and traditional
and religious leaders include youth in decision-making
processes, in line with the youth, peace and security
agenda. Engaging youth in the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns initiative in Africa at all levels
will make ownership possible, ensure the longevity
of security and development policies and encourage
changes in behaviour.
Fourthly, we must ensure the full, equal,
meaningful and effective participation of women in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, in line with
the women and peace and security agenda. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development reminds us that,
without addressing Sustainable Development Goal 5, on
gender equality and women’s empowerment, achieving
sustainable development and consequently peace and
security will be impossible. Similarly, the African
Union Agenda 2063 acknowledges the important role of
women and girls as catalysts for change and prioritizes
the aspirations of gender equality and women’s
empowerment for the region. While the circumstances
in my country, Costa Rica, might be very different
than the ones we are discussing, we are also working
to apply the same lessons by improving and increasing
the participation of youth, local Governments and civil
society through our national development and public
investment plan, while integrating a gender perspective.
All of that is key to ensuring sustainable
development, peace and security for everybody. That is
how we can silence the guns.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Vitorino.
Mr. Vitorino: I begin by thanking you, Sir, and
the Mozambican presidency of the Security Council for
facilitating this important debate.
Conflicts and violence are the dominant forces
behind protracted displacement, and the number
of people living in conflict or violence-induced
displacement reached 53.2 million people at the
end of 2021, marking a new historic record. Forced
displacements can also be a driver of conflict when the
influx of populations leads to competition over scarce
resources, land, access to services or governance, or
force different groups into areas traditionally occupied
by other groups. Violent extremist groups have been
contesting State presence and legitimacy across the
continent, often in remote and underdeveloped areas
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

where institutions have been weak or absent, allowing
them to conduct illegal activities and, above all, exploit
the civilian population. As has already been said,
climate change multiplies pre-existing conflict risks
and reduces the ability of communities in conflict
to achieve sustainable peace, thereby jeopardizing
realizing the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union Agenda 2063.
Well-managed migration can be a powerful driver
to mitigate the combined impacts of conflicts, climate
change and development gaps in order to achieve the
empowerment of migrants and displaced persons and
contribute to the stability and economic prosperity of
their host communities and countries. We can all agree
on the fact that, in order to prevent conflicts and build
peace, we must link early-warning systems to inclusive
conflict resolution mechanisms. We, the International
Organization for Migration, advocate for the inclusion
of human mobility data in all conflict and context
analyses. Understanding why people are on the move,
their preferred solution to end their displacement and the
obstacles to their reintegration are essential elements to
sustain peace and preserve the gains achieved towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The capacities of national and regional authorities
to prevent and resolve forced displacements need to
be strengthened in order to identify the root causes
and monitor conflict trends. A more holistic and
timely understanding of such dynamics will enable all
stakeholders to find more comprehensive solutions that
enable the safer migration of persons, transhumance
and other-cross border movements. In that regard,
we stand ready to assist the newly established
African humanitarian mechanism and the Africa
Multi-Hazard Early Warning and Early Action System,
established by the African Union. We support the
efforts of national and regional authorities to include
migrants, internally displaced persons and refugees
in peace and development planning processes, as their
marginalization hinders long-term peace and stability
and constitutes a major obstacle to achieving the SDGs.
At the United Nations level, meaningfully including
migration and displacement within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
is critical.
In conclusion, I believe that, for the international
community to help countries to transition out of crisis
and situations of fragility, humanitarian, development
and peace assistance should be channelled in

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

specific ways that promote national ownership and
accountability through Government-led and, above
all, community-owned processes, with the meaningful
inclusion of women and youth.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P), made
up of 55 Member States and the European Union,
which this year is co-chaired by Botswana, Costa Rica
and Croatia.
We would like to commend Mozambique for
organizing today’s open debate, aimed at facilitating
a deeper understanding of the contribution that
socioeconomic factors have in promoting social
cohesion, peace and stability, or, conversely, in
triggering conflict.
During the special meeting of the Economic and
Social Council in January on social and economic
measures to prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, the Group of
Friends of R2P noted that economic deprivation and
widening inequalities are important risk factors that
could lead to atrocity crimes. They can exacerbate
competition over scarce resources and severely limit
the capacity of the State to resolve domestic tensions
peacefully. Over the past two decades the African
Union and its regional mechanisms have enhanced their
capacity to deal with conflict and crisis situations on
the continent. Despite the progress made in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts, Africa remains
home to crises that increase the risk of the occurrence
of atrocities and jeopardize human, national and
regional security.
The consequences of the devastating impact of the
illicit transfer, diversion and trafficking of weapons
and their ammunition across Africa can be seen
today in a number of conflict zones. We note that the
Silencing the Guns initiative is a key effort aimed at
ending conflicts on the African continent and could
play a significant role in reducing the risk of atrocity
crimes by limiting the availability of illicit weapons
used to commit them We congratulate Mr. Chambas
on his recent appointment as the African Union High
Representative for the Silencing the Guns Initiative.
The African Union Master Roadmap of Practical
Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2030 offers

23-0906115/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

an opportunity for States to address issues closely
related to the responsibility to protect and to atrocity
prevention, including disarmament, the arms trade
and accountability, as well as combating poverty,
deprivation and inequality and promoting resilience
and strong and stable institutions. In that context, the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect would
like to make the following points.
First, in order to adequately prevent and respond
to the threat of atrocity crimes, it is essential to have a
better understanding of the early warning signs. Many
outbreaks of violence, conflict and atrocities are rooted
in long-standing institutionalized discrimination,
poor education, economic and gender inequalities,
social exclusion, hate speech and violations and
abuses of human rights, including economic, social
and cultural rights, as well as increases in illicit
arms and ammunition trafficking and the growing
impact of climate change, biodiversity loss and other
environmental pressures. Unequal access to justice,
essential resources and jobs, as well as poor market
access and terms of trade and a shrinking democratic
and civic space, in addition to a lack of securitysector reform policies and unsustainable disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes,
can contribute to creating an environment conducive
to atrocity crimes. Many of those risk factors are also
outlined in the United Nations Framework of Analysis
for Atrocity Crimes. In that context, the African
Union’s Continental Early Warning System, which
has been instrumental in analysing emerging security
threats, could be strengthened through the inclusion
of reporting and monitoring of early warning signs of
atrocity crimes. The coordination, harmonization and
exchange of information between the African Union,
subregional mechanisms and international partners
could be further improved.
Secondly, all Member States should uphold their
responsibility to protect by taking effective measures
to address the root causes of violent conflicts,
including the demand for and illicit supply of arms
and ammunition. National ownership of those efforts
is fundamental to ensuring that the Silencing the
Guns initiative is adapted to specific contexts and
challenges. The illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and ammunition puts civilians at risk of
atrocity crimes, destabilizes communities and limits
wider socioeconomic development. By implementing
effective measures to prevent the illicit transfer of
16/30

30/03/2023

small arms and light weapons and ammunition, States
can also limit the means to commit atrocity crimes.
In that context, we would like to recall the landmark
resolutions 2220 (2015) and 2616 (2021).
Thirdly, civil-society actors are often the first
to witness the indicators and early warning signs of
atrocities and are therefore equipped with an in-depth
understanding and expertise that States should
incorporate into any atrocity prevention response.
Civil society is also a key player in promoting and
sustaining effective DDR policies. By including the
voices and rights of local actors, particularly those most
affected by ongoing atrocities, including women and
girls, in decision-making processes, the international
community can take more appropriate and effective
preventive action that promotes respect for human
rights and is community-informed and responsive to
early warning signs of atrocities.
Fourthly, the Group stresses the importance of
implementing the women and peace and security agenda
in the context of the Silencing the Guns initiative,
particularly through resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2467
(2019), and highlights the importance of taking into
account the risk of conventional arms or items being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of genderbased violence or violence against women and children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s timely open
debate, bringing into focus the value of integrating
the development and security nexus at a time when
the African continent is experiencing, on the one
hand, protracted conflicts and a surge in the menace
of terrorism and violent extremism, and on the other,
multiple socioeconomic challenges.
Namibia has strongly advocated for focusing on
the inextricable link between peace and development.
Peace remains an important precursor for development,
and in turn, development cannot prosper without peace.
Today’s meeting is another opportunity to applaud
the enhanced cooperation and continued partnership
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, which represents an exemplary model of
cooperation aimed at ridding Africa of conflicts and
creates conditions conducive to growth, development
and integration on the continent, as encapsulated in our
continental objective of Silencing the Guns.
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

My delegation appreciates the value derived
from the continued partnership between the United
Nations and the AU in all areas of peace, security
and development, under the auspices of the Joint
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security and the framework for the implementation of
the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Both organizations
should clearly outline their roles according to their
comparative advantages, including in peacekeeping
in Africa. Africa has taken ownership of its security
and development challenges and responses. Through
its current membership on the AU Peace and Security
Council and in its capacity as the incumbent Chair of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, Namibia
has endeavoured to make its humble contribution to
strengthening the regional and continental peace and
security architecture.
During the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations in 2020, Member States pledged to
strengthen global governance for the sake of current
and succeeding generations. We commend the
Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen international
foresight and capacities to identify and adapt to new
risks by providing leadership on the development of
a New Agenda for Peace, as we believe strongly that
there is a need to reconfigure the global peace and
security architecture.
Namibia also believes that it is critical to recognize
the links between all the threats to peace and security
in Africa. They include socioeconomic and climate
challenges, combined with illicit financial flows and
criminal activities, which further fuel conflict and
instability across the continent. Illicit financial flows
facilitate illicit flows of arms, particularly small
arms and light weapons, to non-State actors such as
rebel armed groups, terrorists and criminals. Curbing
illicit financial flows will make it more difficult to
illicitly acquire small weapons, thereby contributing to
silencing the guns.
To us, “Silencing the Guns in Africa” is not merely
a slogan. It is a priority that responds to the hopes and
dreams of our continent and a critical aspect of the
African Union’s decisions and partnerships for the
socioeconomic development of Africa. It entails working
hand in hand with all partners to make peace a reality,
end human rights violations and effectively manage and
prevent humanitarian disasters, including genocide.

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Incidents of illicit arms flows and diversions of
arms continue to be recorded across the continent,
in defiance of the AU and regional measures in place
and the Security Council resolutions designed to
prevent them. That represents a threat to longer-term
recovery, reconstruction and development. With greater
transparency, which could be achieved by better sharing
of information within the continent, it may well become
much easier to detect and disrupt illicit arms flows.
International and African regional instruments that
include legally or politically binding obligations and
commitments provide an essential basis for preventing
the proliferation and misuse of arms in Africa. There
is a need for their scrupulous, systematic and inclusive
implementation. Building national capacity for such
action requires more dedicated international assistance
in many countries.
Understanding and addressing the root causes of
armed conflicts in Africa to foster development, as
well as the motivations that underline the radicalization
leading to violent extremism, is crucial. Considerable
emphasis must therefore be placed on good governance,
infrastructure
development,
industrialization,
agricultural modernization and the promotion of
entrepreneurship, as well as on addressing poverty,
unemployment and inequality. Those dimensions are
crucial, bearing in mind the trends with respect to the
continent’s changing demographic profile, its broader
socioeconomic and environmental conditions and their
subsequent impacts on sustainable peace and security.
As Chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security, and throughout our tenure on the AU Peace
and Security Council, Namibia remains committed
to advancing the peace-security-development nexus
through dialogue, mediation and political consultations
in our region and the continent, in line with the African
Union’s aspirations.
Namibia wishes to underscore the critical
importance of peacebuilding as a foundation for
sustainable development in Africa and the need to adopt
a comprehensive, integrated approach to peace and
development at the national and subregional levels. We
would like to draw particular attention to the importance
of Sustainable Development Goal 17, on partnership, in
all our efforts towards building a more peaceful and
prosperous world for all. We therefore strongly believe
that the international community should be actively
engaged in partnership with Africa to provide assistance
in the areas of conflict prevention and peacebuilding,

23-0906117/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

including for their adequate funding. Further efforts
are needed to build institutional capacity to address
the economic, social and humanitarian dimensions of
post-conflict peacebuilding and to mobilize the needed
attention and resources for individual countries.
Finally, Namibia welcomes the progress being
made in increasing the participation of women in peace
negotiations and leadership roles towards resolving
conflicts in Africa. Indeed, it is imperative to integrate
gender perspectives into institutional reforms in postconflict countries for the full realization of Africa’s
longer-term vision in order to prevent the burden of
armed conflicts and armed violence from falling onto
the next generations of Africans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Qatar would like to thank Mozambique for holding
today’s important open debate. I also thank the briefers
for their informative briefings.
The State of Qatar is proud of its distinguished,
high-level relations and advanced strategic partnership
with the States of the African continent at all levels.
The State of Qatar has become an important strategic
partner of several African States, in particular of the
African Union, through its diplomatic endeavours and as
an impartial mediator in conflict settlement, in addition
to being a reliable partner in the areas of peacemaking
and peacebuilding in Africa. We take those steps in
accordance with the priorities of the Silencing the Guns
initiative of the African Union (AU) and United Nations
efforts in the areas of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations in Africa. In that context, we
recall the humanitarian and development efforts made
by the State of Qatar in Africa to address the challenges
faced by the continent. The State of Qatar welcomes and
commends the progress made since the launching of the
Silencing the Guns initiative. Several conflicts have
been halted thanks to the efforts of the AU, African
Governments and regional and international partners.
There is no doubt that peace and security are crucial
for sustainable development, stability and prosperity.
Therefore, the impacts of development policies on the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns initiative
in Africa are of paramount importance. Development
policies that address the root causes of conflict and
promote socioeconomic development can significantly
contribute to achieving peace, security and sustainable
18/30

30/03/2023

development on the continent. That is the focus of
the State of Qatar in its bilateral and international
partnerships, as it prioritizes those partnerships towards
the achievement of inclusive economic growth and the
reduction of poverty and inequality, while increasing
access to education and health care and building the
resilience and capacity of States and communities to
peacefully resolve conflicts and prevent the spread of
terrorism and violence.
The Silencing the Guns initiative is undoubtedly an
African initiative. However, the objective of silencing
the guns and ending wars in Africa and the entire world
is the responsibility of humankind as a whole and is at
the heart of the mission and task of the United Nations
as reflected in the Charter of the United Nations. I am
therefore pleased to reiterate the support of the State
of Qatar for the Silencing the Guns initiative. I call on
the United Nations and its Member States to continue
assisting that important initiative to achieve its goals
by 2030. The implementation of the initiative will
actively contribute to maintaining international peace
and security and achieving prosperity and well-being
in the world.
Based on the principles and objectives of the State
of Qatar’s foreign policy, which rely on preventive
diplomacy and mediation in conflict resolution, as well
as our considerable experience in resolving a number
of regional and international conflicts, we see a need
to invest in addressing the root causes of conflict, with
a focus on peacebuilding, mediation and dialogue,
along with ensuring the effective participation of the
women, young people and vulnerable sectors affected
by conflict and humanitarian crises.
In conclusion, let our meeting today be a landmark
opportunity for reiterating our determination to support
the Silencing the Guns initiative in Africa in order to
establish a conflict-free Africa and a more secure and
peaceful world, and thereby to achieve the aspirations
and hopes of current and future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark — let me begin by thanking
Mozambique for convening today’s meeting on the
development aspects of the African Union’s pioneering
Silencing the Guns initiative. Peace and security cannot
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

be achieved in isolation, as Mozambique underlines by
convening today’s debate.
Democracy, human rights, the rule of law and
access to basic services — indeed, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals —are essential to silencing the
guns. At the same time, we must recognize that illegally
imported small arms and light weapons may exacerbate
conflict, hamper stability and impede development.
The development and peace nexus takes a very real
and concrete centre stage in the Silencing the Guns
initiative and the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention
to three areas — first, the role of the African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations;
secondly, the need for integrated approaches; and
thirdly and finally, the real and urgent need for an
inclusive decision-making and peacebuilding process.
First, the Nordic countries emphasize the critical
importance of regional engagement in peace and
security challenges. An understanding of conflict
dynamics and causes must be the starting point for
finding solutions, and no one is better equipped to do
that than regional organizations. The Nordics are longstanding partners of the African Union and its regional
economic communities and are steadfast supporters of
the implementation of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, including its capacity for prevention,
mediation and peacebuilding. We encourage further
strengthening of the synergies between the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
governance architectures and an even closer AU-United
Nations partnership, especially between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, in order to effectively execute all mandates.
In our view, the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace could address that issue, as well as the need for
predictable funding for African-led peace operations.
And let me use this occasion to make it clear that the
Nordic countries would favourably consider the use of
United Nations assessed contributions on a case-bycase basis to support such operations. We also call
for focused efforts to ensure the protection of human
rights and respect for international humanitarian
law in all operations, as well as accountability when
violations occur.

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Secondly,
the
operationalization
of
the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus is key to
providing the comprehensive and integrated approach
needed to silence the guns. It is also crucial that
development policies fully incorporate that objective.
Our organizations and structures may be built in silos,
but we all know that reality and conflict dynamics are
never siloed, and we must be cognizant of that.
Thirdly and finally, we must ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women and other
stakeholders in decision-making and peacebuilding
processes to leverage local knowledge and solutions so
that we can silence the guns within communities, too. We
commend those AU member States, like Mozambique,
that have adopted national action plans on women and
peace and security. Their implementation can help
recognize the gendered impacts of the illicit trade in
small arms as well as address barriers to participation,
including discrimination, shrinking civic space, sexual
and gender-based violence and reprisals. Furthermore,
let us recognize that there can be no sustainable peace
without the full and meaningful participation of young
people in decisions related to silencing the guns.
Let me conclude by underlining that we need all
stakeholders engaged to deliver on the promise of a
more peaceful future for generations to come. We, the
Nordic countries, are prepared to do our bit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate on peace
and security in Africa, focusing on the impact of
development policies in the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns initiative. Let me also congratulate
you and the delegation of Mozambique on your sterling
leadership and conduct of the presidency of the Security
Council during this month. And I thank the briefers for
their very important contributions.
The African Union Master Roadmap on silencing
the guns in Africa highlights that the cycle of violent
conflicts and disruptive crises persists on the continent,
as do situations where we have seen relapses into a
cycle of violence and destruction for some countries
that were perceived to have emerged from conflicts. It
is critically important for Africa and its people to put in
place strategic guidelines to address those challenges.
Sierra Leone therefore appreciates the convening of
this debate, which presents an opportunity to propose

23-0906119/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

multidimensional approaches and solutions to silencing
the guns in Africa.
While a lack of good governance, along with
economic challenges and marginalization from political
processes, is behind some of the root causes of conflict
across much of Africa, there is a need to focus on
prevention as a way of addressing both the proximate
and the remote causes of those conflicts. Of course,
solutions to conflict situations on the continent must be
expressly diagnosed and the root causes targeted and
addressed. A comprehensive and inclusive approach
to preventing conflict must therefore include the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
the goals of the African Union’s Agenda 2063: The
Africa We Want and development policies that tangibly
benefit and transform the lives of ordinary people on
the continent.
The impact of development policies on the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns initiative
should be positive, but they can be negative as well.
In cases where development policies tend to benefit
a minority of persons in a particular country, the
consequences might lead to inequality and conflict.
The goal is to frame and implement development
policies to generate positive impacts, leading to
stability and prosperity. Sierra Leone has undertaken a
number of development initiatives since the end of our
civil conflict more than two decades ago, not least the
implementation of three poverty reduction strategies
and our current medium-term national development
plan, which is focused on human capital development
and prioritizes education. That has had a direct
correlation to the consolidation of peace and stability
in Sierra Leone over the years.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the link between
development and silencing the guns, which cannot
be overstated. Governments are urged to allocate
adequate resources to implement development policies
and priorities, foster a conducive environment for
private-sector growth and job creation and take all
necessary measures to mitigate against and prevent the
drivers of conflict.

30/03/2023

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few points in my national capacity.
This debate is taking place amid persistent
challenges, including geopolitical tensions and
conflicts, recovery from a pandemic, inflation and
acute food insecurity. The climate crisis is creating
additional setbacks for African countries, many of them
highly vulnerable in environmental terms. Silencing
the guns requires looking beyond peace and security
issues and focusing on the structural transformation
of the socioeconomic arena, ensuring that all Africans
benefit from integrated and inclusive economies.
Despite the challenges, we remain optimistic and
believe that the African continent will look very different
in the future. Interconnected and multidimensional
megatrends will reshape the continent, and with it the
needs of development cooperation. Africa’s dynamic
young population, abundance of resources and diversity
have the potential to transform the continent into an
immense driver of global peace and prosperity. The
African Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want
serves as a useful blueprint to that end. In that vein,
it will be critical to support nationally owned and led
efforts to build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions. Africa must further develop its own
institutions, policies and strategies to prevent conflict.
The following are some key areas that in our opinion
require urgent consideration.
First, there must be a focus on human development,
notably in basic services such as health and education.
The development of human capital is a factor that
contributes to a country’s resilience to external shocks.
Secondly, there should be a tailored approach to
blended finance and investment promotion, taking
into account the specific needs and vulnerabilities of
African countries.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.

Thirdly, it is essential to ensure effective delivery
systems for public services, which are vital to enforcing
long-term solutions and ensuring that the State is
perceived as a legitimate and active presence even in
the most remote areas. Furthermore, women and young
people should be fully integrated into all aspects of
decision-making to ensure inclusivity and diversity.

Mr. Sekeris (Greece): I would like to join others
in expressing my appreciation to Mozambique for
organizing this open debate.

Lastly, implementing the African Continental Free
Trade Area will effectively facilitate intra-African
trade for micro-, small and medium-sized businesses,

20/30

23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

expand access to markets and create new opportunities
for enhanced livelihoods for Africans.
Sustainable development without peace and
security is simply unattainable. It is crucial to invest
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding and to put
women and girls at the centre of security policy. It
is equally essential to promote the New Agenda for
Peace. High-quality and effective social dialogue at all
levels of governance is a prerequisite for ensuring more
participatory and inclusive policy outcomes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me to join
previous speakers in commending the Mozambique
presidency for convening this debate and in thanking
the briefers who spoke this morning.
Our contribution to this debate emphasizes conflict
prevention and resolution, security-sector reform,
peacebuilding and investment in sustaining peace. It is
a fact that silencing the guns and creating peace cannot
be sustained without clear development policies. Good
governance and inclusive institutions remain the most
effective ways to prevent conflicts and build peace. It is
therefore crucial to ensure that Governments, regional
organizations and the international community focus
on addressing the underlying causes of conflict. At
the national level, our post-conflict experience in
Rwanda has shown how important it is to develop
strong institutions that establish the foundations of
good governance based on the rule of law, democratic
principles, values and accountability.
The African Union’s road map for silencing the
guns in Africa is an important framework, which, if
implemented and supported, will contribute to an
Africa free of violent conflict. Conflicts and wars in
Africa have multiple causes. That is why the efforts to
prevent or resolve them should also be multifaceted.
Peace, security and development endeavours cannot be
sequential, but, rather, should be parallel. One without
the other creates a cycle of vulnerability for a State and
its people. Any development framework has little to no
room to materialize if there is no peace. Allow me to
conclude with three points.
First, we must fully embrace the commitments to the
peace agenda within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. One of the main achievements of the
2030 Agenda was to recommit to a radically different

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

approach to development in conflict-affected and
transitional environments. Fostering inclusion, ensuring
access to justice, strengthening the social fabric and
delivering good governance have repeatedly shown to
be essential to delivering the outcomes of sustainable
peace. Progress against the 36 targets across the 2030
Agenda must be achieved, and all such progress should
be reported in all Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
reporting cycles.
Secondly, we must reaffirm a commitment to
human rights — the foundation for human dignity,
justice and social equality. Human rights, including
economic, social, cultural heritage and minority rights,
are the foundation of a world order based on equality
and inclusion and are the ultimate yardstick against
which we can measure the 2030 Agenda aspiration of
no one left behind.
Thirdly, and lastly, we must think at the local
level, but act at the global level by recommitting to
multilateralism as a safeguard for the most vulnerable.
National implementation alone will not suffice to
achieve the SDGs. Forty per cent of the Goal 16 targets
require implementation at the regional and international
levels. That is particularly the case with regard to the
issue of peace, where fostering the external drivers of
peace, justice and inclusion requires a concerted effort
and action by States, as duty holders, to support and be
responsible for the prevention of small arms flows.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Kelly (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s open debate on this important
topic, and congratulations on your presidency. My
thanks also go to the impressive line-up of briefers for
their insightful reflections.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
Having learned from the experience of conflict on
the island of Ireland, we recognize the need to address
the underlying socioeconomic factors that can fuel
tensions and contribute to conflict. Poverty, inequality
and marginalization can create fertile ground for
grievances to take root. Addressing those issues is
essential to achieving lasting peace.
That was true in Northern Ireland. Today it remains
true in many parts of Africa, where drivers of conflict
are compounded by legacies of slavery, colonization,

23-0906121/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

30/03/2023

the imposition of artificial borders and the unjust
exploitation of natural resources.

the European Union (EU) and the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.

Such challenges can be overcome with the right
policies, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, the inclusion of young people, effective
leadership and support from the international
community. Indeed, in recent years progress has
been made, guided by the imperative to silence the
guns and create conditions conducive to Africa’s
sustainable development.

The Silencing the Guns initiative seeks to make
Africa free from wars, conflict and gender-based
violence and to prevent genocide. In other words, this is
an opportunity to build resilient societies. The initiative
also tackles fragilities that hamper peace and security on
the African continent, with reverberations worldwide.

Your own country, Mr. President, is an emerging
success story. It is remarkable to think that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process provided for in the Maputo Accord is nearing
completion. That truly is a significant achievement and
a testament to the determination of the Government
of Mozambique and the supportive role of the United
Nations, including the Office of the Personal Envoy.
Peace is a process, not a destination. While the
Silencing the Guns initiative is of course an important
road map, we still have work to do to achieve its
ambition. One source of concern is the increase in
unconstitutional changes of Government. In other
contexts, progress is held back by gaps in governance
and a convergence of vulnerabilities and security
challenges, such as terrorism, violent extremism, the
surge of foreign fighters and mercenaries, corruption,
transnational organized crime and the impacts of
climate change. In many contexts, the illicit transfer,
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons contribute to the persistence of those security
challenges, exacerbating their impacts. That is a
problem that we must address.
Moving from conflict to sustainable development
is never a straight line. It is a complex, but vital journey
towards a safer, more secure and prosperous Africa.
The international community has a critical role to play,
in coordination with the African Union and subregional
initiatives. Ireland is determined to support African
countries in that collective effort. We are committed
to investing in development programmes that prioritize
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): Romania commends
Mozambique for organizing today’s open debate, and
aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of
22/30

A conflict or a war anywhere in the world has
global consequences. Transformative and sustainable
solutions, including sustainable development policies,
should be a part of the United Nations toolbox in
addressing them. Accountability is an indivisible part
of those solutions.
Romania has invested in the capacity-building of
some African States, as well as in educating young
generations, which can be seen as our pledge to silencing
the guns. Starting in 2008, Romania has been organizing
a post-conflict stabilization and reconstruction training
programme, with the past four sessions having been
exclusively dedicated to the African continent. In 2019,
the programme was organized in Addis Ababa, in
partnership with the African Union. Last year’s edition
took place in Senegal and was dedicated to West Africa.
Twenty-four experts from the region participated.
Likewise, a share of approximately 60 per cent
of the total national development assistance provided
by Romania was granted in support of young people’s
education and the promotion of their participation. Both
the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Romania grant higher-education scholarships
to incoming students from Africa.
As a staunch supporter of the women and peace
and security agenda, we will continue to advocate for
the promotion of women and girls and their meaningful
contribution to peace processes. We encourage
countries to adopt and implement national action plans.
That is a key point for Romania in 2023, as, together
with the United States, we co-chair the Women and
Peace and Security Focal Points Network.
Romania shares many of the challenges faced by
Governments and people in Africa — the brain drain,
harnessing the advantages of digitalization and finding
well-balanced solutions to support environmentally
friendly policies that take into account the social costs
of the green revolution, among other things. Romania’s
more than 30 years of experience since embracing
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

democracy have taught us invaluable lessons in terms
of both successes and errors, which we are open to
sharing with friends.
In 2023, Romania plans to continue its actions
towards achieving peace, development, human
rights and security in Africa as a pledge in the runup to the Sustainable Development Goals Summit
this September. Our focus will be on the transfer of
knowledge in the area of the management of emergency
situations — and Member States will hear more during
the upcoming debates on the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 — agriculture,
with regard to the compliance of African economies
with EU phytosanitary measures and education, media
resilience, diplomacy and post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation.
I conclude by congratulating Mozambique on
its successful presidency of the Security Council
this month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czechia.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): First of all, since
Mozambique’s presidency of the Security Council is
almost over, I would like to use this opportunity to
congratulate it on a very successful presidency. I thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this very important and
timely debate, which offers a valuable opportunity to
exchange views on preventing conflicts, promoting
conflict resolution and ensuring long-term peace and
security through inclusive, transparent and effective
development policies.
It is essential to reiterate time and again that there
can be no sustainable development without peace and
no peace without sustainable development. In that
regard, my country, Czechia, stresses the importance of
resolution 2457 (2019), by which the Security Council
welcomed the Silencing the Guns initiative and its
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the
Guns in Africa. The African Union’s Master Roadmap
is absolutely correct to point out that most crises
and violent conflicts in Africa are driven by poverty
and economic hardships, and that peace, security
and socioeconomic development must be pursued
simultaneously. I would like to use this opportunity
to highlight those areas to which Czechia pays special
attention in its development cooperation with African
partners and which, from our point of view, are key

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

to ensuring stability, sustainable development and the
prevention of conflicts on the continent.
The environment is one of the main challenge areas
listed in the Master Roadmap. Specifically, there is
a need to reduce the vulnerabilities of livelihoods to
climate change by building resilient systems. In that
context, agriculture must be diversified with a view
to making it more resilient against the adverse effects
of climate change and implementing the Malabo
Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and
Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved
Livelihoods. Agriculture is the backbone of Africa’s
economy and a source of livelihood for the majority of
the continent’s population. However, in sub-Saharan
Africa that sector generates only about 14 per cent
of the gross domestic product. Therefore, we must
continue supporting small and medium-scale African
farmers. We must help improve knowledge of effective,
resilient and sustainable agricultural practices and
encourage mechanization, smart farming solutions and
the building of local value chains for agriculture and
food production. Farmers must have also better access
to financial services.
Together with agriculture, we should enhance our
focus on sustainable rural development, including by
ensuring access to safe water, health and nutritional
services and quality education. We must also place
a special focus on African young people, who are
increasingly leaving villages for towns. We must also
focus on the economic empowerment of rural women
and girls, with the aim of reducing chronic poverty while
striving to close social gaps and decrease dependence
on external food assistance, which is exacerbated by
crises such as Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
and the coronavirus disease pandemic. Furthermore,
our efforts to help increase Africa’s agricultural
productivity must not fail to address the impacts of
climate change on the continent. Czechia is part of
the Team Europe Initiative on Climate Adaptation and
Resilience in Africa. We sincerely hope that, together
with the African Union and regional authorities, we can
considerably enhance multi-hazard early-warning and
early-action capacities in Africa.
Along with climate adaptation, we can also improve
overall stabilization. We must continue to implement
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
in the agriculture sector by working towards the key
objectives of disaster prevention, preparedness and
resilience-building. The recent devastating impacts of

23-0906123/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

Cyclone Freddy in southern Africa have shown that there
is still much work to be done. In other words, Africa
will not be stable and conflict-resilient unless it can
rely on more efficient and climate-resilient agriculture
that is even better prepared to face natural disasters.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): We welcome and thank
the President of Mozambique for presiding over the
meeting this morning. I would also like to convey
our congratulations to the Mozambican team for its
successful presidency of the Security Council for the
month. We thank the team for convening this open
debate on a topic of foremost importance for Africa
and allowing our participation to contribute to the
discussions. I commend all the briefers this morning
for their pertinent and insightful remarks.
Silencing the guns is the chief flagship project of
Agenda 2063. That target was set with an underlying
recognition of the fact that development and peace are
inextricably linked. Accordingly, all African countries
pledged to eradicate poverty in one generation and build
shared prosperity through the social and economic
transformation of the continent. We recognized that
security should be seen in its totality, including the
right of people to live in peace with access to the
basic necessities of life, while enjoying the rights and
participating in the affairs of their societies. In that
blueprint for Africa’s transformation, we committed
to addressing the root causes of conflicts, including
economic and social disparities. On that basis,
the Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa clearly stipulates that peace,
security and socioeconomic development should be
pursued simultaneously.
Our continental policies are fully cognizant of
Africa’s political history, which has been marred by
three major tragedies — namely, slavery, colonization
and the exploitation of natural resources. While the
burden from our past continues to be a challenge, Africa
has risen to the challenge to assume total responsibility
for its destiny through the realization of a conflict-free
and prosperous continent. We rekindled and redeployed
the spirit of pan-African solidarity and unity of purpose,
which underpinned the achievement of emancipation
from slavery, colonialism and apartheid. That regional
approach to development and peace underpins the
principle that the security, stability and development of
24/30

30/03/2023

every African country are inseparably linked to those
of the other African countries.
For Africa to unlock the development potential
and reap the demographic dividend we enjoy owing to
our youthful population, Africa should drive its own
development through the sustainable management of its
resources. The inalienable sovereign right of African
countries to use and manage their natural resources
and to meet the needs of the African people needs to
be respected. Member States should develop, protect,
manage and equitably utilize their shared natural
resources for their mutual benefit.
On that basis, we incorporate Agenda 2063 within
our national policies on inclusive growth; job creation;
increasing agricultural production; investments in
science, technology, research and innovation; gender
equality; youth empowerment; and the provision of
basic services, including in the areas of health, nutrition,
education, shelter, water and sanitation. The African
Continental Free Trade Area has gone operational,
bringing Africa closer to its goal of creating an economic
community. At the national level, my country, Ethiopia,
devised and implemented a green and climate-resilient
economy. We make concerted efforts to restore nature
and protect biodiversity through our record-breaking
Green Legacy Initiative. Our efforts are bearing fruit,
as Ethiopia is on track to increase its forest coverage
from 15 to 30 per cent by 2030. We are increasing our
allocation of resources for agriculture, which has led
us to successfully substituting the import of grains
such as wheat by enhancing local production. We are
working to meet the increasing need for the supply of
clean energy and to close the deficit.
These development efforts at the national and
regional level are designed and implemented to reinforce
peace and address the root causes of conflict. With
strong pan-African solidarity and unity of purpose, we
shall achieve peace through our development policies
and encouraging trajectories.
Because economic development must be
complemented by other efforts, we shall make sure that
systems for political independence and context-relevant,
effective and democratic governance are put in place.
In line with this, our agenda for the continent calls for
concerted action for good governance, democracy, social
inclusion, respect for human rights, justice and the rule
of law. We are also working to ensure that the root causes
of extremism and violence are addressed in a concerted
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

manner, using multidimensional interventions. In this
regard, we concur with the President of Mozambique’s
words addressed to the Peacebuilding Commission
yesterday, that “it is true that not all conflict and terror
is home-grown for Africa”.
We must therefore enhance cooperation and
partnerships to curb the threats to peace and security
emanating not only from internal causes but also
from external sources. In this regard, our partnership
with the United Nations and friends from outside
the continent is indispensable. Political backing and
development partnership, including debt cancellation
and relief, should be seen as an investment in realizing
the aspirations of people to development and peace and
to the creation of a renewed future, where our children
will live in peace on our shared planet.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Chukwu (Nigeria): At the outset, let
me congratulate the President of the Republic of
Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi,
for a successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and for organizing today’s important meeting,
particularly as this year marks the tenth anniversary of
the collective proclamation by African leaders to silence
the guns. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Cristina Duarte, African Union High Representative
Mohamed Ibn Chambas and other briefers for their
insightful contributions to today’s debate.
Peace, security and development in Africa remains
an important but challenging global agenda. Besides
the many socioeconomic and development challenges,
Africa’s Silencing the Guns by 2030 initiative also faces
some hurdles related to the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, the expansion of terrorist activities
across the continent, the recent wave of unconstitutional
changes of Government and inadequate funding for
regionally led peace support operations. In this regard,
allow me to highlight four areas on which we must
focus to accelerate the implementation of the African
Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa and to deliver greater success in the
initiative’s remaining six years.
First, promoting the development agenda is essential
to enhancing national ownership of the Vision 2030
target. Widening access to education, strengthening
good governance, securing technology transfer and
promoting inclusive participation of women and youth

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

in governance and economic activities will lead to
more resilient societies. Nowhere is this need more
evident than in the Sahel and Lake Chad Basin regions
of sub-Saharan Africa, which are also grappling with
the devastating consequences of climate change on
livelihoods and development. Accordingly, we believe
that recovery and resilience strategies must be centred
on unique national and regional perspectives that
address the root causes of violent conflict.
Secondly, ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing for peace and security activities
remains a major challenge facing the African Union
(AU), regional institutions and African States. While
the strategic partnership between the AU and United
Nations continues to bear fruit, the obstacles to providing
support to African-led peace operations from United
Nations assessed contributions need to be overcome.
Likewise, mobilization of domestic resources is key
and will require increased collective efforts to tackle
illicit financial flows that are depriving the continent of
vast amounts of its much-needed resources.
Thirdly, expanding knowledge and research
capabilities on illicit arms flow in the region is
important in curbing the inflow, proliferation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons. For its part,
Nigeria has established a national centre for the control
of small arms and light weapons, which provides policy
guidance, research and monitoring of all aspects of
small arms and light weapons in the country, in close
collaboration with relevant national, regional and
international stakeholders.
Lastly, to echo the point made by President Nyusi
this morning, achieving the Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative will be jeopardized if terrorism is
allowed to persist on the continent. In this regard,
Nigeria and the Office of Counter-Terrorism will host a
regional counter-terrorism summit for Africa in Abuja
to identify ways of strengthening regional responses to
the threat of terrorism in Africa. The Security Council’s
support towards the successful outcome of this event
is welcome.
In concluding, I wish to reaffirm Nigeria’s
unwavering commitment to the effective implementation
of the AU Master Roadmap on Silencing the Guns,
which would greatly contribute towards the realization
of AU’s Agenda 2063 and fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We call on all Council

23-0906125/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

members to sustain their support for the African
continent and these critical agendas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes
today’s debate on the implementation of the Silencing
the Guns agenda, and we express our appreciation to
Mozambique as President of the Security Council for
convening it. I would like to thank all the briefers for
their substantive briefings today.
Ukraine fully supports the African Union’s
ambitious goal to end all wars, civil conflicts, terrorism
and gender-based violence. We believe that long-term
sustainable development is a vital prerequisite for
achieving this noble objective.
We positively note the African Union’s endeavours
to champion inclusive and sustainable development
policies. However, notwithstanding the enormous
efforts undertaken by the African Union and the
countries of the continent in different fields, Africa
still faces various challenges, including, but not limited
to economic difficulties, unemployment, competition
over power and resources, terrorist and mercenary
activity, the illicit exploitation of natural resources, and
climate change.
Ukraine reiterates the importance of the successful
implementation of the priorities outlined by the African
Union in its Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to
Silence the Guns in Africa in all domains. We believe
that Africa must address both the symptoms and the
root causes of conflict. In attending to the current
problems of peace and security, all parties concerned
should work on the elimination of the sources of those
problems. As one of the key initiatives within the
African Union’s Agenda 2063, Silencing the Guns
is aimed at creating an environment conducive to
and incentives for economic growth and investment.
We believe there are a number of priorities whose
implementation is crucial — reinforcing good
governance and the rule of law; ensuring unrestricted
access to quality education; stimulating economic
diversification and sustainable livelihoods; ensuring
the substantive and equal participation and leadership
of women and further strengthening United Nations
cooperation with the African Union and the relevant
regional economic communities.
26/30

30/03/2023

Among the many challenges that Africa is facing
today, special attention should be paid to the activities
of mercenaries. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about the growing footprint in a number of
African countries of the Wagner Group, an international
criminal organization that is closely linked to Moscow’s
regime. There have been many credible reports of crimes
committed by the Wagner Group, including torture,
the systematic killing of civilians and mass looting.
Ukraine is a country where that criminal organization
is currently not only committing grave human rights
violations but also actively participating in combat
operations against the Armed Forces of Ukraine and
using various methods of warfare, in particular by
turning to Russian jails to recruit thousands of convicts,
including people of African descent, who are being
cynically and ruthlessly used in Russia’s war against an
independent State.
In conclusion, Ukraine is strengthening its
relations with Africa. We are intensifying our dialogue
with every country on the continent at every level.
As a reliable food supplier, Ukraine has continued to
provide wheat as humanitarian aid to Ethiopia and
Somalia, despite the obstacles that Russia is creating.
We will remain a reliable and responsible partner for
all African countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of Mozambique on a very
successful presidency, as well as on organizing today’s
debate. I also thank the briefers and speakers for their
useful insights.
Several countries in Africa, particularly in the
Sahel, Central Africa and the Horn of Africa, continue
to be conflict-ridden as a result of factors that are driven
by chronic political instability, ethnic divisions and
exploitation by terrorist and armed groups. External
factors also play a role in fuelling such conflicts, and
that continues to be a matter of deep concern. We
therefore all need to come together to support Africa’s
efforts to silence the guns by end of the decade. In that
regard, I would like to make six points.
First, inclusive politics, well-established governance
structures and decentralized Administrations are critical
elements in nation-building, and those processes can be
long and complex, particularly for countries ravaged by
centuries of colonial rule. It is important to recognize
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

the primacy of national Governments and authorities
in identifying and driving priorities, strategies and
activities for sustaining peace and development and for
avoiding relapses into conflict.
Secondly, we need to acknowledge and accept
African leadership and Africa-driven solutions to
Africa’s problems, which as I understand it was stated in
as many words by the President of Mozambique yesterday
at a meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission. Trying
an external one-size-fits-all solution is a sure-fire
recipe for failure. A deeper understanding of conflicts
in Africa that best responds to their local wisdom, as
well as the development of a sense of ownership, is a
critical factor in resolving such conflicts and achieving
lasting peace.
Thirdly, the Security Council should fully leverage
the comparative advantage of Africa’s regional
and subregional organizations to resolve prolonged
conflicts. Collaboration between the United Nations and
the African Union, and with subregional organizations
such as the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Southern African Development Community
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
has always yielded positive results.
Fourthly, terrorism has to be contained, given that
it is the biggest security threat in Africa. It is important
to strengthen the capacities of national, regional and
subregional responses to terrorism in Africa through
capacity-building, training and the provision of
equipment and sustainable financial support, bilaterally
as well as multilaterally. Initiatives such as the African
Union Transition Mission to Somalia, the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Southern African
Development Community Mission in Mozambique and
the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram
need more robust support from the Security Council
and the international community.
Fifthly, peacebuilding efforts in Africa must be
strengthened. Major donors, particularly developed
countries and the international financial institutions,
should ramp up their official development assistance
commitments and eliminate barriers to concessional
financing to Africa’s economies so that they can achieve
the goals enshrined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
Lastly, for the sake of the Council’s credibility, it is
important that Africa have permanent representation in

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

its decision-making. In every debate on issues in these
areas pertaining to Africa in the Security Council,
India has consistently called for ensuring that Africa’s
aspirations, as outlined in the Ezulwini Consensus and
the Sirte Declaration, are honoured. The Council must
move meaningfully beyond mere lip service to address
Africa’s core concerns.
India has been supporting several African
countries
through
development
partnerships,
capacity-building, including of security forces and
institutions, scholarships, vocational training and
knowledge-sharing and providing preferred market
access to African products, among other efforts. India
will continue to do its utmost to support our African
brethren in their quest for sustainable peace, and as our
Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Jaishankar, has aptly
said, “In India, you will always find a friend willing to
stand with you through thick and thin”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, let me warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council, which is ending
this week. And I thank you very much for convening
this debate, which is very important for my delegation.
Spain aligns itself with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union, and I would like to add
some comments on the topic in my national capacity.
First, in addressing peace and security in Africa,
reality and experience have confirmed for us the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach that
besides focusing on peace and security, encompasses
sustainable development, the strengthening of
institutions and safe, orderly and regular migration.
That comprehensive approach and the importance
of the link between security and development has
informed Spain’s two successive presidencies of
the General Assembly of the Sahel Alliance. Our
cooperation is particularly focused on supporting the
peace and security pillar with the aim of promoting
peace and stability, good governance, human rights
and the prevention of terrorism, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063. I would also like to specifically
mention Spain’s support for the promotion of gender
equality and the participation of women in the areas of
governance, peace and security in Africa, in line with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Recently,

23-0906127/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

together with UN-Women, Spain organized a seminar
in the Niger on the role of women as mediators. We
have also contributed €400,000 to the women, peace
and security programme of the Economic Community
of West African States, and €20 million to the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)/
Spanish Fund for African Women’s Empowerment.
At the regional level, Spain supports the
leadership of the African Union and the African Union
Development Agency (AUDA)-NEPAD. At the most
recent meeting of the Executive Council of the African
Union, Mr. José Manuel Albares Bueno, Spain’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the European Union and
Cooperation, announced a €50 million contribution to
peace and security efforts and inclusive and productive
growth, in addition to the €20 million earmarked
for AUDA-NEPAD. In anticipation of the Spanish
presidency of the Council of the European Union
for the second half of this year, we are working on
organizing a high-level European-African meeting on
job-creating investments. The Spanish presidency will
also coincide with the Sustainable Development Goals
Summit and the ministerial-level Summit of the Future.
In that regard, for our part, we will work to ensure a
comprehensive approach to peace and security that can
result in stability and sustainable development on the
African continent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): First of all, allow
me to extend my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate, and
to all the briefers for their updates. Indonesia applauds
Africa’s continued commitment to silencing the guns
despite the ever-growing challenges. In the light of our
aspirations for a New Agenda for Peace, business as
usual is not an option. We need a comprehensive and
inclusive approach to realizing peace and stability
in Africa. On that note, my delegation would like to
underline three points.
First, at the national level we need to ensure that
local communities, including women and young people,
are empowered in the areas of peace and development.
That constitutes a bottom-up approach throughout the
peace continuum. People’s ownership at the grassroots level and the national ownership of the process
must both be nurtured. The United Nations, through
its organs, including the Security Council, could
28/30

30/03/2023

widen its support to a people-centred mechanism, for
instance, through peacekeeping efforts in numerous
missions aimed at promoting positive community
engagement programmes.
Secondly, at the regional level we need to enhance
partnerships. Indonesia believes that the region knows
best about prevention, responding to security challenges
and making efforts to sustain peace. In that regard, the
African Union and other subregional organizations
in Africa should play a prominent role in synergizing
security initiatives, such as the Silencing the Guns
initiative, through development projects that involve
numerous actors. Enhanced partnership between the
United Nations and the relevant regional entities in
Africa is imperative to build strategic dialogue and
create platforms to enable collaboration. Moreover,
international partnerships in supporting capacitybuilding and the sharing of best practices to maintain
good governance should also be bolstered, including
through South-South and triangular cooperation.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen the integrated
strategy of peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should strengthen its role in
bridging security and development contexts in postconflict settings. Furthermore, the PBC should make
the most of its convening role in order to facilitate
synergy and coherence in peacebuilding. That should
be done through its active engagement with all relevant
United Nations entities and implementing actors on the
ground, in particular to support institution-building
and reconstruction in affected areas, as well as to
support transparency in order to prevent the relapse of
conflicts. The effective accomplishment of that task
will depend on accountable, sustainable and predictable
resources. Indonesia believes that broadening the
sources of funding, such as by fostering partnerships
with international financial institutions and the private
sector, will be key.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize our view that
without peace there can be no development, and without
development there can be no peace. Indonesia reiterates
its steadfast support to Africa’s efforts in advancing a
stable and prosperous region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we commend Mozambique for organizing
today’s open debate, which has allowed us to gain a
23-09061

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

deeper understanding of how socioeconomic factors
contribute to promoting social cohesion, peace and
stability. In Africa as in other regions of the world,
the implementation of structural change in individual
countries is the key to maintaining a virtuous circle
of development and peace. In that regard, it is worth
noting that the African economy has seen significant
growth in recent years. That economic growth should be
sustained, including as a way to generate employment
and opportunities, which will make it possible to
deepen the process aimed at addressing the structural
causes of conflicts.
In recent times, there has been a global trend of
national conflicts rapidly becoming regional in nature.
To ensure peace and generate growth, it is necessary to
stabilize the areas of conflict and prevent those sources
of instability from spreading to other areas. Economic
difficulties and inequalities are major risk factors that
can lead to conflict, exacerbate the competition for
resources and limit States’ ability to resolve internal
tensions peacefully. We note that the Silencing the Guns
initiative is a key effort aimed at ending conflicts on
the African continent that could play an important role
in reducing such conflicts by limiting the availability
of illicit weapons.
Over the past two decades, the African Union (AU)
and its regional mechanisms have demonstrated their
ability to address conflict and crisis situations on the
continent. In that regard, we highlight the support and
collaboration of the United Nations-African Union
partnership, which generates synergies and coordinates
different initiatives in order to reduce conflicts and
achieve lasting and sustainable peace. A positive
example of that is the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, which was signed on 19 April 2017.
That agreement cemented the relationship between the
two organizations and their shared quest for peace and
security in Africa.
On another note, terrorism poses obstacles to the
development of countries, and it is therefore essential
that the complexities of that phenomenon be addressed
jointly in a comprehensive multilateral effort among the
relevant United Nations and AU entities and units, based
on coordination and cooperation, in order to effectively
prevent and combat that scourge. Coordinated action
is required among the States of the region, subregional
organizations and the United Nations in order to address
the activities of terrorist groups and at the same time to

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

confront the illicit trafficking of drugs and small arms
and light weapons.
African issues are a constant focus of the Security
Council. With the Council’s assistance, much progress
has been made by African States, the African Union and
other subregional organizations in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
its member States is vital to realizing the collective
efforts for peace and security on the continent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabeba (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the convening of today’s open debate on the
impact of development policies on the implementation
of the silencing the guns agenda pertaining to peace and
security in Africa. This debate is apt, as the year 2023
marks the tenth anniversary of the Silencing the Guns
initiative of the African Union (AU). We also appreciate
the informative briefings delivered this morning.
Notwithstanding the effects of the coronavirus
disease and other multidimensional challenges, the
African continent has made meaningful progress
in advancing socioeconomic development since the
adoption of the African Union’s Agenda 2063, including
the Silencing the Guns initiative. Progress has been
made at the national and regional levels through projects
led by the African Union Development Agency and the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, which are
mandated to fast-track the realization of Agenda 2063.
Progress has also been made through the strengthening
of the African governance architecture to complement
the African peace and security architecture.
The Silencing the Guns initiative is a manifestation
of African people’s desire to end the scourge of violent
conflict and suffering on the continent in pursuit of
shared prosperity and socioeconomic development.
That laudable initiative is therefore one of the key
flagship projects of Agenda 2063, which is the blueprint
for Africa’s socioeconomic development. We recognize,
however, that the quest for achieving prosperity and
socioeconomic development is contingent on ending
violent conflict, fragility and instability on the
African continent, because peace and development
are intertwined. Against that backdrop, the AU
and the respective regional economic communities
have adopted several frameworks to aid countries in
achieving their respective development objectives by

23-0906129/30

S/PV.9299 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

focusing primarily on addressing the root causes and
drivers of insecurity, while improving governance,
building requisite skills and institutional capacity. The
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the AU’s
Agenda 2063 remain the overarching frameworks
driving development imperatives on the continent.
However, there are impediments to silencing
the guns permanently as evidenced by continuance,
relapses, and recurrence of conflicts in some parts of
the continent. These calls for strategic and targeted
investment to conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace through strengthened post-conflict
reconstruction and development interventions. Building
resilience in institutions responsible for the promotion
of inclusive economic growth and development is vital.
It is also important to recognize that the
implementation of development policies requires longterm financing. Therefore, multilateral development
banks, development finance institutions and the private
sector all have a critical role in assisting financing
and implementing development aspirations of African
countries with a view to accelerate the attainment of
both Agenda 2063 and the SDG’s.
Forging partnerships among important partners
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace is pivotal for
coordination of efforts. We encourage United Nations
entities, especially the United Nations Development
Programme, to cooperate closely with affected
African countries, the African Union and subregional
organizations in providing necessary assistance
on development policies aimed at extricating these
countries from fragility and violent conflicts.

30/30

30/03/2023

While we reflect on the impact of development
policies on ending conflicts and suffering in Africa, we
also need to recognize the effects of external factors that
impact on development policies. Unilateral sanctions
and other economic coercive measures, as well as illicit
financial flows, have been proven as impediments to
the socioeconomic development of countries on the
continent. Those barriers must be addressed effectively
if the African continent is to achieve its full development
potential, peace, and stability.
We also believe that it is prudent to continue
conversations aimed at assessing the implementation
of activities associated with the Silencing of the Guns
initiative. In addition to ensuring the implementation of
resolution 2457 (2019), the Master Roadmap on Practical
Steps to Silencing the Guns in Africa and its monitoring
mechanism are useful benchmarks for assessing the
progress made on the impact of development policies
on the initiative.
In conclusion, South Africa remains resolute in
actively advancing Africa’s aspiration of attaining
lasting peace, security and prosperity, and we support
the continued focus of the Security Council on peace
and security on the continent.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Mozambique would like to thank all delegations
that honoured us with their participation in this open
debate at different levels.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

23-09061
