THIR

T Y-SEC0

ND

Y h’:‘A R

th
MEETING:

iVEn/

2 SEPTEMBER

1’977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agencla/2029)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. , .. . ..

Page
1

Adoption

of the age&a

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , ,. . ..

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United
Natiom
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
..,..........,,....,.,.........,,...,........

I

. . , , . . .

.. . .

S/W.2029

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplemerz ts of the Official K~cords of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohrtiorrs ard Decisbrrs of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2029TH
Held in New York

on Friday,

MEETING
2 September

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

4. In accordance with a dispatch from Nicosia, a Turkish
Cypriot spokesman has said:

Preser7t: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

“As we have said repeatedly, Varosha is an integral part
of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus and is therefore
a purely internal matter. Although no families will be
moving in today, they will do so as the necessary repair
work is completed on the buildings they are to occupy.”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2029)
I.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2387)
The meeting was called to order at 11. 1.5a.m.

5. I think that the implications of the statement are
evident as to the intention of Turkey to proceed with the
colonization of the Constantia area, and as 1 said in my
statement (2026th meeting], this is but the first step
towards the step-by-step settlement of the whole new city
of Famagusta.
6. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I should first
like to say how pleased I am to have the opportunity to
speak under your presidency. I will do my best, starting this
morning, by speaking very briefly, to make your presidency
a success. 1 should also like to acknowledge our satisfaction
and pleasure at having had the opportunity to serve under
the distinguished representative of France Iast month.

P

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situatian in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2026th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to participate, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s discussion under the terms of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christophides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Papa&as
(Greece) rind
Mr. Tiirkmerz
(Turkey) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Affairs of Cyprus.

I call on the Minister for Foreign

3. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): I consider it my duty
to report to the Council all developments regarding
Famagusta, it being the most immediate issue with which
the Council is dealing.

7. Scarcely 10 weeks ago, the Council adopted resolution
410 (1977) and, in doing so, reaffirmed its directive to the
parties -regarding the framework for achieving a just and
equitable solution to the problem of Cyprus. It also urged,
and not for the first time, the parties concerned to act with
the utmost restraint by refraining from any unilateral or
other action likely to affect adversely the prospects of
negotiations for a just and peaceful solution and to
continue and accelerate determined co-operative efforts to
achieve the objectives of the Council.
8. The events of the past two months and the fact that the
Council is once again faced with the Cyprus issue are proof,
if proof were needed, of the wisdom of the cautionary
advice contained in our resolution of last June.
9. In the statements of Mr. Christophides, the Foreign
Minister of Cyprus, and Mr. Celik, we have heard widely
differing interpretations of recent developments at Famagusta. But without prejudice to the views of either side, it is
obvious that what has happened is an example of the way
in which any unilateral action, no matter how limited it
may be or how justified in the eyes of one party or another,
can stimulate apprehensions that impede the resumption of
the intcrcommunal talks, which, we are all agreed, constitute the only possible route to a peaceful settlement.
10. We believe that, in the light of the situation that now
exists, this debate has been useful. We have heard the

Li

-

17. In keepingwith our position, we wish to sponsorthe
rapprochementof the two communitiesof the island, to
appeal for the avoidance of unilateral acts and the
continuation of efforts towards a peaceful solution based
on respect for the fundamental and legitimate rights of
both communities.

assurances given that the recent Turkish Cypriot actions in
New Famagusta do not constitute any kind of colonization
or resettlement. In our view, this undertaking is important
because there can be no question that any such development would pose a grave threat to the prospects for peace
in Cyprus. It would certainly be a matter of very serious
concern to the Council.

18. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama)(interpretation jkom Spanish):
The delegationof Panamawishesto expressits solidarity
with the tribute of respectand admiration which hasbeen
paid in the Council to Archbishop Makarios, Presidentof
Cyprus,who recently passedaway. Archbishop Makarios,in
my country and throughout Latin America, has a well.
deservedreputation, not only asthe father of the nation of
Cyprus, but also as one of the genuine founders of the
non-alignedmovement, which hasbecomeso important in
our times. Our sympathy goes to the Government and
peopleof Cyprus.

11. We believe that this debate is useful ,iso because it
gives us an opportunity
to express our dismay at the
statements made by both sides about the conditions under
which they will, or will not, resume the intercommunal
negotiations. In our view, the Council should at this time
reiterate its cautionary words about the danger of unilateral
actions and, at the same time, press for the urgent
resumption of these intercommunal talks, at which both
sides should be encouraged to make practical proposals for
moving forward in accordance with the guidelines agreed
on at the high-level meeting of last February. It would be
our hope that, by the time the question of Cyprus comes
before the Council again in December, there will be
substantial progress to report.

19. Sir, I wishnow to voice my delegation’ssatisfactionat
seeingyou presidingover the Security Council’swork. You
represent one of the States whoseindustry, exemplary
disciplineand attachment to spiritualvalueshavegainedthe
respectand admiration of the international community. As
representativeof your country in the Council, you embody
thosevaluesand my delegation,aswell asmy Government,
which maintainsthe closestandmost cordial relationswith
yours, wish you every successin the dischargeof your
delicatetasks;at the sametime, we offer you our sincerest
and closestco-operation,

12. Miss LOPEZ
(Venezuela)
(interpretrrtion
from
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on
starting your presidency for the month of September, in
the certainty that you will conduct our debates most
skilfully. Through you, I wish to express our appreciation
to the representatives of China and France for the
distinction with which they discharged the functions of the
presidency of the Council during the months of July and
August.
13. The reasons for convening thi$ meeting and the
statementsthat we have heard by the parties concernedin
the question of Cyprus have given us further cause for
concern over the risk of a further deterioration of the
situation in the island. Nevertheless, this debate has
buttressedour conviction that the measuresand recommendations contained in previous United N&ions resolutions
continue to be the basicguidelinesfor solvingthe problem.

20. It is our pleasant duty to convey to Ambassador
Leprette our gratitude for the highly professionalmannerin
which he conducted the work of the Council during the
month of August. His concern over maintaining constanI
consultationswith Council members,and his adherenceto
the fundamental principles of his country’s policy, for
which we have so much respect,were manifcstcd her8 by
hard work and by the implementationof principleswhich
we all hold dear.

21. The Security Council is faced with a situation which,
accordingto statementsmadehereby the representativeof
14. The factors conducive to a solution of the problem Cyprus, representsa new unilateral action on the part of
that is once again before us have been defined and the Government of Turkey which had been in preparation
reiterated in various General Assembly and Security Coun- for some time and which had been planned for several
cil resolutions.Any solution must rest on the maintenance weeks,asthe representativeof Cyprushad occasionto state
of the independence,sovereignty and territorial integrity of
in his letter to the Secretary-Generalof 22 July last
Cyprus. Peaceand security for the Cypriot population must [S/12371/. This new, unfortunate phasein the situation
be the basicaim of any solution.
was dramatically describedin the letter of 26 August from
the representativeof Cyprusto the Presidentof the Council
15,. Within that basic framework, efforts have been made [S/12387/.
through laboured negotiations to reach an understanding
between the interested parties. In this connexion, the role
22. The complaint of Cyprus contains the following
played by the Secretary-Generaland his Special Represen- allegations. First, it accusesTurkey of committing intertative hasbeenextremely valuable.
national crimesagainst the people of Cyprus in expelling
the indigenousCypriot inhabitants and in systematically
16. Any changeor departure from the courseset out in the
installing in their homes a foreign population massively
relevant provisions of the General Assembly and the
transported from Turkey. Secondly, it mentions the impoSecurity Council would seriously delay the possibilitiesfor
sition of new, illegal measuresby the Government of
understanding. Any act that could objectively be interTurkey, in flagrant violation of General Assembly and
preted asbeing unilateral clearly constitutes an obstacleto
Security Council resolutions,in an attempt to colonize the
progresstowards an agreement,and consequently it is our
new area of Famagusta.Thirdly, it denouncesthe defacto
duty to criticize it severely.
occupation by the Turkish army of the Constantia Motel
2

and adjacent buildings. Fourthly, it cites statements by the
Turkish authorities to the effect that, beginning on 1 September, there would be a systematic process of colonisation
of the new city of Famagusta.

J. F. Kennedy Avenue, the main thoroughfare of the new
city of Famagusta, has been renamed by occupation forces
Sanjar Pasha Kadesi Avenue, which, as 1 understand it, is
the name of the general who commanded the Turkish army
forces that invaded the island in 1974. That seemingly
simple act has many humiliating, depressing and bloody
implications because, knowing the feelings of the people,
we also know their reactions. These are unnecessary
provocations which in no way help to create the climate of
peace and understanding which the Security Council wishes
to see between the parties to the conflict in the island.

23. There is no doubt that the facts reported by the
representative of Cyprus deserve the most serious considcration. In this regard, we owe a debt of thanks to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus and to the reprcsentative of the Soviet Union, who, at yesterday’s meeting
/2028th meeting], asked the Secretary-General to supply
information concerning the events which have been
reported to the Council. The information supplied by the
Secretary-General which, as he himself stated, is based on
the reports of his Special Representative in Cyprus,
Ambassador PBrez de CuelIar, and of the UNFTCYP
Commander, General James J. Quinn, brought out the
following facts. First,

26, SixthIy, the Secretary-General

“In various statements, Mr. Denktq and other Turkish
Cypriot spokesmen have emphasized the point that
Varosha was an integral part of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus, whose status was a Turkish Cypriot
internal affair.” /Ibid., pam. 29./

“Varosha, the new quarter of Famagusta south of the
Turkish Cypriot-inhabited walled city, was evacuated by
its Greek Cypriot inhabitants and occupied by Turkish
troops during the second military operation, in August
1974.” [Ibid,, para. 25. J

27. If‘ Council members examine the texts of Council
resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975) and resolutions of
the General Assembly, adopted almost unanimously, they
will note that insistence on emphasizing the mention fo the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus violates those resolutions, which clearly establish that there is no recognition of
any legal validity for the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus. Therefore such explanations are not only at
variance with the resolutions but also indicate a deliberate
intention to oppose the will of the Council and the General
Assembly.

Secondly, since then, the Greek Cypriots and other
residents have not been allowed to return to Varosha, and
Turkish Cypriots have also been prevented from settling
there. Thirdly,
“On 20 July 1977, Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister
of Turkey, stated that his Government had taken steps to
open Varosha for civilian settlement.” /Ibid., paru. 26.1

Fourthly, in accordance with announcements
Turkish and Turkish-Cypriot forces that

28. Furthermore, from the information supplied by the
Secretary-General it may be seen-and this is the seventh
point of my summary---that there is a direct relationship
between the situation at Varosha and the conduct of the
intcrcommunal
talks; that impact on the talks, as the
Secretary-General
said, was moreover emphasized by
Mr. Papadopoulos, the Greek Cypriot interlocutor who, on
23 August, stated that if the colonisation of Famagusta was
carried out it would be an expansion of the Turkish
invasion and that, as a result, the purpose of the intercommunal talks would be defeated.

made by

“the Constantia Hotel, situated on a promontory at the
north-east end of Varosha overlooking Famagusta Harbour, would be open as a Turkish Cypriot hotel and
catering training centre and that certain nearby buildings,
including a loo-flat apartment building, would be taken
over by Turkish Cypriots”[ibid.,
[tara. 27/.

29. In essence this debate therefore revolves around an
attempt at colonization, which is obviously not limited to
that region of the world. When the question of Cyprus was
discussed and the mandate of UNFICYP extended, I had
occasion to refer to some background events. However, it is
not necessary to re-examine here all the details of the
question. What is essential is that the Security Council and
the General Assembly, and all the States which took part in
the process of establishing the Republic of Cyprus, should
recognize that the Republic of Cyprus deserves respect fol
its independence, its sovereignty and its territorial integrity.
That is what I have to say about the crcalion of the State of
Cyprus.

24. This last fact deserves brief comment. There is no
doubt that the Constantin Hotel, as well as the apartment
buildings, which are located in a Greek-Cypriot
area, arc
privately-owned property from which the legitimate owners
have been evicted. Not only have they been dispossessed,
which is a violation of human rights, but their right of
ownership of those buildings has been completely violated.
This is a fact which should be taken into account, because
it indicates the gravity of the situation.
25. Fifthly, according to information
Secretary-General:

continues:

supplied by the

“In mid-August, the Turkish Cypriot authorities bcgal;
changing Greek street names to Turkish -ames in the
Constantia Hotel area and, in one instance, outside it.”
[Ibid., para. 28. /

30. In connexion with the development of its foreign
policy, the General Assembly and the Security Council have
recognized the non-alignment of the Republic ol” Cyprus.
Thus any notion that the Republic of Cyprus could be
partitioned, or that it could be the ob,ject of crlosis 01
double cnosis, should be discarded. According to the will of

Also noteworthy, as was mentioned here by the representative of Cyprus, is the ominous fact-to say the least-that
3

the United Nations and all treaties, international agreements and resolutions relating to its establishment, Cyprus
is an independent, sovereign, non-aligned Republic with a
right to territorial integrity and unity.
31. We listened with great attention when the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot community mentioned the importance of the talks in the search
for a Peaceful solution to the problem. But this cannot be a
mere expression of intent. It must be concrete. There must
be a serious intention to save the situation at a time when
there has been a clear violation of LJnited Nations resolutions and international law.
37. A few moments ago 1 said-and this is the final part of
my statement-that
the type of colonization formula now
seen in the new city of Famagusta is not limited to that
part of the world, and that the Security Council, dealing
with problems of extreme seriousness in other areas of the
world, has laid down guidelines and established norms and
priiiciples which must be complied with. This applied, for
example, in the case of the bantustanization of South
Africa. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have seriously condemned that practice, which entails
population changes and relocation and even the arbitrary
expropriation of property,
33. In the case of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories,
there is a trend in international bodies, for
diplomatic
reasons apparently, not to refer to those
problems or to identify them. But there is no reason why
they should not be identified if they are before the Council.
In the case of the occupied Arab territories, the Council has
opposed the establishment of setilements on the West Bank
of the Jordan. It has done so categorically and definitively.
34. lu the case of Cyprus, the Security Council and the
General Assembly have stated that they are opposed to any
population change, to that skilful and arbjtrary means of
colonization, seeking to alter the image or structure of the
population and the very ownership of property in Cyprus,
for which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus
should
be responsible, not the authorities of the invading
army.
35. The Secretary-General,
to whom we express our
respect, has made consistent statements on the three cases.
When this problem was raised by Mr. Ecevit before his
Caretaker
Covcrnment
ended, on 22 July the SecretaryGeneral had the following statement published through
official Llnited Nations channels:
“The Secretary-General is concerned at the statement
made by Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister, concerning
I’roposcd steps in relation to Varosha. such
StepS,
if
jmplcniented, would certainly create a serious SitUatiOn
and would have a negative effect on the future of the
negotiating process.”
TIIC Council hopes that the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral will be successful. The Secretary-General has very
clearly pointed out that this type of unilateral action has a
negative impact on the possibility of a successful COllChlSiOn
of the negotiations.

36. However, i repeat that this is not an isolated position
on the part of the Secretary-General but a very consistent
one. Let us look at the position he has taken on the
occupied Arab territories. Press release No. 407 1, dated 27
July 1977, of the Office of Public Information published
the following statement made by a United Nations spokesman:
“The Secretary-General considers it most unfortunate
that the Israeli Government has decided to leg&e three
settlements in the occupied West Bank of the Jordan.
This cannot but affect the current efforts to resume the
negotiating process in the Middle East. In this connexion,
the statement by the President of the Security Council on
behalf of the Council on 11 November 1976 is recalled
[1969th

meeting].

”

Since the presidency of the Council on 11 November 1976
washeld by Panama,1 must point out that that statement
was not a statement by the delegationof Panamabut a
statement by the Council, adoptedby consensus,with the
consent
of all its members.That statement said that the
establishmentof those settlementsnot only affected the
negotiating processbut totally lackedlegalvalidity.
37. If that occurswith regardto bantustanizationand also
with regard to the question of the occupied Arab territories, how could there be an exception in the caseof
Cyprus? That would not be possible. Recently, the
Secretary-General,at the LagosConference’-and I wishto
emphasizethe consistency of his statements--madea more
vigorous statement regarding the situation in South Africa.
38. The situation is serious and we should welcome the
efforts of Council membersto maintain an atmosphereof
moderation and understanding.But this atmosphereis not
something that Council memberscan bring about through
mere words. We need the co-operation of the parties.
Basically, we need the co-operationof the country that has
its armedforces in Cyprus.
39. If bantustanization is to be deploredin Africa, if the
settlementsin occupied Arab territories are to be deplored
in the Middle East, then colonization is alsoto be deplored
in Cyprus. I say this with all due respect;there are ethical,
religiousand politicai valueswhich, in a Moslemmosque,in
a Christian church or in a Jewishsynagoguehave andmust
have the samesignificance.This mustbe soif mankind is to
hope for a climate of peace, respect and tranquillity
ensuringfor man on this planet a goodand securefuture in
keepingwith the idealsof the UnitedNations.
40. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Panamafor his reference to the excellentrelationsbetween
our two countries and for the kind wordsaddressed
to me.
I shall treasure the memory of my official visit to his
beautiful country for the negotiationsin PanamaCity.
The meeting

tvse at Il.55

a.m.

1 See Report
of the World Conference
for Action
against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. K.77.XIV.3), annex III.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

I.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
