A/64/PV.21

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

21

st plenary meeting
Monday, 19 October 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 167
Observer status for the International Olympic
Committee in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/458)
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Sixth Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendation
of the Sixth Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee.
The Assembly will now proceed to take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Sixth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/3).

The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 167?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 45
Sport for peace and development: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal
Draft resolutions A/64/L.2 and A/64/L.3
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.2.
Mr. Furlong (Canada): As President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Vancouver Organizing
Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games, I have the honour of introducing to the
General Assembly today the draft resolution entitled

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-56441 (E)

*0956441*

A/64/PV.21

“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal” (A/64/L.2). With just 116 days
left before the official opening of the XXI Olympic
Winter Games and 144 days to the opening of the X
Paralympic Games in Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada, I am pleased to be here today to highlight the
principles and ideals that underpin the draft resolution.
When Vancouver won the bid to host the XXI
Olympic Winter Games, our Organizing Committee,
together with the Government of Canada and our
partners, set a vision of success far beyond the legacies
of facilities, structures and economics. For these
Games to have true and lasting meaning for all lives
that would be touched by them, we needed to ensure a
human legacy, one that is about harnessing the power
of sport to transform the spirit of a nation, if not an
entire world community.
From the beginning, our vision for the Games has
been a shared vision, supported by an entire nation: a
vision grounded in our collective regard for sport and
support for the values of Olympism — mutual
understanding, friendship, solidarity and fair play; a
vision that has guided our decisions, our actions and
our partnerships; a vision that has shaped our hopes
and dreams for success.
These Games are not just about 27 days of sport,
but also about a privileged opportunity to inspire a
generation. And so we have endeavoured to capture
that vision, in collaboration with all nations
represented here, in the draft resolution put before the
Assembly. The resolution captures key elements from
past Olympic Truce resolutions: recognizing the
growing role that sport is playing as a tool within
United Nations agencies and Member States to support
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals; highlighting the important work of the United
Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace;
and encouraging the efforts of international sport
organizations and national Olympic and Paralympic
Committees to mobilize sport to foster social
development and strengthen a culture of peace.
The draft resolution also welcomes the joint
endeavours of the International Olympic Committee,
the International Paralympic Committee and the United
Nations system in such fields as human development,
poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health
promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, youth

2

education, equality, peacebuilding and sustainable
development.
In its central focus, this draft resolution finds its
inspiration in the ancient Greek tradition of granting a
truce during the Olympic Games, which ensured safe
passage of athletes to and from the Games. In addition
to appealing for the observation of the Olympic Truce
during the upcoming Olympic and Paralympic Winter
Games in Vancouver, the resolution also calls on
United Nations Member States to cooperate with the
International Olympic Committee and the International
Paralympic Committee in their efforts to use sport as a
tool to promote peace, dialogue and reconciliation in
areas of conflict during and beyond the Olympic
Games period.
Canada has been honoured by the helpful
cooperation among other United Nations Member
States and by their many contributions and ideas
towards formulating this year’s resolution. In addition,
we are very grateful for the assistance from the
International Olympic and Paralympic Committees and
the Secretary-General’s Special Advisor on Sport for
Development and Peace and for their support in
developing new elements in the text, and for the
valuable counsel provided by the Group of Friends on
Sport for Development and Peace.
The draft resolution is consistent with the
longstanding recognition of sport as a vital tool for
social development. Canada recognizes the power of
sport to build sustainable communities, to advocate for
equality, to foster social inclusion among young people
and to contribute to a global culture of peace. To this
end, Canada is actively supporting a number of
effective sport-for-development initiatives in the
Commonwealth, la Francophonie, the Middle East and
South America.
The 2010 Winter Olympic Games marks the first
time Canada has been responsible for leading Olympic
Truce efforts since the Truce was revitalized in 1992.
However, the very nature of this ancient and timehonoured tradition calls for the widest amount of
cooperation at the global level if the ultimate
objectives of the draft resolution are to be achieved.
Once again, the tremendous level of support for and
sponsorship of the draft resolution is a testament to the
universal support for the principles affirmed in the text.
The Organizing Committee aims to pursue the
Olympic Truce goals of protecting the interests of

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

athletes and contributing to peaceful and diplomatic
solutions to conflict around the world through
meaningful engagement with Canadians and the
international community and through key initiatives
that leave lasting legacies locally, nationally and
internationally.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, the host
province of British Columbia, the host city of
Vancouver, the Vancouver Organizing Committee and
all our partners, I thank the Assembly for its attention
and hope that this draft resolution will be adopted with
the Assembly’s unanimous support.

The spirit of the Olympic and Paralympic Games
serves as a call to action for young people to embrace,
embody and express the Olympic values of fair play,
friendship and respect. At home, young Canadians
across the country are taking up this call through an
initiative with the theme “Make your Peace”. Based on
the idea that lasting peace starts at the local level, the
initiative encourages individuals to create everyday
peace at home, school, work and in the community. By
empowering our young people in everyday acts of
peace, we are fostering a generation of conscientious
global citizens and creating the building blocks for
just, inclusive and harmonious societies of tomorrow.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.3.

The recognition of the rights of persons with
disabilities is evident in the support of the Paralympic
Movement in this draft Olympic Truce resolution, an
important initiative that Canada sought to include,
building on previous versions of the resolution. The
application of the Olympic Truce to the Paralympic
Games and the related commitments of the
International Paralympic Committee, alongside those
of the International Olympic Committee, is for Canada
an important demonstration of the power of sport to
address social inclusion and encourage active
participation of persons with disabilities on an
equitable basis with others in cultural life, recreation,
leisure and sport.
The draft Olympic Truce resolution also
highlights Canada’s commitment to full participation
of our country’s Aboriginal peoples. These Games
mark a historic level of participation by Canada’s
Aboriginal community in a national event — achieved
through a shared desire from all partners to staging
Games that fully reflect Canada’s rich and diverse
society.
The very title of this draft resolution — “Building
a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” — speaks to the mandate we have set
for ourselves: to leave the world in better shape as a
result of our collective international efforts at the 2010
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games in Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

09-56441

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I have the honour to
introduce on behalf of my delegation and other
sponsors draft resolution A/64/L.3, entitled, “2010
International Federation of Association Football World
Cup event”, which will be held in South Africa.
I would like to announce that since the tabling of
the draft resolution the following countries have
become sponsors: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Congo, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Iceland, India, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liberia, Madagascar, Maldives, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Ukraine and the United States of America.
In his statement during the general debate of the
Assembly’s sixty-fourth session (see A/64/PV.4), His
Excellency Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of
South Africa, highlighted the importance South Africa
and Africa attach to hosting the 2010 International
Federation of Association Football (FIFA) World Cup
in the middle of next year. The historic decision by
FIFA to award the hosting of the 2010 World Cup to
South Africa marked the first time that this major
sporting event will take place on the African continent.
The United Nations always stood with the people
of South Africa during the dark days of apartheid and
supported the liberation and self-determination of our
people. That crucial support culminated in the historic

3

A/64/PV.21

democratic elections of April 1994. Today, we come to
the Assembly as free people and as a free nation. More
than ever before, our democratic Government is
committed to peace and development in South Africa,
Africa and the world at large.
The draft resolution before us today presents the
Assembly with another opportunity to provide
necessary political support to South Africa and Africa
for the hosting of a successful 2010 FIFA World Cup.
The objective of the draft resolution resonates with the
three pillars of the United Nations, namely peace,
development and human rights.
There is global recognition of the importance,
role and contribution that a sport like soccer can make
in various domains. Given its universal popularity,
soccer plays a positive role in bringing people together
and can be mainstreamed into the strategic agenda of
countries.
The FIFA World Cup is one of the biggest
sporting festivals of our age. It provides a global stage
on which nations and peoples of the world come
together to reaffirm our common humanity. It creates
the opportunity, so important in our troubled universe,
for all of us to experience the reality that we belong to
one human family, regardless of race, colour, gender,
age, political and religious belief and country or
continent of origin.
South Africa is committed to ensuring that
hosting this event contributes to deepening social
cohesion, national reconciliation, peace and prosperity
in Africa and beyond. South Africa is also committed
to contributing to the ideals of freedom, liberty and
hope for a better world.
We believe that sport can effectively contribute to
the realization of social and economic development,
including the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the promotion of dialogue
among civilizations. For that reason, we commend the
continued work of the United Nations New York Office
of Sport for Development and Peace and the United
Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace, in
Geneva. Both offices have effectively contributed to
advancing advocacy work on sports within the United
Nations system and beyond.
Two hundred and thirty-four days away from the
2010 FIFA World Cup, we would like to assure the
Assembly that South Africa is ready to deliver a world-

4

class soccer event that will ensure a lasting legacy for
the people of Africa. The African Legacy Programme
for the 2010 World Cup is aimed at supporting the
realization of African Renaissance objectives,
including programmes of the African Union such as the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development; ensuring
maximum and effective African participation at the
2010 event; supporting efforts aimed at strengthening
and promoting the development and advancement of
African football; and improving Africa’s global image.
Similarly, we undertake to ensure that our continent
shares a common sense of hope and that we will
sustain the pride of FIFA and of all footballers and
lovers of football throughout the world in the human
festival that is the soccer World Cup.
We thank all Member States for their constructive
inputs and suggestions during the consultations on the
draft text. On behalf of the South African delegation
and other sponsors, we hope that the draft resolution
will enjoy the unanimous support of the General
Assembly.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
reaffirm South Africa’s readiness and commitment to
hosting the peoples of the world next year, who will
enjoy unique African hospitality and vibrancy. Working
together, we can do more to ensure that the 2010 FIFA
World Cup in South Africa becomes one of the most
memorable sporting events. We will see everyone in
South Africa and Africa from 11 June to 11 July 2010
and at all other times.
Mrs. Kaur (India): I am honoured and privileged
to participate in today’s discussion on “Sport for peace
and development: building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
As I am speaking for the first time at the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly, please allow
me at the outset, Sir, to add my voice to those of
preceding speakers in congratulating you on your
election to the presidency of the General Assembly.
By its very nature, sport is about inclusion and
participation. It brings individuals and communities
together and bridges ethnic and cultural divides. It
transcends social-cultural barriers and geographical
borders and promotes peace and harmony. It also
provides for understanding of the importance of
discipline and leadership.

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

Sport is an inalienable part of the educational
process and an essential component of a child’s
development. It also fosters children’s physical and
emotional health and the building of valuable social
connections. The fundamental elements of sport,
including the obvious benefits of physical and mental
well-being, make it a most useful tool for supporting
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals.
Moreover, sporting activities have a unique
convening power to spur social communication and
advocacy. They are most effective tools for social
mobilization, supporting such activities as HIV/AIDS
education
and
immunization
campaigns.
In
re-channelling destructive impulses and harmful
actions, such as drug abuse and involvement in crime,
the efficacy of sport cannot be overemphasized.
Mastery in sports was considered as important as
knowledge of scriptures in ancient India. The education
system in modern India is trying to continue and build
upon that heritage and respect for sport and physical
education. The efforts of the Government of India have
been aimed at broad-basing sports and providing
modern sports infrastructure. A national sports policy
was adopted by India in 2001.
At the national level, the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports in the Government of India has
responsibility for sports. The Sports Authority of India
is its principal arm for nurturing talent and providing
infrastructure, equipment, coaching and other facilities.
Here, if I may add a personal touch, I am indeed proud
that India’s National Institute of Sports is located in my
constituency, Patiala. My family has been and is
intimately connected with the Olympic movement. In
addition, the Government has encouraged the national
sports federations to function more efficiently and is
encouraging the active involvement of business and
industry in the promotion of sports.
We are proud that New Delhi will be hosting the
next Commonwealth Games from 3 to 14 October
2010. The Games are a unique, world-class, multi-sport
event held once every four years among the member
countries and territories of the Commonwealth. The
three core values of the Commonwealth Games
movement — humanity, equality and destiny — were
adopted by the movement in 2001. Those values
inspire and unite millions of people and symbolize the
broad mandate for holding the games within the

09-56441

Commonwealth. India organized the Commonwealth
Youth Games, a sub-event of the Commonwealth
Games, in Pune in October 2008.
Pierre de Coubertin, founder of the modern
Olympic Games, said, “Sport must be the heritage of
all men and of all social classes”. India is steadfast in
its commitment to the Olympic Charter and, as in
previous years, is co-sponsoring in the General
Assembly the draft resolution entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” (A/64/L.2).
We are also very pleased that the 2016 Olympics
have been awarded to Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, a fellow
developing country, and that the 2010 World Cup of the
Fédération Internationale de Football Association
(FIFA) will be hosted by South Africa — a first for a
country on the African continent. We are also
co-sponsoring the draft resolution on the 2010 FIFA
World Cup in South Africa (A/64/L.3). In addition, we
wish Canada every success in organizing the XXI
Winter Olympic Games and the X Paralympic Winter
Games, and we commend Singapore’s initiative to
organize the Youth Olympic Games. We have no doubt
that the hosting of major global sporting events in
developing countries will contribute greatly to the
advancement of sports in developing countries and
spur development activities.
Sport is a reflection of society. The degeneration
of values in society, as reflected in violence,
corruption, hooliganism, deception and drug abuse, is
also making inroads into the area of sport. Concerted
vigilance and resolute action are needed to prevent the
intrusion of those evils and to protect the noble ideals
and spirit behind the Olympic Games and other sports.
It must be our endeavour to promote sports and a
culture of sports in our countries. That can only
contribute to promoting development, peace,
friendship, cooperation and understanding among
peoples.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now hear an address by His Serene Highness
Prince Albert II of Monaco.
His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco
was escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to
the United Nations His Serene Highness Prince Albert

5

A/64/PV.21

II of Monaco and to invite him to address the
Assembly.
Prince Albert II (spoke in French): One month
ago, from this very rostrum, an appeal was launched
for a new type of multilateralism — one imbued with
the values of cooperation, mutual comprehension,
solidarity and tolerance; one that would be inclusive,
participatory, transparent, effective and constructive;
one that would bring States closer so that they could,
together, fashion their common future while respecting
their differences.
Today, confronted with crises that no one can
resolve alone, we are obligated, perhaps urgently, to act
to improve the quality of life of millions of men,
women and children, whose suffering is tarnishing the
successes of our age, and to reduce the adverse
consequences of the climate change and environmental
degradation that threaten the very existence of future
generations.
By inviting the International Olympic Committee
(IOC) to participate in these deliberations, the General
Assembly, mindful of preserving human dignity, is
recognizing the symbol of a movement that defends an
ideal of human progress and promotes a society of
peace.
The five interlocking rings representing our five
continents, in the basic colours that are on all flags of
the States Members of our Organization, are
synonymous with hope. Therefore, more than at any
time in the past 16 years, the building of a world that is
peaceful and better thanks to sport and the Olympic
ideal is of particular importance. Resolution 64/3
extends cooperation between two universal institutions,
the values and ideals of which it defends and are
strengthened by the granting to IOC of the status of
observer in our Assembly.

the contribution of sport to peace and development,
which we enshrined in the Millennium Declaration, the
official involvement of the IOC in the deliberations of
the General Assembly institutionalizes the link
between ancient wisdom and the most vital objective of
the United Nations — the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Thus, behind the symbol of the rings that we have
all come to recognize is the temporary calming of an
armed conflict — the opportunity to spare the life of a
child, woman or man — that we truly support. As most
pertinently emphasized in the International Committee
of the Red Cross report entitled “Our world. Views
from the field”, published in June 2009, it is also an
all-too-brief moment to spare victims, often civilians,
from suffering, displacement, the dispersion of
families, lack of basic necessities, and above all fear —
the fear of dying or, worse yet, of losing a loved one.
As a member of the IOC, I have no doubt of the
full support that it will lend to the work of our
Assembly. Beyond its involvement in peacekeeping
missions to promote sports as a means for
re-establishing trust between parties emerging from a
conflict, the IOC has endorsed our commitment to
implementing the Millennium Development Goals. It
has, on the one hand, based its social responsibility on
six objectives where sports could have a strong impact,
and, on the other hand, established relations with such
United Nations bodies as the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, the United
Nations Environment Programme, UNESCO, the
World Health Organization, the International Labour
Organization, the World Food Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

Born of the tradition of Ancient Greece, the
Olympic Truce, known as ekecheiria, cornerstone of
the Olympic Games, ordered in the ninth century B.C.
the suspension of conflicts from the seventh day before
the opening of the Games to the seventh day after the
closing of the Games, and in this way allowed athletes
and spectators to participate in these competitions in a
safe and peaceful environment.

As we prepare to review the implementation of
these objectives, the relevance of the IOC agenda and
its participation in our deliberations could not be more
appropriate. The study we shall undertake in 2010 will
reveal the strength of our determination, but we already
know that if we are to implement our priorities, as
basic as they might be, we will need to redouble our
efforts and enlist the support of all stakeholders and all
people of goodwill, for it will be much more than an
unprecedented effort towards general mobilization.

Today, the Olympic Truce is the expression of
humankind’s desire to build a world of peace,
respectful of the principles of fair competition. Beyond

We are convinced that, with the ongoing and
unfailing support of the Secretary-General, the
personal commitment of Mr. Lemke, his Special

6

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace, the
efforts of the Bureau, and the active contribution of the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace,
we can help sport to realize its full potential for peace
and development.
The third annual Peace and Sport International
Forum, to be held in the Principality of Monaco from 25 to
27 November, which I will be chairing, will once again
bring together, in an apolitical context, global sport
governance, Governments, athletes, non-governmental
organizations and representatives of the private sector.
Through this involvement, I have made a
commitment to ensure that sport is recognized as a
means of promoting and building peace in vulnerable
communities affected by extreme poverty, the aftermath
of conflicts or the lack of social cohesion. Peace and
Sport is involved in a number of countries — Côte
d’Ivoire, Burundi, Timor-Leste and Colombia — and
hopes soon to be involved in many others.
Talking about the IOC without mentioning that it
represents the largest sport organization for youth
throughout the world would be a failure to recognize
the intergenerational link that it embodies. The first
Youth Olympic Games, to be held in Singapore in
August 2010, will be a major event in that respect.
Inculcating young people throughout the world
with unpretentious and healthy values — physical
well-being, health, a balanced lifestyle, and respect for
fair play and non-discrimination — is an effort that
must be renewed on a constant basis. That is the spirit
not only of sport, but also of life in society in an
interdependent world. I am very enthusiastic about the
accomplishments of all those athletes whose work,
rigour, discipline and resolve lead them to surpass
themselves and inspire us to rediscover the feats that
people are capable of.
Finally, I would like to thank the Italian
delegation for having submitted the request of the
International Olympic Committee and wish our
Canadian colleagues well-deserved success with the
upcoming XXI Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver,
reminding them that I still have fond and moving
memories of the XV Games in Calgary in 1988, where
it was my honour to become an Olympian.
In conclusion, I offer my full personal support
and that of my delegation to South Africa and the
continent of Africa for the holding of the 2010 World

09-56441

Cup of the Fédération Internationale de Football
Association, whose success will be important not only
to the entire African continent, but to all those who
share the values of sport.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I wish to thank His Serene
Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco for the statement
he has just made.
His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco
was escorted from the General Assembly Hall.
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): It is a great honour for
me to take the floor on agenda item 45 in order to
express my country’s wholehearted support for the
draft resolution entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
(A/64/L.2).
Since 1993, the General Assembly has adopted
eight resolutions on the Olympic Truce. It is important
to stress that all these resolutions were sponsored by
almost all Member States. This unique record proves
that Member States are fully committed to the Olympic
ideals and believe that the ancient Greek concept of
ekecheiria retains its importance and can offer a
constructive approach to conflict resolution.
Promoting peace was, in fact, the very reason
why the Olympic Games were originally established.
In antiquity, the implementation of the Olympic Truce
entailed a cessation of all hostilities to allow thousands
of athletes, pilgrims and spectators to travel to
Olympia to attend the sacred celebration of human
achievement, and then return home in safety and
security. The Olympic Truce was upheld for over
1,000 years, making it the longest lasting peace treaty
in history.
Today, the Olympic Games should continue to
offer a unique opportunity to promote the culture of
peace and to convey the message that it is possible to
create a lasting peace from a pause in hostilities. With
regard to the concept of Olympic Truce, it has become
an expression of humankind’s desire to build a world
based on the rules of fair competition, civility,
reconciliation and tolerance. Moreover, it bridges an
old and wise tradition related to the most essential
objectives of the world today — the maintenance of
international peace and the promotion of multicultural
dialogue, cooperation and understanding.

7

A/64/PV.21

Making the Olympic Truce a reality in the
modern world is truly a challenging endeavour, and we
have no illusions that it will miraculously heal all the
rifts that ravage so many regions of the world.
However, if the Olympic Truce could help to bring
about even a brief pause from conflict and strife, it
would certainly send a powerful message of hope.
The efficient tool for achieving this goal is sport,
which is substantial to the notion of Olympic Truce.
Over the past few years, sport has been widely
recognized by States and specialized agencies as a
cost-effective instrument for addressing humankind’s
challenge. Furthermore, the latest comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on the item under
consideration stated that sport has been a powerful
lever in the pursuit of the internationally agreed
development goals, especially the Millennium
Development Goals. It also mentions that sport
successfully addresses such issues as racism, the plight
of street children, gender inequality and traumatized
youth — in other words, the root causes of violence.
The Olympic Truce, as an ideological driving
force, and Sport, as a practical means to advance
human development, have proved to be the right
combination for moving forward. Results, though not
always impressive, have been obtained, so let us
persevere in this direction and remain confident that it
is the right one, keeping in mind that conflicts in the
world will certainly not cease overnight.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the consideration of the agenda item
“Sport for peace and development” in the plenary of
the General Assembly. China believes that sport has
always played a major catalytic role in humankind’s
pursuit of peace and development. It deepens
understanding and exchanges among different cultures
and promotes dialogue and cooperation.
China appreciates the efforts of the United
Nations to integrate the values of sport with the goal of
peace and development. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser and the United Nations
Inter-Agency Task Force on Sport for Development
and Peace in their endeavours to mobilize all possible
resources to incorporate sport into activities and
programmes
for
peacekeeping,
development,
education, health and gender equality and into the
efforts to safeguard the rights and interests of persons
with disabilities, so as to further advance the role of

8

sport in helping
Development Goals.

to

achieve

the

Millennium

Last year, the Chinese Government successfully
hosted the XXIX Summer Olympic Games and the XIII
Paralympic Games in Beijing. Two years ago, the
Chinese delegation sponsored and submitted for
adoption resolution 62/4 on the Olympic Truce. Today,
we are pleased to see that, under the agenda item on
sport, the Governments of Canada and South Africa
have submitted draft resolutions on the Olympic Truce
and the World Cup of the Fédération Internationale de
Football Association (FIFA), respectively draft
resolutions A/64/L.2 and A/64/L.3. China is willing to
join the sponsors of the two draft resolutions, and
hopes for the full success of the 2010 Winter Olympic
and Paralympic Games, to be held in Vancouver, the
2010 FIFA World Cup, to be held in South Africa, and
the first Youth Olympic Games, to be held in
Singapore. We also welcome the participation of the
International Olympic Committee in the General
Assembly as an observer for the first time.
The success of the Beijing Olympiad greatly
increased the impact of the Olympic Games in
developing countries, promoted the spreading of the
Olympic spirit, aroused the enthusiasm of hundreds of
millions of Chinese people for sport, and solidified the
social foundation of the development of sport at the
grass-roots level in China. In January 2009, in order to
carry on the invaluable spiritual heritage of the Beijing
Olympics and advance our national fitness programme,
the Chinese Government proclaimed 8 August, the
opening day of the Beijing Olympic Games, as our
National Fitness Day.
In September this year, the Chinese Government
instituted national fitness regulations, the first
comprehensive set of administrative regulations
focusing on the development of a national fitness
programme. By specifying the rights of citizens to
engage in national fitness activities and the
responsibilities of Government departments in
promoting fitness for all, the regulations provide a
strong legal basis to facilitate national fitness
activities. The Chinese Government has also put in
place a national physical condition monitoring system,
a set of physical exercise standards and a physical
training system for the general public.
Concerted efforts and assiduous research have led
to good results in finding ways to utilize the Beijing

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

Olympic Games stadiums, thus reaping social as well
as economic benefits. History proves that the people of
China are capable not only of hosting a truly
exceptional Olympiad, but also of wisely managing the
invaluable physical heritage of the Beijing Olympic
Games and passing on their spiritual heritage.
2009 marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
founding of the new China. The past 60 years have
witnessed rapid progress in our economic and social
development and spectacular achievements in sport.
The advancement of sport in China has greatly
improved our people’s health, enhanced their selfconfidence and inspired us in our ceaseless pursuit of
excellence. Sport has also provided a boost for
progress in all fields.
Currently, with the coordination and healthy
development of competitive sport, grass-roots sport
activities and physical education throughout the
Chinese educational system, the number of people
engaged in regular physical exercise is now equivalent
to 28.2 per cent of the entire population. Nationwide,
there are over 850,000 sports facilities, or 1.02 square
metres of sports facilities per capita, which is,
respectively, 200 and 100 times more than in the years
following the founding of the People’s Republic of
China. Sport activities at the grass-roots level have
been consistently improved in a systematic and
scientific way. The standardized management of sport
events and their appeal to the public are also
increasing. Throughout the nation, there are now nearly
210,000 urban and rural fitness training centres and
venues, 3,092 youth sports clubs and 176 single-event
national,
provincial,
regional,
municipal
and
professional sport associations.
Guided by the scientific outlook on development,
our Government will continue to give full play to the
positive role of sport in the building of a harmonious
society, to adhere to the goal of improving the physical
well-being and the quality of life of all Chinese people,
to build more and better urban and rural fitness
facilities, to improve grass-roots sport organizations
and the national fitness system, and to provide better
sport services to the public so that the people can share
the health and development benefits of sport.
We stand ready to work with other countries and
continue to advance the role of sport in promoting
international peace and development, to enhance
international cooperation and exchanges in sport, and

09-56441

to jointly contribute to world peace, development and
prosperity.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The San Francisco Charter laid the basis for what
would become a new system of international relations
to prevent the recurrence of the terrible experiences of
the two world wars of the twentieth century. The
fundamental goal set out in its first paragraph is to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to
establish a democratic and fair international order
based on equal respect for the dignity of all human
beings.
With those objectives, the Organization to which
we belong today was created, the aims of which are to
maintain international peace and security, based on the
principles of the sovereign equality of all its Members,
the peaceful settlement of international disputes, the
non-use or threat of force and non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States. We were also promised that
all peoples would achieve economic and social
progress.
However, having celebrated the sixtieth
anniversary of the United Nations, we now bear
witness to a grim economic and social outlook marked
by the combination of the economic and financial, food
and energy crises, as well as the negative impact of
climate change that threatens the human race.
Furthermore, the powerful countries persist in their
desire to control natural resources deemed strategic
through wars of aggression and foreign occupation.
As a result of those ills, responsibility for which
lies with the current unfair and unequal international
order, and not with the countries of the South, the
countries of the South have seen our development
efforts undermined. That is why, today more than ever,
it is urgent to foster a climate of international peace by
promoting
solidarity
and
multilateralism
as
fundamental values.
For Cuba, sport unquestionably strengthens
solidarity and friendship among peoples as crucial
factors in the promotion of peace, development and
cooperation among nations. Sport is an important
aspect of development at both the national and
international levels. For Cuba, sport is no longer
exclusive, but has become the right of the entire
population. Since the triumph of the Cuban Revolution,
we have discovered the true path of collective sport,

9

A/64/PV.21

which has led to outstanding successes in regional and
international competitions.
Pursuant to that right, we have promoted an
educational system that includes physical education as
an integral part of human learning. We are working to
ensure sports training from early childhood with a view
to promoting the talents of those who stand out as
future athletes to champion and raise the level of our
country in international sport. At the same time, we
oppose the athletic activities whose only reward is
money, and therefore condemn the theft of sporting
talents to which developing countries are prey.
The Cuban sport movement, headed by the Cuban
Olympic Committee and the National Institute of
Sport, Physical Education and Recreation, has offered
its selfless cooperation to various countries of the
South by sending technical experts, teachers and
trainers who, modestly and on the basis of bilateral
agreements, inculcate new sport training methods that
help boost sporting results and mass participation,
developing strong links of brotherhood and friendship
among peoples.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), Vice-President, took the Chair.
We have also strengthened international
cooperation by making our Institute of Sports Medicine
and Anti-doping Laboratory available to the countries
of the South in order to contribute to the fight against
the scourge of drugs that corrupt athletes and hamper
honest competition, as well as the reputation and
culture of athletes and trainers.
Cuba also founded the International School of
Physical Education and Sport, devoted to training
professionals who value solidarity above all and are
capable of transforming physical education and sport in
their countries. Cuba will host the Third International
Convention of Physical Activity and Sport in Havana
from 9 to 13 November 2009. The Convention’s motto
is “Professional development, physical activity and
quality of life”.
We wish to congratulate Brazil on the selection of
Rio de Janeiro as host of the 2016 Olympics. That
choice was fair and well deserved. The countries of the
South also deserve to host such games of brotherhood
and solidarity without commercial interests. We are
sure that the 2016 Olympic Games will be a success for
the entire South.

10

Let us spread world solidarity, including through
the Olympic ideal, and all the weapons that this
civilization has created will be superfluous. Let us sow
ideas, and the relentless destruction of our environment
will be averted. Let us share the hope that a better
world is possible.
Mr. Gan (Singapore): The Singapore delegation
would like to congratulate Canada on the imminent
adoption of draft resolution A/64/L.2, “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal”. We are confident that Canada, as host
of the XXI Olympic Winter Games and the X
Paralympic Winter Games, will spare no efforts in its
Olympic preparation in the coming months. We would
like to extend to the Vancouver Winter Olympics
Organizing Committee our best wishes for successful
Games.
Singapore is pleased to co-sponsor this
resolution. Much has been said about how sport can be
an agent for promoting understanding and respect
among people. At the community level, sport has been
a catalyst for combating social exclusion, engaging
youth, building communities and positively influencing
social behaviours. At the international level, sport has
reinforced links between countries and regions,
challenged prejudice and found commonalities among
nations in conflict. Sport is about values that are
fundamental to us and transcend all boundaries.
The Youth Olympic Games is the first new
product of the International Olympic Committee (IOC)
in 80 years, the last being the Winter Olympic Games.
The Youth Olympic Games will attract 5,000 youth
athletes and officials from 205 National Olympic
Committees to compete in all 26 summer sports in 201
events.
At the 119th International Olympic Committee
Session, the IOC President, Jacques Rogge, declared
that the Youth Olympic Games
“are the flagship of the IOC’s determination to
reach out to young people. These games will not
only be about competition, they will also be the
platform through which youngsters will learn
about the Olympic values and the benefits of
sport, and share their experiences with other
communities around the globe”.
In a sporting arena tarnished by scandals and
where use of steroids and cheating no longer surprise

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

any of us, it is perhaps timely that we remind
ourselves, and our youth, that sport is not just about
victories, but about interacting and connecting with
one another, uniting people and building bridges.
Singapore is privileged to host the inaugural
Youth Olympic Games from 14 to 26 August 2010.
Similar to the Olympic Games, the emphasis of the
Youth Olympic Games will be on sport excellence.
However, the Youth Olympic Games will integrate its
sport programme with a culture and education
programme. This is a first for the Olympic movement.
It represents a shift in thinking and an opportunity to
do things differently. Singapore envisions a Youth
Olympic Games that will inspire our youth to embrace
the Olympic values of excellence, friendship and
respect not just in sport, but their everyday life.
Singapore 2010 is about taking bold steps. It is
about making an investment in our youth, our future
leaders. With the introduction of the culture and
education programme, the Singapore 2010 Youth
Olympic Games has been developed as a learning
journey, even as young athletes prepare and train to
compete in sport. The programme comprises five
themes, such as Olympism, skills development and
social responsibility. Through that fun and interactive
programme, Singapore 2010 aims to provide young
people with the opportunity to develop the confidence,
belief and courage not only to succeed on the playing
field, but to champion their values and convictions to
make a positive impact in their communities and build
a better and peaceful world.
The learning journey for youth began in January
2008 through pre-Games activities and programmes.
For example, one of the programmes, Friends@YOG,
which was introduced in March 2009, twins every
Singapore school to a school from each of the other
204 countries with a National Olympic Committee.
That provides an opportunity for interaction among
youth, which leads to better understanding of one
another’s culture and country.
During the Games, Singaporean youth will also
have the opportunity to exhibit what they have learned
about their counterparts in the world culture village at
the Youth Olympic Village. That will provide a good
platform for visiting athletes and officials to talk about
their own countries and cultures and exchange ideas to
get to know one another better. We are confident that
the Youth Olympic Games pre-Games activities will

09-56441

contribute to the growth of our young people to
become better leaders for tomorrow.
Many international communities have joined us
in our pre-Games activities, sharing their cultures and
experiences in celebration of Singapore 2010. We
invite members of the Assembly to join us in this
journey as we lead in developing a legacy for future
generations.
Today’s youth have diverse interests and
expectations. The Youth Olympic Games will create an
environment where young people, especially athletes,
will receive support, will be encouraged to take
ownership of their ideas, initiatives and responsibilities
and will be empowered to make a difference in their
communities. Young people are engaged in
contributing ideas for Singapore 2010 and are given
opportunities to take ownership in organizing events in
support and in celebration of Singapore 2010.
An example of that is the Singapore 2010 CAN!
festivals. “CAN!” stands for “Create. Action. Now!”
Through the Singapore 2010 CAN! festivals, young
people have been entrusted with planning and
organizing quarterly festivals, each with a theme,
namely culture and heritage, digital media,
environment, and the arts. Youth have also been active
in other capacities, such as volunteering, administrative
support and participating in the many Singapore 2010
CAN! events.
Singapore is a young nation infused with a
myriad of cultural colours and societal textures. That
provides a good backdrop and environment for crosscultural learning and understanding. Similar to the
Vancouver XXI Olympic Winter Games and X
Paralympic Winter Games, the Singapore 2010 Youth
Olympic Games aim to promote the Olympic values of
excellence, friendship and respect.
What Singapore hopes to achieve at the end of
the inaugural Youth Olympic Games is to be successful
in inspiring young people around the world and sowing
the seeds of those Olympic values and for the youth to
begin to live by them, if they do not already do so.
In closing, allow me to relate a story to illustrate
how youth can help or contribute to building a better
and peaceful world through sport.
John Ian Wing was a 17-year-old ChineseAustralian student living in Melbourne. He was
immensely troubled by the tensions during the 1956

11

A/64/PV.21

Melbourne Games. A near riot had broken out during
the USSR-Hungary water polo competition, tainted by
the Suez Canal Crisis and the Soviet Union’s invasion
of Hungary. Wing sent an anonymous letter to the
Melbourne Organizing Committee, suggesting that all
athletes walk freely as one nation in the closing
ceremony, contrary to the tradition of marching by
nation. To his surprise, his idea of “One World, One
Nation” was implemented. Today, he is still lauded for
his role in promoting peace and global unity.
Mrs. Enna Park (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea wholeheartedly supports the draft
resolution being considered under agenda item “Sport
for peace and development: building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
Sport is a powerful tool to bring diverse groups
together under the spirit and values enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. The biannual Olympics,
Paralympic Games and the World Cup are leading
examples of this interaction.
Last year’s Summer Olympic Games in Beijing
were a success, and my delegation is proud that the
Games took place in Asia. The Republic of Korea, as
host of the Olympics in 1988, knows how important
hosting the Games is to Member States, and we
congratulate China’s achievement in this regard. My
delegation would like to also congratulate Canada and
voice our support for the Vancouver 2010 Winter
Games as a continuation of the successful
manifestation of international cooperation and
development through sport.
Furthermore, we hope that Member States will
uphold the Olympic Truce and lend their valuable
backing to the initiative of sport and human
development during the build-up to and duration of the
Games.
My delegation welcomes the full recognition of
the increasingly important role of sport in achieving
internationally agreed development goals, including
those contained in the Millennium Declaration, as
stated in the draft resolution. While sport alone cannot
pave the way for peace and social development, it can
be an effective tool when used in conjunction with
other existing programmes and initiatives. In this
regard, my delegation notes the many positive ways
sport can contribute to the Millennium Development
Goals, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report on
sport for development and peace (A/63/466).

12

As a contribution to that cause, the Republic of
Korea has actively engaged in global sports events by
hosting the Olympics and the World Cup. In the
coming years we will also host the 2011 World Track
and Field Championship, the 2014 Asian Games and
the 2015 Summer Universiade. We also hope to host
the Winter Olympics in 2018 and the World Cup in
2022 and have made official bids for both events.
The Republic of Korea also considers it important
to contribute to increased international cooperation in
promoting sports for development. For example, we
have initiated various programmes for supporting
athletic activities both in our region and in other
regions. Such programmes include Vision 2014, which
is designed to assist sports projects of other countries
in the Asian region for the period from 2007 to 2014,
and the Dream Program to promote young athletes in
winter games worldwide for the period from 2004 to
2010.
Lastly, the Republic of Korea lends its support to
draft resolution A/64/L.3, on the 2010 FIFA World
Cup. We congratulate South Africa and emphatically
back its preparations to host the World Cup. That
upcoming Cup is an historic occasion, as it marks the
first time that the pre-eminent football tournament will
be played on African soil. Having successfully
co-hosted the 2002 tournament alongside Japan —
which was the first and only time the World Cup has
come to Asia — my delegation fully understands the
significance that the tournament will have in advancing
the international recognition, development, tourism in
and prestige of Africa. We are looking forward to a
successful competition that will not only help further
the global spirit of competitiveness and sport at the
highest level but will also serve as an invaluable
opportunity to promote unity, solidarity, peace and
reconciliation and preventive campaigns against
scourges such as HIV/AIDS that affect the youth of the
continent.
The Republic of Korea will remain a strong
advocate for the principle of sport for development and
peace and will continue to contribute to the realization
of the ideals of the Olympics and sport.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): To many, sports can serve
merely as exercise. But in a global context, sports
serve as a common language that can foster
international friendship and harmony. A competitive
sporting experience between people transcends our

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

differences and reminds us that as human beings we
have far more that binds us together than draws us
apart. From dusty soccer fields to the Olympic stage,
people from diverse backgrounds, religions, cultures
and races can join together in a common cause, in a
shared experience. In the words of the Olympic
Charter, sports and friendly competition can
“contribute to building a peaceful and better world”.
In our region, we seek to harness the spirit of
sports to forge relationships and build bridges between
peoples and cultures through an active network of
organizations that use the medium of sports to promote
peace and coexistence. All over the world, when two
rival soccer teams prepare to play, we can easily
imagine a battle about to unfold. Yet the Abu GhoshMevaseret Zion soccer club is a shining example of
how a so-called battleground can become a field of
coexistence.
The Abu Ghosh-Mevaseret Zion team is an ArabJewish soccer club named after the towns on the
western outskirts of Jerusalem. The project sought the
support of the city councils of both Abu Ghosh and
Mevaseret Zion in order to build widespread public
interest in the project. The team is managed by a joint
Arab-Jewish board and trains hundreds of children
from diverse backgrounds. This soccer club is but one
example of how private citizens can use the medium of
sports to set aside differences, foster integration and
develop trust. This example shows that through
concerted efforts on the ground a brighter future is
possible.
Another success story is the sports programme of
the Peres Center for Peace, which brings young Israelis
and Palestinians together to learn from one another and
to develop cross-cultural ties. A wide array of
programmes touches the lives of over 10,000 children
as they utilize sports to encourage solidarity, respect
and interaction. The flagship programme of the
Center’s sports-related work is the Twinned Peace
Sport Schools project. Launched in 2002, the
programme pairs Israeli and Palestinian communities
as it offers weekly sports training, peace education and
inter-language learning. The programme engages 1,600
disadvantaged Palestinian and Israeli young people
who would not otherwise have such an opportunity to
play sports or to meet and learn from others. Those
successes — which are mere examples among many
others — should indicate what can be achieved through
sports.

09-56441

Unfortunately, not all sporting events are carried
out in the same spirit. Earlier this year, Israeli tennis
star Shahar Peer was denied a visa in order to play in
the Dubai Tennis Championships. While Israel
commends the firm resolve displayed by the Women’s
Tennis Association, as well as by those affiliates and
sponsors of the event who acted in the face of such
politicized prejudice, the episode reflects a dangerous
trend to politicize the world of sports.
In a moment that reminds us of the hatred that
can permeate the world of sports, we recall the 1972
Olympic Games in Munich, where gunmen from the
terrorist group Black September broke into the
Olympic Village and killed 11 Israeli athletes, coaches
and referees. The reverberations of that abhorrent and
monstrous act of terrorism are still felt in Israel and
around the world to this very day.
As the world seeks to solve the most intractable
challenges related to peace and development, we must
find new, dynamic ways of confronting difficulties and
of building bridges between people. The use of sports
to promote a culture of peace and development can be
effective. Yet sports cannot achieve such goals alone.
The support and involvement of the media and civil
society are needed for sports to be an effective vehicle
for peace and development. Israel strongly supports
that concept and calls on all Member States to use the
opportunities provided by sports to ensure the widest
appeal.
In that spirit, Israel is pleased to join as a sponsor
of resolutions A/64/L.2 and A/64/L.3, “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal”, and “2010 International Federation of
Association Football World Cup event”, respectively.
Mr. Webb (United States of America): My name
is Wellington Webb, and I am privileged to serve on
the United States delegation to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session, at the invitation of my friend
President Obama. Having served as Mayor of Denver,
Colorado, I have long supported the United States
Olympic Committee, which has its headquarters in
Colorado. Therefore, I am pleased to speak on behalf
of the United States today on the topic of building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal.
The Olympic movement’s fundamental goals
have been to serve society, to place sport at the service
of humanity and to promote peaceful societies

13

A/64/PV.21

committed to the preservation of human dignity. The
United States was pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution adopted earlier today (resolution 64/3)
inviting the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to
participate in the General Assembly as an observer.
In many resolutions over the years, Member
States have called for United Nations system-wide
cooperation with the IOC to implement projects using
sport as a tool for peacebuilding, human development,
humanitarian relief and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. The offer of observer
status to the IOC recognizes the potential of sport to
inspire us to pursue the goals and ideals of
international understanding, security and prosperity, as
envisioned in the United Nations Charter.
Over the years, the IOC has signed
memorandums of understanding with 15 United
Nations specialized agencies and programmes and
cooperates with another 10. In May 2006, the
Secretary-General formalized the working relationship
that had already developed between the IOC and some
United Nations peacekeeping missions to apply sport,
too, in rebuilding confidence between parties coming
out of conflict.
The United States is also pleased to co-sponsor
today’s draft resolution entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
(A/64/L.2), which proclaims an Olympic truce for the
XXI Olympic Winter Games and the X Paralympic
Winter Games, to be held at Vancouver, Canada, in
February. We have co-sponsored similar resolutions on
nine occasions since 1993.
The Olympic Truce promotes international
understanding on the basis of the principle that sports
can inspire peace. Since the beginning of the ancient
Games in 776 B.C., athletic competition has helped
transcend our differences. The central purpose of the
Truce has been to bring people together and to permit
the safe passage and participation of all concerned with
the Games.
The International Olympic Truce Foundation,
established by the IOC, promotes global support for
and observance of the Olympic Truce. It encourages all
to act in favour of peace and to mobilize young people
for the promotion of the Olympic ideal, establishes
contacts between communities in conflict and offers
humanitarian support in countries undergoing strife.

14

Today, the United States delegation is also
pleased to be among the sponsors of draft resolution
A/64/L.3, entitled “2010 International Federation of
Association Football World Cup event” and introduced
by the delegation of South Africa. The year 2010 will
mark the first time that a sports event on such a scale
has taken place in Africa. My delegation is particularly
pleased that the United States team will be among
those competing. The attention of the United States
will be all the greater in enhancing the 2010 World
Cup’s legacy of sport for peace and development in
Africa.
At Vancouver next February, athletes will set
aside their political, religious and social differences
and compete on a level playing field in the pursuit of
excellence. As President Obama noted just a few weeks
ago, in a world where we all too often witness the
darker aspects of our humanity, peaceful competition
between nations represents what is best about our
humanity.
The theme of sport for peace and development is
of great importance to the United States, even in
non-Olympic years. The United States welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace. More and more people around
the world understand the value of such efforts.
Sports United is a United States diplomatic
outreach programme to start a dialogue at the grassroots level with boys and girls abroad. It aids young
people in discovering how success in athletics can be
translated into the development of life skills and
achievement in the classroom. Those young people
establish links with United States sports professionals
and gain exposure to American life and culture. Young
athletes and coaches are invited to the United States to
learn about sports in America. American athletes and
coaches go abroad to conduct clinics in sport to stress
team-building, education, positive health and respect
for all. Americans learn about foreign cultures and the
challenges that young people overseas face today.
Our discussions today remind the world of the
importance of preparing for the forthcoming Games in
spirit as well as in body. Sport is not simply an end in
itself; it should also serve as a means to promote peace
and to educate the youth of the world.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda

09-56441

A/64/PV.21

item 45. We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/64/L.2, and A/64/L.3 as orally revised.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.2?

The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.2, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”. I
should like to announce that since the draft resolution
was issued, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Central African Republic,
Colombia, the Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Finland,
Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia,
Seychelles, Somalia, the Sudan, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Zambia.

Draft resolution A/64/L.2 was adopted (resolution
64/4).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/64/L.3, entitled “2010
International Federation of Association Football World
Cup event”. The following countries have joined the
list of sponsors of the draft resolution: Botswana, Cape
Verde, Chad, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kenya, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger,
Norway, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia and Uganda.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.3, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/64/L.3, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 64/5).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of agenda item 45.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

09-56441

15
