S/2002/537

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2002
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Great Lakes
region, 27 April-7 May 2002
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 17 April 2002 (S/2002/430),
the President of the Security Council informed the
Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to the Great Lakes region of
Africa. Following consultations among the members, it
was agreed that the composition of the mission should
be as follows:
France (Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, head of
mission)
Bulgaria (Ambassador Stefan Tafrov)
Cameroon (Ambassador Martin Chungong
Ayafor)
China (Minister Counsellor Chen Xu)
Colombia (Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso)
Guinea (Ambassador François Fall)
Ireland (Ambassador Gerard Corr)
Mauritius (Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul)
Mexico (Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser)
Norway (Ambassador Wegger Christian
Strømmen)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Andrey
Granovsky)
Singapore (Counsellor Lip Cheng How)
Syrian Arab Republic (Ambassador Mikhail
Wehbe)

02-37954 (E)

130502

*0237954*

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland (Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock)
United States of America (Ambassador Richard
W. Williamson).
2.
The terms of reference of the Security Council
mission are annexed to document S/2002/430.
3.
The Security Council mission left New York on
27 April and returned on 7 May. During that period, the
mission visited Johannesburg, Pretoria, Harare,
Kinshasa, Kisangani, Luanda, Kampala, Dar es Salaam,
Bujumbura and Kigali. They met with the President of
South Africa, Thabo Mbeki; the President of
Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe; the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila; the
President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos; the
President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Benjamin Mkapa; the President of Burundi, Pierre
Buyoya; and the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame.
The mission also met in Pretoria with the Deputy
President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma; the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, Jean Ping; the President
of the Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie
(RCD-Goma), Adolphe Onusumba, and its SecretaryGeneral, Azarias Ruberwa; and, in the presence of the
facilitation, with Burundian rebel groups. In Luanda,
the mission met with the Chairman of the Political
Committee, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola,
Jõao Bernardo de Miranda, and held a joint meeting
with the Political Committee; and in Kampala, met
with the leader of the Mouvement de libération du
Congo (MLC), Jean-Pierre Bemba. In Pretoria, the
mission met with the Chairman and two members of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of

S/2002/537

Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Bujumbura and
Kigali, the mission met with senior ministers of the
Governments of Burundi and Rwanda, and with the
Implementation Monitoring Committee. The mission
also met with representatives of civil society in
Kinshasa and Kisangani, including participants from
human rights and religious groups. The Security
Council mission was accompanied from Kinshasa
onwards by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Amos Namanga Ngongi, and the Force
Commander of MONUC, General Mountaga Diallo.

II. Democratic Republic of the Congo
Positions adopted by the Security Council
mission
4.
This was the third mission of the Security
Council to the Great Lakes region. The first, in May
2000, was conducted at a time when fighting was
continuing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and there had been serious clashes between Rwandan
and Ugandan troops in Kisangani. The objective of the
mission at that time was to achieve a ceasefire among
the parties. The second Security Council mission, in
May 2001, coincided with the onset of phase II of the
deployment of MONUC, the disengagement of forces
along the confrontation line. This third Security
Council mission was carried out immediately after the
inter-Congolese dialogue in Sun City, and as MONUC
was preparing itself to enter the next stage of its
phase III deployment in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
communicated it to its various interlocutors. According
to this approach, there were three main aspects to the
conflict, all mutually interlinked, which had to be taken
forward in parallel, namely, the outcome of the interCongolese dialogue, the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the disarmament, demobilization and
repatriation of the armed groups listed in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. While the Security Council had
no direct substantive responsibility for the conduct of
the inter-Congolese dialogue, a task that had been
entrusted to the neutral facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
the Council was indeed concerned with the outcome of
the dialogue and its relationship with the other two
aspects.
8.
The mission stressed the importance of what had
been achieved in Sun City, primarily the unanimous
adoption of 37 resolutions, which would serve as the
basis for the transitional authority. Since no
comprehensive agreement was reached, however, the
Security Council mission also underlined the need for
further talks among the Congolese parties in order to
develop a fully inclusive agreement on the transition.

6.
The mission also made the point that considerable
thought had been given to postponing the dispatch of
the mission at a time when the situation in many areas
of the world greatly preoccupied the Security Council.
The Council had however decided to demonstrate its
commitment to the peace processes in the Great Lakes
region by dispatching the mission as scheduled.

9.
The mission also put forward an idea to facilitate
the withdrawal of foreign forces that was developed
during the course of the visit on the basis of the
favourable response received from the mission’s
interlocutors. The idea was for the creation of a
“curtain” of troops along the eastern borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, subject to the
invitation of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This might involve the parties
concerned, namely, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the one hand and Rwanda, Uganda and
Burundi on the other hand, to work out mechanisms for
military cooperation along their common borders so as
to have the military presence of the countries
concerned in a limited portion of the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for a limited
period, in order to ensure a better monitoring of the
borders, as a stage in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. Other African Governments might be
invited to contribute troops to this mechanism, and
MONUC could also be requested to offer advice and a
monitoring presence. This might involve, at their
request, the parties concerned.

7.
During the course of the visit, the Security
Council mission developed its view of the conflict in

10. The Security Council mission reiterated the
strong position of the Security Council that the city of

5.
With each of its interlocutors, the head of the
mission introduced the members of the mission and set
out its objectives, in accordance with the terms of
reference. Individual members then made comments or
put questions.

2

S/2002/537

Kisangani should be demilitarized immediately and
without conditions. The mission called on RCD to
withdraw its forces, and called on all those with
influence over RCD to ensure that the Security
Council’s resolutions were put into effect without
further delay.
11. Members of the Security Council mission
expressed to their various interlocutors their deep
concern over the serious violations of human rights and
the appalling humanitarian situation of much of the
population in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
a result of the conflict. The mission was also aware of
the great importance of reviving the economy of the
Great Lakes region, not least by promoting the
development of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the interests of its people,
and the reopening of the River Congo to commercial
traffic, as agreed by the three Congolese parties when
they signed an agreement on the modalities of
resuming commercial river traffic.
12. The Security Council mission proposed that new
impetus be given to the consideration of an
international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region that could be
convened at an appropriate time.
13. The Security Council mission made clear its
position that the Council would severely condemn any
party that violated the ceasefire in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Summary of the achievements and conclusions
of the Security Council mission
14. The Security Council mission found that the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement, with the help of
MONUC, continue to make progress, albeit slowly, in
the application of the peace process, which requires
patient and attentive follow-up. In its meetings with the
parties, the mission was able to propose various actions
to be taken in order to advance the process further.
15. The Council mission met Sir Ketumile Masire,
the neutral facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue,
and commended him for his efforts at Sun City and the
results obtained there. At the same time, the Security
Council mission was gratified to note that all its
interlocutors agreed that negotiations should continue
among the Congolese parties with a view to reaching a
more comprehensive and inclusive agreement. This
would facilitate the reunification of the country and the

preservation of the principle of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. A transitional authority could pave
the way for the organization and conduct of free and
fair democratic elections. The Security Council mission
noted with satisfaction that, at its suggestion,
representatives of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MLC and RCD-Goma met on
the margins of the Political Committee meeting in
Luanda on 2 May to initiate the further discussions
required in order to bring about this objective.
16. The Security Council mission notes that some
progress has been made in the withdrawal of foreign
forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It must also be noted, however, that, of all
the original belligerents, only Namibia has withdrawn
all its combat troops from the territory. The
withdrawals of contingents by Angola, Uganda and
Zimbabwe are partial, and need to be finally verified.
Reported withdrawals by Rwanda have been verified
neither by MONUC nor by the Joint Military
Commission.
17. The mission welcomes the broadly positive
response among the Lusaka signatory parties to the
idea it proposed of the establishment of a “curtain” of
forces along the borders of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. These
forces, from the three neighbouring countries
concerned, might be deployed, with the agreement of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as a stage in their continuing withdrawal from
that country’s territory, as an interim border security
measure, in coordination with the deployment of
Congolese troops, and accompanied by MONUC
military observers. The joint force would be deployed
for a specified period of time, in a limited and defined
area. Other African Governments might also be invited
to contribute troops.
18. The Security Council mission commends
MONUC for the progress achieved so far in the
disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of the
Rwandan combatants at Kamina. The destruction by
fire of more than 1,000 weapons surrendered by those
combatants was the culmination of several months of
effort to gain the confidence of those combatants. The
Security Council mission would like to express its
appreciation to President Kabila and his Government
for the cooperation they extended to MONUC in the
execution of this exercise. The mission further takes
note of the agreement in principle by the Government

3

S/2002/537

of Rwanda to accept a delegation representing the
Kamina combatants, and trusts that this important
confidence-building measure can be accomplished at
an early date. The Security Council mission further
notes the expression by President Kagame of Rwanda’s
willingness and readiness to repatriate and reintegrate
Rwandan fighters from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
19. During its meeting with representatives of civil
society in Kisangani, as well as in the unscheduled
informal encounters with local residents that followed,
the Security Council mission was struck by the strong
desire of the local population for peace and a unified
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and a prompt and
complete demilitarization of Kisangani, in accordance
with the agreement reached by President Kagame and
President Museveni in May 2000, and with Security
Council resolutions. The mission was also impressed
by the strong desire of the civil society representatives
to see the achievement of a comprehensive agreement
on a transitional authority in which civil society
representatives would participate. The Security Council
mission takes note of the solemn reiteration by the
RCD leadership before the Ministers of the Political
Committee and the Ambassadors of the Security
Council of their “irrevocable” commitment to
demilitarizing Kisangani, and calls on them to proceed
to take the necessary steps without further delay. The
mission also welcomes the plans being prepared by
MONUC to train the Kisangani police force.
20. In its meetings with representatives of civil
society in Kinshasa and Kisangani, the Security
Council mission was struck again by the plight of
millions of Congolese citizens living in harrowing
conditions, without adequate food, fresh water or
medical care, as well as the millions of persons
displaced from their homes by insecurity and
instability. Evidence presented by representatives of
women’s groups indicated how deeply the welfare and
security of women and girls have been affected by the
conflict. The establishment of a broad-based
transitional authority governing the whole country will
permit humanitarian aid organizations to gain access to
populations in need in order to mitigate some of the
worst effects of the conflict. The Security Council
mission hopes that the progressive deployment of
MONUC human rights and other civilian personnel,
including civilian police, into the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo will permit greater scrutiny of

4

the situation there and encourage stricter compliance
with and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. This process will be immeasurably advanced
if it is conducted pursuant to an inclusive agreement on
the establishment of an interim authority governing the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
its entirety, and in the context of the rebuilding of
united Congolese administration structures and the
orderly withdrawal of foreign forces. The mission
heard from President Kagame that Rwanda would wish
to work closely with such a united administration on
the demobilization of the armed groups, and that
Rwanda’s presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was related only to its legitimate security
concerns.
21. The Security Council mission is encouraged by
the signing by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MLC and RCD of an
agreement to reopen the River Congo to commercial
traffic. The mission’s visit to Kisangani, and the arrival
at that time of a barge convoy accompanied by the
MONUC riverine unit, underlined the importance of
the river to the economic and social life of the country.
The Security Council is committed to the early
reopening of the River Congo to commercial traffic as
an essential means of improving the economic and
social life of millions of Congolese citizens; ending the
isolation of the city of Kisangani; generating a climate
of confidence and security in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and normalizing
the situation throughout the country.
22. The mission underlined to its interlocutors the
importance that the Security Council attached to the
question of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
question on which the representatives of the
Government and representatives of Congolese civil
society in Kinshasa and Kisangani had expressed their
deep concern. The mission made it clear that the
Council would follow up on the next report of the
Panel of Experts to the Security Council.
Recommendations
23. The Security Council mission commends the
Congolese parties for the willingness they expressed,
both individually and at the meeting of the Political
Committee in Luanda on 2 May, to continue their
discussions with a view to establishing a transitional
administration at an early date. The mission trusts that,

S/2002/537

in accordance with the views expressed by its
interlocutors, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MLC and RCD-Goma will
pursue their talks with a view to reaching a
comprehensive and inclusive agreement in accordance
with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Such an
agreement might then be endorsed by the parties to the
inter-Congolese dialogue, in the presence of the neutral
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire. In this context, the
mission recommends that the Security Council, within
the next few days, should consider taking further
initiatives on this matter in coordination with the
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement and the leaders of
the region.
24. The Security Council mission recommends that
the Council may wish, following the establishment of a
fully inclusive Congolese transitional authority, to
consider, on the basis of recommendations to be
submitted by the Secretary-General at an appropriate
time, and taking into account the needs of the
Congolese transitional authority, adding to the future
mandate of MONUC elements concerning the
organization and conduct of free and fair elections.
25. The Security Council mission recommends that
the Security Council should renew its call for the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
the Lusaka Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The mission further recommends
that the Secretary-General, if requested by the parties,
could instruct MONUC to facilitate the development
and implementation of the “curtain” proposal as an
interim measure aimed at ensuring border security in
the final stages of withdrawal.
26. The progress made in resolving the situation of
the combatants at Kamina represents a start for the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR) operation. The Security
Council may wish to call for an early conclusion of the
situation there, including the repatriation, resettlement
and reinsertion into social and economic life of the
1,981 combatants and the members of their families,
within the context of agreement between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda, with MONUC assistance.
27. The Security Council mission is however aware
that DDRRR in the east will pose serious problems of
security. Further progress in creating the necessary

climate of confidence and security, which is essential
to the success of the voluntary approach to DDRRR
taken by MONUC, will require the deployment of a
robust force at Kindu within the existing mandate of
MONUC. The Security Council mission is aware of the
need for a capable troop-contributing country to
provide such a force, within the current authorized
ceiling of 5,537 troops, and recommends that efforts be
redoubled to identify such a country at the earliest
possible time.
28. The Security Council mission recommends to the
Security Council that it devote particular attention to
the implementation of the MONUC mandate in the
fields of human rights and humanitarian assistance to
populations in need in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, taking fully into account the needs of women
and girls. The progressive deployment of MONUC
human rights and humanitarian personnel in the eastern
part of the country, particularly if this is achieved
alongside the establishment of State authority
throughout the country following agreement on a fully
inclusive transitional authority, should be expected to
lead to improvements in this area.
29. The Security Council should consider supporting
the efforts of MONUC to train the Kisangani police
force and taking prompt action on the request of the
Secretary-General, in his tenth report to the Security
Council (S/2002/169), for 85 additional police officers
for this purpose.
30. The Security Council mission takes the strong
view that further progress in the peace process should
take the form of economic dividends for the
population. The delay in achieving this risks the
credibility of the process and of the international
community. Accordingly, all efforts should be made to
ensure that humanitarian aid, as well as longer-term
economic and development assistance, is provided to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon as
possible in support of the peace process. Only thus can
a sound basis be created for a more durable peace.
31. The Security Council mission was encouraged by
the generally positive reception accorded to the
proposal to convene, at an appropriate time, an
international conference on security, development and
peace in the Great Lakes region. The Security Council
may wish to give further consideration to this idea, in
conjunction with the Organization of African Unity and
regional leaders.

5

S/2002/537

32. Once the inter-Congolese dialogue develops
positively and United Nations forces are deployed in
Kindu, the peace process is poised to enter a new and
more complex dynamic. The various aspects of this
complex process, for which the parties bear ultimate
responsibility, will need to be carefully coordinated. It
would be very useful if the regional leaders, in
coordination with the United Nations, could ensure the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism. Such a
mechanism might be entrusted with the following
tasks:
• Coordinating the various aspects of the process,
and ensuring the coherence of action taken by the
international community.
• Accompanying the transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by pursuing the
application of the results of the inter-Congolese
dialogue throughout the territory of the country
while promoting a harmonious cohabitation in
Kinshasa; continuing political and economic
development in the country and the preparation of
free and fair elections.
• Facilitating the dialogue among regional heads of
State concerning the development of phase III of
MONUC deployment, DDRRR, establishment of
a “curtain” for border security, and withdrawal of
foreign forces.
• Preparing, subject to the continuing favourable
development of the situation, an international
conference on peace, security and development in
the Great Lakes region.

III. Burundi
Summary of achievements and conclusions
33. Since the Security Council mission visited
Burundi in May 2001, there have been a number of
improvements in the country. Owing to the
achievements of the facilitator, former President
Mandela, and the efforts of the Burundians themselves,
a transitional Government was installed on the basis of
the Arusha Agreement on 1 November 2001. The
States of the region, particularly the United Republic of
Tanzania and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
have lent their full support to the implementation of the
transition. Thanks to the facilitation of the Deputy
President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma and the

6

President of Gabon, Omar Bongo, a framework for
dialogue has been created to facilitate contacts between
the transitional Government and the non-signatory
armed groups.
34. However, none of this progress is irreversible,
and further efforts will be necessary to ensure the
success of the peace process in Burundi to achieve the
cessation of hostilities and a ceasefire, an improvement
of the economic situation, and continued cooperation
among Burundian parties.
35. The continuation of fighting is the most serious
risk that faces the implementation of the Burundi peace
process. The Security Council mission demanded that
the rebel groups cease hostilities immediately and enter
into negotiations with the support of the facilitation
within the framework of the Arusha Agreement.
36. Of all the mission’s interlocutors (the Burundian
authorities and regional heads of State), the armed
groups alone did not share the view that a sense of
urgency was required in achieving a cessation of
hostilities. It is the view of the Security Council
mission that, without an urgent cessation of hostilities,
followed by a ceasefire agreement, the peace process
could be jeopardized. It is also the view of most of the
heads of State of the region, some of whom expressed
doubts concerning the willingness of the armed groups
to enter into negotiations. Some considered the time
might have come to contemplate more robust measures.
If that were the case, the possibility of regional
sanctions has been raised.
37. The success of the peace process in Burundi will
be primarily the success of the Burundians themselves.
Maintaining confidence and cooperation among the
signatories of the Arusha Agreement is critical in this
regard. The Security Council mission understood the
determination of its interlocutors in Burundi to put the
conflict behind them, and by their determination to
accomplish those ends.
38. All the mission’s interlocutors, both Burundian
and non-Burundian, stressed the risk that the
tremendous economic and financial difficulties
currently facing the country might undermine the peace
process.
39. The humanitarian situation in Burundi is
disastrous. The mission expressed its support to the
tripartite commission (Burundi, United Republic of

S/2002/537

Tanzania, UNHCR) for the efforts it is making to assist
the voluntary return of refugees as appropriate.
Recommendations
40. The Security Council mission recommends that,
in the coming weeks, and before the next meeting of
the regional peace initiative, dialogue with all regional
players be intensified. The Council may also wish to
encourage the States of the region to pursue their
efforts to persuade the armed groups to agree to a
cessation of hostilities and ceasefire agreement, and to
extend full assistance to the facilitation in this regard.

Congo and Burundi. The mission thanks the United
Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations agencies for the faultless logistical
arrangements made on its behalf in Johannesburg,
Harare, Kinshasa, Luanda, Kampala, Dar es Salaam,
Bujumbura and Kigali, and Cairo, and thanks the
Secretariat staff who accompanied it for their unfailing
support.

41. The mission stresses the need for the
implementation of reforms called for in the Arusha
Agreement by the transitional Government and its
institutions, with or without a ceasefire, to the full
extent the military situation allows.
42. The international community has a role to play in
assisting the Burundian parties to work together for the
success of this process, and in monitoring the
implementation of the Arusha reforms. The United
Nations, in particular, has assumed such a role. In the
view of the Security Council mission it is vital that that
role be performed, especially through the presidency of
the Implementation Monitoring Committee, with all the
close attention to issues that the situation requires.
43. The support of the international community will
be critical. It will in particular be essential for donors
to fulfil the commitments they made at the Paris
conference of December 2000 and the Geneva
conference of December 2001. The mission will follow
up with the international financial institutions on this
point. There is a risk that the peace process, and all the
gains made with it so far, might collapse if further
assistance, including direct aid, is not forthcoming in
the near future.
***
44. The Security Council mission wishes to express
its deep appreciation to the heads of State of the Great
Lakes region and to Sir Ketumile Masire, who met with
the mission to share their views. The mission is also
very grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Namanga Ngongi, and to the
Acting Representative of the Secretary-General in
Burundi, Amadou Keita, for the sound advice and
impeccable arrangements they caused to be made for
the mission’s visits to the Democratic Republic of the

7
