S/2019/774

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 September 2019
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 30 May to
17 September 2019, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution
350 (1974) and extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2477 (2019).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained despite a number of violations of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces
Agreement) of 1974, which are set out below. While the overall security situation in
the UNDOF area of operations remained stable, there was some military activity in
the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2477 (2019), in which the Council reiterated
that there should be no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing
of the ceasefire line by individuals, constitute violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. In its regular interactions with both sides, the leadership of
UNDOF continued to call upon the parties to exercise restraint and prevent any
miscalculation that might lead to an escalation of the situation.
4.
During the reporting period, there were several breaches of the ceasefire line. In
the early hours of 12 June, United Nations personnel at ob servation post 51 heard a
large explosion and observed a fire close to Hamadiyah al-Jadidah in the area of
separation. Shortly thereafter, United Nations personnel observed five missiles being
fired from the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) towards the area of separation.
UNDOF was not in a position to determine the point of origin or impact of the
missiles. On 24 July, United Nations personnel observed the firing of three missiles

19-16447 (E)

300919

*1916447*

S/2019/774

from the Alpha side towards the Bravo side. One of the missiles impacted the vicinity
of Ruhinah in the area of separation. Around the same time, UNDOF personnel heard
over 50 heavy explosions, as well as aircraft activity. On 1 August, United Nations
personnel heard two explosions and observed smoke in the vicinity of Ruhinah,
approximately 5 km from observation post 51. At the same time, UNDOF observed a
heavy explosion close to a position of the Syrian armed forces in the vicinity of
Burayqah in the area of limitation. Open sources reported that these explosions were
the result of Israeli strikes directed at alleged targets on the Bravo side.
5.
The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that, on 1 June, projectiles had
been fired from the Bravo side towards a ski resort on Mount Hermon on the Alpha
side. On 2 June, military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO) in Observer Group Golan, who are under the operational
control of UNDOF, inspected the site, which was about 100 m south of an Israel
Defense Forces position, and found a crater and an indication that a projectile had
been fired from an east-south-easterly direction.
6.
The Israel Defense Forces continued to carry out their planned operation of
laying razor concertina wire, which they had begun on 1 May, and also installed steel reinforced concrete blast walls west of the Israeli technical fence in the northern part
of the Alpha side. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that the purpose of
the reinforcement walls was to protect civilians and military personnel on the Alpha
side. On 8 June, the Syrian authorities protested against the operations of the Israel
Defense Forces and requested UNDOF to conduct an investigation into the matter. In
its investigation, UNDOF found that, on five occasions during the Israel Defense
Forces operations, Israel Defense Forces soldiers had crossed the ceasefire line and
damaged farmland and vegetation in the northern part of the area of separation. The
leadership of UNDOF liaised with the Israel Defense Forces and the Syrian
authorities to de-escalate the situation.
7.
Sporadic heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the northern, central and southern parts
of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that this
military activity was due to controlled detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of
clearance and training by the Syrian armed forces. UNDOF observed the continuous
presence of the Syrian armed forces, some of whom were armed, staffing a number
of checkpoints within the area of separation, including in the vicinity of Ba ‘th and
Khan Arnabah, as well as along the main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus.
The number of main battle tanks in the area of separation increased over the reporting
period, in particular in the vicinity of Khan Arnabah in the area of separation. UNDOF
also observed the presence of new artillery self-propelled howitzer and anti-aircraft
guns in the area of limitation.
8.
The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems and multiple rocket launcher systems within 10 km of the ceasefire line,
which are considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation
pursuant to the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
9.
UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock. The Israel
Defense Forces continued to express deep concern about these crossings, which they
stated were a threat to the safety and security of Israel Defense Forces personnel
operating in proximity of the ceasefire line and to their activities. UNDOF began
placing warning signs along the ceasefire line to deter any such crossings.
10. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the crossings of the ceasefire line by
2/7

19-16447

S/2019/774

civilians from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel
in the areas of separation and limitation and the firing into the area of separation and
across the ceasefire line.
11. Despite the improvement in the security situation in the UNDOF area of
operations, open sources reported the presence of armed groups and a number of
attacks against Syrian armed forces. In addition, open sources reported the
assassination and attempted assassination of several opposition leaders that had
“reconciled” with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular in the
vicinity of Nawa, Tasil, Yadudah and Muzayrib in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side.
12. During the reporting period, UNDOF did not observe any internally displaced
persons or tents in the area of separation. On 30 June, at the request of the Israel
Defense Forces and with the agreement of the Syrian authorities, UNDOF and the
International Committee of the Red Cross facilitated, through the Qunaytirah
crossing, the handover to Syrian authorities of a Syrian nation al who had previously
been detained by the Israeli authorities in the area of Mount Hermon.
13. Pending its return to full operations carried out on the Bravo side prior to its
relocation in August 2014, UNDOF continued to maintain visibility, albeit limi ted, of
the area of separation and the ceasefire line. UNDOF maintained its positions on
Mount Hermon and at Camp Faouar and United Nations positions 32 and 37, in the
central part of the area of separation, 80, in the southern part of the area of separati on,
and 22, on the Alpha side. UNDOF reoccupied United Nations positions 27, in the
central part of the area of separation, and 85, in the southern part of the area of
separation. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers
of Observer Group Golan. They maintained five fixed and three temporary
observation posts along the ceasefire line, as well as four temporary observation posts
on Mount Hermon. Observer Group Golan also continued to maintain temporary
observation posts in the vicinity of vacated United Nations observation posts 56, 71
and 72. The military observers in Observer Group Golan will not be deployed at
observation posts in the area of separation on a permanent basis until the security
conditions permit, when adequate accommodation and appropriate force protection
measures are in place. The focus of Observer Group Golan remains on continuous
static observation and situational awareness.
14. UNDOF made progress towards its gradual return to the area of separation as it
continued to develop the infrastructure of positions 27, 37 and 85 and improve the
force protection measures at these positions. The Force carried out clearance
operations at United Nations position 68 in preparation for its reconstruction and
reoccupation. The refurbishment of United Nations observation posts 72 and 56 began
in June and is expected to be completed in September 2019.
15. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. With the
improvement in the security situation on the Bravo side, UNDOF plans to resume
inspections in the area of limitation, which were suspended fo r security reasons.
16. UNDOF continued to engage with the Israel Defense Forces with a view to
addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations positions in the
area of separation and to reducing the delays and challenges experienced by U nited
Nations personnel in crossing the technical fence to United Nations observation posts.
The leadership of UNDOF continued to remind the parties of their obligation to
scrupulously abide by the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the ground and to extend all
cooperation to UNDOF in the fulfilment of the tasks under its mandate.
19-16447

3/7

S/2019/774

17. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation as the Force advanced its return to vacated positions in the area
of separation. During the reporting period, UNDOF increased its monthly operational
patrols on routes in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side from 346
in June to 573 in August. In addition, in July UNDOF conducted patrols for the first
time since 2014 to observation post 58, located close to the southernmost part of the
area of limitation on the Bravo side. The opening of the patrol route to observation
post 58 increased the situational awareness of UNDOF of the area of operations.
UNDOF enhanced its visibility on the Bravo side by progressively opening new patrol
routes in the areas of separation and limitation. UNDOF patrol routes covered
approximately 90 per cent of the area of separation and about 50 per cent of the area
of limitation. The clearance of temporary observation posts for use by UNDOF on
Mount Hermon further enhanced the footprint of UNDOF. Liaison officers of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic accompanied UNDOF personnel on all
patrols and assessment visits.
18. In accordance with the UNDOF operational concept, the new UNDOF
mechanized infantry company scheduled to be deployed to the southern part of the
area of separation joined the Force on 5 September, enhancing the progress of the
Force in its gradual return to the area of separation.
19. UNDOF regularly used the Qunaytirah crossing to move equipment and
personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides. Since 15 July, UNDOF military police
have reoccupied on a full-time basis the United Nations Charlie gate position between
the Alpha gate and the Bravo gate at the Qunaytirah crossing.
20. UNDOF continues to liaise with the Israel Defense Forces with regard to their
facilitation of the crossing of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel at the
Qunaytirah crossing, in particular the need for United Nations personnel to use only
documents issued by UNDOF to cross and for an increase in the opening days and
hours of the crossing.
21. UNDOF continues to assess that there is a significant threat to United Nations
personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, and from the possible presence of sleeper
cells of armed groups, including listed terrorist groups. UNDOF continues its
assessment of the security situation in the southernmost part of the area of separation
in view of the planned deployment to positions in that area.
22. In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2477 (2019)
and the UNDOF operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deplo y
appropriate technology to ensure the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and
equipment. A surveillance trailer to support UNDOF observation tasks remained
deployed on the Alpha side at Camp Ziouani and United Nations position 22, while
another was maintained at Camp Faouar.
23. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as facilities in Damascus. UNDOF c onducted
regular rehearsals, exercises and training for contingencies identified. Risk mitigation
measures, including force protection measures, continued to be developed at United
Nations positions and observation posts and at the UNDOF operational base a t Camp
Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
24. As at 17 September, UNDOF comprised 1,058 troops, including 40 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Australia (1), Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji
(193), Ghana (13), India (184), Ireland (134), Nepal (352), the Netherlands (2) and

4/7

19-16447

S/2019/774

Uruguay (172). In addition, 75 military observers from Observer Group Golan,
including 13 women, assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
25. In its resolution 2477 (2019), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 31 December 2019, and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made
at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on
the situation in the Middle East (A/74/310), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 73/22 on Jerusalem and 73/23 on the Syrian Golan.
26. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a
comprehensive, just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security
Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
27. I note the generally continued calm situation in the area of separation. However,
I am concerned about the continued violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement in a particularly volatile time for the region. I am particularly concerned
about the firing on 12 June of missiles across the ceasefire line by the Israel Defense
Forces. Furthermore, I remain concerned by the continued presence of the Syrian
armed forces in the area of separation. There should be no military forces in the area
of separation other than those of UNDOF. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain
from firing across the ceasefire line and crossing the ceasefire line. The continued
presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on both the
Alpha and Bravo sides is also of concern. These developments have the potential to
jeopardize the Agreement. I continue to urge the parties to the Agreement to exercise
utmost restraint. I continue to encourage members of the Security Council to support
efforts to sensitize both parties to the risk of esca lation and the need to preserve the
long-standing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic.
28. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. All vi olations of the ceasefire
line increase tensions between the signatories to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and contribute to undermining stability in the area. The continued liaison
of UNDOF with the parties has contributed to de-escalation during times of
heightened tensions. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic to the Agreement and their continued support for the presence of UNDOF
remain essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be
a priority for the Force. I welcome the stated intentions of the parties to continue to
support the return of UNDOF to full operations on the Bravo side. UNDOF personnel
must be allowed to make use of the Qunaytirah crossing across the ceasefire line, in
line with established procedures, and to move freely within its area of operations to
ensure the effective and efficient implementation of its mandate. At the same time,
the parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of
UNDOF.

19-16447

5/7

S/2019/774

29. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Force’s plans for furthering the objectives set forth by the
Security Council and to ensure that the Force is able to implement its mandate fully,
including through inspections on the Bravo side, conditions permitting.
30. I welcome the fact that the Security Council continues to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in accordance
with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The support of the parties in
facilitating the clearance of mines, unexploded ordnance and explosive remnants of
war in the UNDOF area of operations is crucial. It is also necessary for UNDOF to
continue to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return fully
to the area of separation, conditions permitting.
31. The continued support of Member States, and in particular the confidence of
troop-contributing countries in and their commitment to UNDOF, remain key factors
in the Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to count on the support of
the troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with the implementation of its
agreed plan to increase operations in the areas of separation and limitation. I am
grateful to the Governments of Australia, Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for their contributions, commitment and resolve
and the consummate professionalism of their military personnel in UNDOF. I am also
thankful to the Member States that have contributed military observers to UNTSO.
32. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the acting Head of Mission
and Force Commander, Major General Shivaram Kharel, and all military and civilian
personnel of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan serving under his leadership, who
continue to perform the important tasks assigned to them by the Security Council with
efficiency and commitment under challenging circumstances.

6/7

19-16447

S/2019/774

19-16447

7/7
