United Nations

298th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Wednesday, 1 November 1950, at 10.45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records

CONTENT'S

Page

Appointment of the Secretary..:General of the United Nations (A/1439;
A/1460, A/1470) (concluded) ••••.... : ••••.•••..•.•••..••..•.... 279
Question of the maj ority required for the adoptio~ by t~e Genelral Asse!Dbly
of amendments to and. parts of proposals relatmg to Important questions:
report of the 'Sixth Committee (A/1433) .................•....... 290
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran). '

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations (A/1439, A/1460, A/1470)

(concluded)
[Agenda item 17]
1. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics y (translated from Russian): The' debates so
far have been fairly extensive and have shed light on
a number of questions connected with the item on the
agenda. I am therefore relieved of the necessity of
constantly reverting to questions which are important
but have already been discussed here in sufficient detail. I should like, nevertheless, to comment on some
statements which were made after I spoke yesterday
[296th meeting]. This seems to me important, inas~
much as a whole series of considerations put forward
by various speakers, among them General Romulo and
Mr. Younger, require if only a brief analysis by those
who defend the Charter and the principles of the Charter, and who demal1d that, in deciding the question of
the appointment of the Secretary-General, we should
follow the only normal and legitimate procedure-the
procedure laid down in the Charter.
2. General R6mulo stated [297th meeting] that we
had arrived at a deadlock and that what was happening in connexion with the extension of the term of
office of the Secretary-General was a classic example
of the impasses which result from the rule of unanimity.
3. That is not the case. The deadlock was not brought
about because of the existence of th~ rule of unanimity
-of the veto, as it is called; we arrived at a deadlock
because the principle of unanimity, embodied in that
rule, Was not respected al1d because the rule was not
observed. The principle of unanimity, as it applies to
a recommendation 'concerning the Secretary-General,
requires that, if one of the permanent members objects
to a given candidature, the other permanent members

should respect this rule of unanimity-this principleand should not insist on that candidature. That is what
, the Charter requires. That is the politica,l and moral
aspect of the matter which engendered the rule of
unanimity. If this requirement of the €harter is fulfilled, it, is impossible to arrive at an impasse, because
s\1ch an impasse is created only when the rule of unanimity is violated, in,other words, when the principle of
respect for the rule of unanimity is violated.
4. The principle of unanimity does not oblige members
of the Security Council to give reasons for their objections. The very fact of an objection on the part o( o:ne
of the permanent members of the Security Council stlffices for the question to be regarded as closed. If a vote
is taken in the Security Council on questions which are
not procedural, Article 27 of the Charter requires that
there should be an affirmative vote of seven members
including the concurring votes of the five ,permanent
members. If, however, one of the permanent members
casts a negative vote, the question is considered closed,
provided, of course, that the unanimity rule is respected
and taken into consideration, and provided one e,ds on
the principle that the rule is binding. In that case, no
one has the right to demand that any permanent member of the Security Council which voted against the
proposal concerned should explain why it voted against
the proposal or to begin a discussion on whether or not
that permanent member of the Security, Council had
, any grounds for objecting to the proposal.
5. No one has the right even to put the question in that
way, since we are dealing here with a sacred right, the
exercise of which is at the discretion of those who have
it, and which is not subject to any discussion. That is
the meaning of Article ;27 and of the principle of unanimity. On that principle is based the respoltlsibiHty of
all the permanent members of the Security Council,
which constitute the basic nucleus of the Security Coun-

~79

...

A/PV.298

280

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

<:il; and it is that Council which bears the primary
responsibility for. the maintenance of intern~tional peace
and security agamst any threat of aggl-esslOn. We observe that rule.
.
6. When the question of the appointment of th'1 Secretary-General was discussed in the Security Cou.ncil, the
USSR delegation proposed and supported the appointment of Mr. Modzelewski, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland, to the post of Secretary-General.
The majority did not vote for that nomination. The
Soviet Union delegation did not then take an attitude,
or rather, a pose of indignation and, above all, of caprice.
We did not declare then that, if the members did not
reconsider the question and did not vote for Mr. Modzelewski, we should vote against any other candidate or
use the veto. But that was what the United States delegation did, in the person of Mr. Austin, in conne..~ion
with the other candidatures. Since the candidature we
had proposed failed to secure the support of the majority, we considered the incident closed; our attitude
would have been the same had that support been refused by only a single delegation representing a permanent· member State of the Security Council. We
turned to the consideration of other candidatures.
7. After Trygve Lie's candidature had been proposed
and we had voted against it, it was incumbent upon
the other' members of the Security Council, and particularly upon the permanent members, to respect our
position in the matter, to reckon with it and not to create
a deadlock. What, then, should be done in such a case?
Simply what we did with regard to the Polish candidature, which we set aside. Be good enough, then, to
set aside Trygve Lie's candidature too, seek a third solution, seek a third candidate! In fact, there was not just
one third candidate, there were four-General R6mulo,
!\({r. Charles Malik, representative of Lebanon, Sir Benegal Rau, representative of India, and Mr. Padilla
Nervo, representative of Mexicc;».
8~ Mr. Youn~er-.I b.elieve he is not her~ an? apo.log"ze for &peakmg m hIS absence, but I thmk It would
be mo,:e desirable that he should be present-said here
[297th meeting] that the opinion of the majority should
be respected. But in that case it is necessary in the first
place to speak of the respect due to the Charter, and
to the funaamental principles of the Charter, and also
to the rights of the minorIty. For only the Charter can
protect the minority and its rights against the encroachments of a majority whose strength lies in its size and
in the fact that its members act on the basis of prior
agreement and organize blocs and groups which are
numerically superior to any other group, a luajol'ity
which can therefore automatically exert pressure at any
p'oint, at each step and in regard to any measure which
It wants to take because such a measure serves its own
interests.
9. In these circumstances, the rights of the minority,
as I said yesterday, and I want to reiterate today, are
s~,cred rights. If we speak of respect for t!:le majority,
tho'1 the majority should think of respecting the rights
of the minority.
10. We are told that the deadlock is due to the rule
of uuanimjty; General R6mulo made that point and was
supported by Mr. Younger and some others. I submit
that this is not so, and that the trouble is the unwillingness of certain representatives to "espect the Charter

and its provisions, which offer an excellent way out of
the deadlock.
11. Suppose that one candidate has not been supported by a single permanent member of the Security
Council, and suppose that a second candidate has not
been supported by one permanent member of the other
political camp; in that case, let us find a third, a fourth,
a sixth, a tenth candidate. There are sixty delegations
here, representing most of the world; there must be
someone who can break the deadlock by the normal
methods provided in the Charter. Of course that could
be done, especially since the opponents of our proposal
do not object to the candidates personally. Have we not
heard here the most flattering eulogies of Mr. Padilla
Nervo, General R6mulo, Sir Benegal Rau and Mr.
Charles Malik? All who spoke of them--well or ill, that
is their business-emphasized that there was no objection to any of them.
12. Let us consider the full logical implications of
this situation. Let us assume that two States have become capricious-not only the United States, but also
the USSR. In that case, both the capricious parties
would have to be pacified. The majority of the members
of the Security Council would have to firld a third
course, which both Powers would have to respect. And
we are prepared to respect it. We are prepared to support any candidature, if that candidature i$ suitable.
What is there to prevent the United States from following such a course? What prevents it, as we have heard
here, is political prejudice, bad political motives.
13. It is said that we want to punish Trygve Lie for
his Korean polir.y, for his support of the policy of the
majority. If that were the case, it would be absurd for
us to support the candidature for the post of SecretaryGeneral of any other member of that same camp, who
also pursued, perhaps even more energetically, that same
Korean policy to which we object and which we have
censured here. What kind of logic is this? Why shOUld
the removal of Mr. Lie from the office of SecretaryGeneral for the reasons we have stated be regarded as a
punishment for his Korean policy? Why, in that case,
should political figures who bear no less responsibility
for that policy than he be appropriate candidates? There
l~l'Ust be some consistency, after all.
14. Hence General R6mulo, by proposing that Trygve
Lie should be appointed for a further term in the absence of a recommendation from the Security Council,
is certainly not helping to find Q. way out of the impasse;
on thecontrarj, he and many others who support this
proposal submitted by the Anglo-American bloc are
matting it worse. They are simply aggravating the deadlock instead of breaking it by deciding to respect the
principle of unanimity, to recognize: that one of the permanent members has every legal right to object to a.ny
candidate-whatever motives may be ascribed to it for
so objecting-to withdraw the disputed candidature and
to look for other candidates; and that can be done, if a
real attempt is made. Indeed, from certain statel:llents
which were l11ade yesterday it may be concluded that
even tho'se who are not in favour of this course do not
regard Trygve Lie as really suitable, ev.en from their
own point of view, and that, were it not for this far..
fetched political motive, his value to the United Nations
would not be partIcularly great, since others are not
worse and might even be better.~... ...

298th Meeting-l November 1950
2Bl
-------------------~----------------------:-15. What, then, is the crux of the matter? It is that
21. Let us assume that this is indeed a simple, ada certain influential delegation, representing a certain
ministrative question, which can be settled. simply by
influential State-I shall name it openly, it is the United
agreeing on a candidate who would satisfy everybody.
States-is seeking at any cost to retain the same Trygve
But that means, in the first place, abandoning the polLie for a further term.
icy of using the veto against every other candidate, in
other words, renouncing the threat that the veto will he
16. General R6mulo, in the statement to which I have
used in the case of every dther candidate-the second,
already referred, displayed a characteristic lack of rethe
third, or the tenth. But that is precisely the threat
spect for the Charter and, consequently, for the United
made
by the United States representa,tive, Mr. Austin.·
Nations. He stated openly that, although the Security
If, then, the way out of the impasse is indeed renunciaCouncil was unable to make a recommendation with
tion
of the veto, as General R6mulo said, that renunciregard to Trygve Lie, the Philippine Government
ation
should also extend to the threat to use the veto.
whole-heartedly supported Trygve Lie's appointment.
And
in
that case, the first step should be taken by Mr.
That was a really surprising statement, especially comAustin, since it was he who threatened to use the veto
ing from such a guardian of the Charter as General
and
in .fact used it by influencing others to support his
R6mulo proved himself to be in his capacity as Presiabstention.
dent of the fourth session of the General Assembly.
22. I have frequently maintait}ed, and my delegation
17. How can such statements be made? General R6has
frequently stated, that the veto can take various
mtdo admits that the Security Council has made no
forms.
It can take the form of silence. It can also take
recommendation, although a recommendation is rethe fonn of a conspiracy of abstention: if everybody
quired. He does not deny this. At the same time, he
abstains
except for two members who vote against,
says: "nevertheless, we shall support Trygve Lie's apone
who
votes in favour, the proposal is rejected, havpointment". I wish to stress the word "appointment".
ing
failed
to secure the seven votes required by the
Thus h~ did. not conceal the fact that it is a question of
Charter.
an appomtment.
.
23. Is this not the same veto? Of course it is also a
18. General Romulo thus proposes that Tryg-ve Lie
veto~. it is the same principle of resistance achieved in an
should be appointed without a recommendatiofJ..of the
orgardzed manner. Mr. Dulles openly states in his book
Security Council; he is acting, it seems, not on the
War or Peace-I have already mentioned this, but think
basis of the Charter, but of the orders he has received
it advisable to recall it now-that it is unnecessary for
from a certain quarter. General R6mulo does not wish
the U~ited States to use the right of veto while it has
to recognize or observe the requirements of the Charter.
a
,majority. He used the words "a majority. '.' friendly
He says: "the United Nations must noi.ve a Secretaryto
the United States".1 We know that friendship may
General". We also consider that the United Nations
be obtained by various means, such as threats, pressure,
must have a Secretary-General, but we consider'that it
money, economic dependency, and so forth. You know
should have a' legitimate Secretary-General, that is to
this as well as I do, perhaps even better.
say, a Secretary-General who would hold that post on a
24. Thus, all the views expressed here by the relegitimate basis, on the basis of the law laid down in the
spected General R6mulo are a general's, a soldier's, or,
Charter. But General R6mulo does not want to take that
rather, a sergeant-major's arguments: one, two, three,
into account; his reasoning seems to be as follows: "we
left turn, march! Orders are orders! There is not a
must have a Secretary-General, even if he has to be
scrap of logic in this.
appointed to that post illegally". As for us, we say: "we
must have a Secretary-General who has been legally
25. How does General R6mulo propose that this dead..
appointed".
lock should be broken? He speaks of a vacuum al1d
says: "this vacuum must be filled by adopting the draft
19. General R6mulo proposes that we should take the
resolution submitted by the fifteen delegaticlns". I have
line of least resistance, alleging that this would free us
already said, however, that there is a better method, a
from what he ~al!ed impotence. He does not realize,
method provided for in the Charter; that .is the method
~owever, that it ~s he who is showing a "position of
we have adopted. We maintain that .it is essential to
Impotence", to use his phrase, on a question which he
1
brt.~ak a deadlock and to fill a vacuum by following the
alleges to be mere 1y of an administrative character.
course laid down, established and pointed aut by the
20. If this is indeed a simple, administrative question,
.
Charter.
it is the more unpardonable and inadmissible for Mr.
Austin, Mr. Younger, Mr. Pearson and others to main-· 26. The representative of Pakistan, Sir Mohammad
Zafrulla Khan, said. [297th meeting] that the Security
tain that an important principle is involved and to place
Council could do nothing more and that the solution of
the questiop. on a high moral plane by comparing it with
such
a problem could not be postponed ut,ltil the end
the attitude of the USSR to the foreign policy conducted
of the session. ! should like, incidentally, to say a few
here by Mr. Austin, a policy with which we are allegedly
words about SIr Mohammad Zafrulla Khatl, since he
dissatisfied. We are displeased not only with the policy
frequently comes forward here with legal analyses.
of Mr. Austin, but also with that of Trygve Lie, but we
do not connect the one displeasure with the other be27. I should like to remind Sir Mohammad and those
cause the selection of a Secretary-General is indeed an
who may be swayed by his arguments that, unless I am
administrative question, although it is very important
mistaken, the session will not end for another forty days.
and undoubtedly has political significance. Thus the
I think that it is proposed to close the session between
s~onsors of the proposal for the extension of Trygve
Lie's term of office should eliminate the contradictions
1 See Dulles, ]. F., War or Peace, New York, ,!lhe Macmiltan
which exist in their arguments.
Co., 1950, page 195.

ana

282

GeneM:'al AS8embly"':-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

10 and 15 December, and today is 1 November. Thus,
we have at least forty to forty-five days. I believe, however, that if we were to take the course laid down in the
Charter, we could reach agreement in five minutes by
accepting one of the candidates to whom no objections
were raised and setting aside any candidate who is op. posed by anyone, not only by the five permanent members of' the Security Council, but by the other six
.' non-permanent members.
28. If Egypt, Cuba, Norway, India or any other nonpermanent member objects to any candidate, I should
. be prepared-and I am sure that my colleague, Jacob
Malik, will agree with me-not to object to any c~ndi­
dature, out of respect--I 'repeat, out of respect--riot
only for what may be termed the arithmetical minority,
· but also out of respect for the rights of that minority
and for the principles on which it should base its position and in accordance with which it should act.
29. It is therefore allsoltitely incomprehensible that
Sir Mohammad Zafrulla Khan should have said that
· nothing could be done. What would happen if the mat-.
ter were postponed for two weeks, or four 'Weeks?
Would there not be time to take a vote on it before
10 December? But you have decided to pursue this
· course. Why do you insist on settling the matter today?
Because you do not want to give us an opportunity' of
continuing our discussions and our attempts to reach
agreement.
30. We know of cases where the five permanent members of the Securtty Council or the Foreign Ministers
of the great Powers could not rea~h agreement not only
for months, but even for years. One of the most difficult and insoluble problems during, th.e drafting _of !he
peace treaty with Italy was the question of the ltalIan
colonies. Although many meetings of the Cou11cil of
Foreign Ministers were devoted to that question, no
· solution was found: one year passed, then another and
then a third. But in the end a decision was· reached, a
unanimous decision which solved the question and which
was included in the peace treaty in the following form:
"If with respect to" any of these territories th~ Four
Powers are unable to agree upon their disposal within
one year ... the matter shall be referred to the General Assembly of the United Nations for a recommendation".2 As you know, the General Assembly took a
decision, ·which all four Powers, the five great Powers,
.
undertook to observe and have observed.
31. Of course, you will say that you are not interested
in examples. Why? I am thet'efore surprised that the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan, who is always a logical
thinker, should have departed from his normal practice. His reasoning is not logical but contradictory and,
what is more, it is as unsubstantial as any argument
can be which says that "it is too .late for action" when
there are still forty days ahead.
32. Mr. Younger said that, although the Charter admittedly made no reference to an extension of a term
of office, it did not forbid it. The deduction is that we
may do anything which the Charter does not forbid.
The Charter does not, for example,. say that. representatives may stand on their heads. None of them, however, stand on their heads-they all stand on their feet.
The argument that what is not forbidden is permissible
2

See Treaty of Peace with Italy, Annex XI, paragraph 3.

does not, therefore, hold water. No criminal code lays
down that swindling, rape or murder are forbidden or
that theft is permitted. But they state that, if.you commit
murder or if you rob someone, you will receive a specific punishment. It follows therefore from Mr. Younger's logic that I am free to murder, because murder is
not forbidden but is merely described as punishable.
I do not know what sort of logic that is. Yesterday, we
were given a t~,ste of French logic and today we are
being given a taste of English logic. But that is not logic
as the world in general understands it; it is not even
logic at all.
33. Mr. Younger is wrong for the further reason that
reso'lution 11 (I), adopted by the General Assembly on
24 January 1946, provides the following: "The same
rules apply to a renewal.of appointment as to an original appointment". I am quoting paragraph 4 (c) of that
resolution. I should be glad if someone could explain to
me the difference between an extension of appointment
and a renewal of appointment.
34. I am very glad that Mr. EI-Khouri is the next
speaker. I shall ask him either to refute what I have
said or to answer this elementary question: what is
the difference between "appointment" and "renewal of
appointment"? What is the difference? In both cases
there is an appointment. I have a second question to
put. What is the difference between the renewal of a.
person's appointment and the extension of the appointment of the same person? Does it make any difference
whether I say "Trygve Lie's appointment must be renewed for a specific period" or "Trygve Lie's appointment must be extended for a specific period"? I see no
difference.
35. Consequently, even if we take the point of view
of the majority that it is a question of extending the
term of office, that is in effect a "renewal of appointment", nothing else. This being so, I would ask you to
be good enough to carry out the terms of General
Assembly resolution 11 (I).
36. We are told in reply that, while that General
Assembly may have taken· one d~cisio.n, the present
Assembly is free to take another. That would, however,
be the height of arbitrariness: it would be an absolutely
intolerable method of conducting our work. It would
mean that every decision taken by the General Assembly would be amended in the light of the attitude we
chose to adopt to this or that question later. Of course,
the General Assembly laid down that provision and is
also free to revoke it. But before you can take action
on the basis of a provision which has been revoked, you
must first revoke it. Revoke it then, and. you will be in
a position to say: "Reference should no longet· be made
to the resolution of 24 January 1946 but to that of
1 November 1950. Here you have a new rule and a new
decision, to the effect that there is no need to comply
with the provisions laid down on 24 January 1946/'
37. You will, however, encounter a very serious obstacle, because the existing provision is based on Article 97 of the Charter and you would thus be faced with
the necessity of revoking the Charter also. I am aware
that .many of you are prepared to go to those lengths,
without regard for any considerations, without regard
for Article 109 of the Charter or for the procedure
laid down in the Charter for the amendment of its pro"

298th Meeting-l November 1950
visions. But an this would be a violation of the law and
we shall res~lutely oppose such violations.
38. It is also contended that, since the General Assembly appointed the Secretary-General for a term of five
years, the Security Council is not concerned with the
question under discussion. The General Assembly may,
it is asserted, extend and, so to speak, permit a renewal
of appointment for any period without reference to the
Security Council. ,
39. But you are overlooking one fact. In the first place,
paragraph 4 (a) of General Assembly resolution 11 (I)
states: "There being no stipulation on the subject (i.e.,
extension of appointment) in the Charter, the General
Assembly and the Security Council are free to modify
the term of office of future Secretaries-General in the
light of experience". You are now changing that. You
are saying "for three years". Not for five years, but for
three. Who then will this be? The next SecretaryGeneral or the same one? But he'is already the next one.
40. Consequently paragraph 4 (a) of the resolution
does not entitle you to exclude the Secl.lrity Council
from this procedure. If we are to abide by the Charter,
the General Assembly cannot modify the SecretaryGeneral's term of office by unilateral action, without reference to the Security Council. If we abide by the Charter, only the General Assembly and the Security Council,
acting together, can modify that term.
41. But perhaps our approach to the interpretation of
the Charter is incorrect? In that case, let me put another question which any lawyer-and in this particular
instance not only a lawyer-could answer without difficulty, namely, what basic rule should be followed in
interpreting a law?
.
42. The basic rule-and this is recognized everywhere
-is that we have to start with the .fundamental provision enunciated in that law, with the provision which
requires interpretation. What, then, is the provision
that is fundamental in that sense and that we have to
interpret? It is the provision concerning the modification of the term of office, concerning' the procedure
governing such modification. If General Assembly resolution 11 (I) provides that the term of office must be
modified in a specific way, namely, by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, how should that
provision be interpreted in relation to the present case?
Inasmuch as someone is being appointed for a new term
and, inasmuch as that term is no longer to be five years
but three years or even, as has been suggested, one year,
or for ever or for an indefinite time, or until ~. date
which Vim probably never arrive-'and that is apparently the intention with regard to the respected candidate round whom the struggle revolves today-it can of
course only be interpreted to mean that we must by-pass
the Security Council.
43. But I maintain that, if we are dealing with the
term of office, whatever it may be, and with its modification, we must be ,guided by the only provision contained on that subject in the Charter, which stipulates
that the term of office of future Secretaries-General may
not be modified by unilateral action on the part of the
General Assembly but, must be effected solely in accordance with the Charter, in other words, by the General Assembly and the Securi~y Council. .
.

283

44. This is precisely the situation in which we find
ourselves today and we can by-pass the Security Council only by committing a flagrant violation of the Charter. The Security Council is not even being consulted.
The question has arisen of reappointing the SecretaryGeneral for a further, reduced term or of extending his
previous term of office. But I should like to know
whether the Security Council has in fact discussed that
question. It has discussed the question of appointing a .
Secretary-General and has considered various candidates. But· has the Council been consulted on the question of extending the Secretary-General's term of office'
or reappointing him or on the question of modifying his
next term of office? Is the Security Council not in fact
concerned with that?
45. If it is concerned with the' appointment of a Sec
retary-General, is it not also concerned with the ques·
tion of who will fulfil his .functions after the expiry ot
the originCl,l term of office? Would it not be correct to
describe this flagrant disregard of the Charter and the
Security Council as a mockery of the Charter, of the
principles it sets forth and of the United Nations as a (
whole? Is it not an arbitrary action which the em- I
boldened majority has seen fit to perpetrate against the.
minority, the Charter ul1d the constitution under which
our Organization has been established?
46. Our Organization cannot live or operate without
respect for the Charter. It will die, it will wither away,
it will collapse. That is precisely what the sponsors of
this draft resolution are aiming a\t. And they ilave the
effrontery to assert, as Mr. Pearson has asserted here,
that neither the Charter nor a General Assembly resolution can render the whole Organhlation ineffective. '
47. No, it is acts such as these which will doom the
General Assembly to .inactivity, or, worse still, tocriminal acts which can find no justification or shadow of
justification in the Charter. But to lose our respect for
the Charter is to lose our respect for the Organization
itself, to lose respect for ourselves.
48. Mr., Pearson is somewhat frivolous in his treatment of so important an issue as the one with which we .
are now concerned. He has an equally frivolous and
off-hand approach to the attitude which a number of
delegations and, in particular, that of the USSR, will
adopt towards the illegally appointed Secretary-General.
49. I have alr~ady indicated what the attitude of the Ii
Soviet Union will be. We shall not recognize s~ch a
Secretary-General as the lega~ holder of that. office,
because he will have been continued in office illegally
What is illegal is illegal and we cannot be compelled to
admit that black is white and that illegality is legality.
According to Mr. Pearson, the responsibility in this
regard will rest, not with those who are flagrantly and .
cynically viol~ting the Charter, but with those who are.
defending it and upholding the honour and dignity of
the United N a t i o n s . '
.
50. Mohamed SALAH-EL-DIN Bey (Egypt): The'
question before us is highly important. The election of
the Secretary-General, who supervises the administrative and executive functions of our Organization, is
no trivial matter,' especially when it provokes such sharp
disagreement, involves the interpretation of one of the
most important provisions of the Charter and is likely
to create a .precedent which would bind our Organiza-

284

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

tion. It is therefore necessary that we should be very
careful in dealing with this question and that the posi..
i tion should be completely clarified, not only with regard
to the two viewpoints presented to us by the representatives who have spoken before me, but also from the
techni~~ viewpoin~ which reconci1~s logical analysis and
proper mterpretatlon of the provIsions of the Charter
with accomplished facts and factors relative to the necessities of our work.
51. The Egyptian delegation, in this connexion, will
not follow the method sometimes adopted, of determining the objective and then seeking to justi~ it. It will
adopt the method of interpreting the provisions of the
Charter in the light of th~ practical situation which confronts us, regardless of the ultimate result we may eventually reach. I need not say much after having heard
the detailed speeches from both sides in support of their
respective viewpoints, which are to a great extent
worthy of consideration.
52. The viewpoint of the Soviet Union, which is based
on Article 97 of the Charter and on General Assembly
res\')lution 11 (I) of 24 January 1946, is that a recommendation by the Security Council is necessary in order
to have the Secretary-General appointed by the General Assembly.
53. The Egyptian delegation does not doubt for one
moment, in principle, the validity of this viewpoint..
But what is to be done in the event of the Security
Council being unable to make the required recommendation to the General Assembly? The period of five years,
which is fixed in the General Assembly's resolution, is
nearly over. Will the Organization remain without a
Secretary-General when we are all agreed on the importance of his functions and responsibilities? I do not
imagine that any of us hold such a view. Nor can any
of us rightly interpret Article 97 of the Charter in a
way that would lead to a result which would be unac.
ceptable both logically and in practice.
54. Wh~t, then,. is the solution? The only;, solution
naturally IS to refer the matter to the General Assembly
.to deal with as it deems ,fit. In other words, once the
, Security Council concedes failure to reach an agreement
on making a recommendation to the General Assembly
concerning the appointment of a Secretary-General, the
Council has exhausted its competence. I may even say
that it has abandoned its competence in favour of the
General Assembly. To speak differently would mean
giving the Security Council or anyone of its permanent
members licence to obstruct a most important function
of the Organization. The Charter cannot conceivably
have such an aim.
55. 0.£ COljrSe, it must first be proved to us that the
Securit~r CO,uncil has been unable to make the r~com­
mendaticm required of it. This indeed' is the situation
in which we find ourselves today.
56. I am not basing this conclusion on the letters of the
President of the Security Council dated 12 and 15 October [A/1439 and A/1460], for all that c,a,n be gathered
from these two letters is that the Security Council held
four meetings duri.ng which it could not agree on the
recommendation to be made to the General Assembly
concerning the appointment of a Secretary-General. It
is possible for some members to maintain that these
four meetings were not sufficient and that the Security

Council should continue to try to reach an agreement.
Some of us may even feel that the members of the
Security Council should remain behind closed doors
until they agree on a recommendation. This may be
conceivable, btlt we aJl know that the situation is more
complicated than th(~ two letters of the President of the
Security Council may convey.
57. Whatever may have been the terms used by the
representative of the United States at the meetings of
the Security Council or at those of the permanent members concerning the attitude of his government toward
the appointment of the Secretary-General, it is definitely established that the present situation is as follows:
the veto was used against the recommendation for the
reappointment of Mr. Trygve Lie, and the veto would
be used, if necessary, against a recommendation for the
,appointment of any candidate other than Mr. Trygve
'L'
l le.
S8. There is no need to dwell on the reasons given by
each party for taking its respective stand. In my view
it would serve no end except to provide a fresh example
of the disadvantages of the right of veto. I think all will
agree with me that the only description to be applied to
the situation reached in the Security Council is that of
a deadloCk. In other words, the Security Council has
been unable to exercise the functions vested in it by
Article 97 of the Charter. It is inevitable, therefore, that
these functions should go to the General Assembly, as
we have already pointed out.
59. However, this competence cannot go to the General Assen;bly restricted by any condition, but it ~hould
be entire and intact. This is plain enough. The General
Assembly becomes the master of the whole situation.
No one, .of course, is entitled to limit its competence to
a certain proposal or to a'certain candidate. I make it
a point to say this lest it may be understood that our
competence in considering this question is limited to the
proposal which has been submitted, ~mely, that the
present Secretary-General should be continued in\ office.
I feel in duty bound to give a warning in thi~ connexion, if our judgment is to be sound and bastd on
full cognizance of the Charter; and if we ar/~ to (avoid
unsound precedents that may be used agains1: us il\1 the
future.
60. Moreover, the limitations of the Gener,tl A~,sem­
bly's competence to the extension of the SecretaryGeneral's term of office may lead to a very odd sit~ation
which would not be acceptable to any of us, namely, the
perpetuating. of the term of office of the present Secretary-General in the event of the repeated failure of
the Security Council to recommend anothe:r candidate.
The whole question is therefore reduced to this, that
the General Assembly is entitled to approve or reject the
proposal submitted by the fifteen co-sponsors as weii as
to consider any other proposal on the nomination of any
other candidate.
61. The General Assembly should, in all events, follow in voting the established procedure for the election,
since all these proposals have in fact one object, namely,
the election of the Secretal~y-General.
62. Needless to say, if the permanent members of the
Security C.oundl which have the right of veto should
decide after these lengthy and critical discussions to try
again, or if the General Assembly should ask the Secu-

298th Meeting-l November 1950
rity' Council to make a fresh effort, we should welcome
such a move.
63. For these reason~ the Egyptian delegation will
support the SovIet Umon draft resolution [A/1471].
If this draft resolution is rejected by the General Assembly, I am afraid that many will find themselves as we
do, fo~ced to abstain from voting on the joi~t draft
resolution.
64. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): I should like
to tax the patience of the representatives for a few minutes in discussing the legal aspects of the case before us.
65. It is well known that the legality of any proposition is a fundamftntal basis for its adoption. In political
matters some politicians would consider that legality is
not nece~sary when the necessity of action is present.
~hey ml~ht evade legal!ty and adopt certain resolutlOns. whIch. are rat~er dlegal, b.ut there is a general
doc~r~ne whIch prevatls that legabty is essential for any
decIsIOn or any action to be taKen, even in political
matters. Any problem solved on a wrong basis' is not
considered to be solved; if it is solved legally and in
the right way, it is considered solved. Otherwise the
problem would remain unsolved, awaiting solution 'on a
legal and righteous basis.
~. M~uy speakers on this subject have been discussIng the legal aspect of the case; others have been disl;ussing it fro~ the political angle. The representative
of Egypt, who Just.preceded me, ~as dealt with the legal
aspect of the questton. I should bke to comment a little
on .what h~ said and also to take uv some othe~' points
whIch I thmk WQuld be proper for the consideration of
the Assembly.
67. Some previous speakers have said that the Organization of the United Nations cannot remain without a
Secretary-General, whose position is very important for
the conduct of the executive and administrative work of
the Organization. One representative made reference to
a legal opinion given by the International Court of Justice in regard to Article 4 of the Charter,8 to the effect
that the .G~neral Assembly cannot take an~ position on
the admISSIon of new Members to the Untted Nations
without the recommendation of the Security Council.
He said that Article 97 would, in that case, resemble
Article 4. I say that there is some difference between
the two articles mentioned and the effect which results
from the application of both of them.
68. In the matter of Article 4 of the Charter, it is quite
conceivable that, if the Security Council did not make
the required recommendation, there would be no direct
harm to the Organization because the question of the
admission of an applicant State was deferred for one
two or three years. But in the matter of the Secretary~
Gene.ral Article 97 should be so applied as to ensure an
~ppomtme~t~ because the Organization cannot continue
Its work WIthout a Secretary-General. There is that difference between the two cases, and because of it we
cannot ~pply in the matter of the Secretary-General the
lega~ op~nlon pronounced by the International Court of
Jusbce 10 conrlexion with the question of admission to
membership.
'
69. But let. us consider the matter from the other
.standpoint. Article 97 requires a recommendation from

U8 .~~ p,~o,!"Petence of Assembly rCO!lrding admission to the
n, e notJOns} Advisory Opinion: I.e.l. Reporls19S0} page 4.

285

the Security Council. Therefore the Security Council
should make such a recommendation. It cannot b1ve up
the problem .and leave it unsolved, but should find some
way of making the recommendation. Some delegations
have suggested h~re that the Security Council should
hold further meetings-another four or even eight-in
order to reach a solution and to agree upon a recommendation, but I am afraid that under the system at
prese.n~ opera~ing in the Security Council it would be
useless even If that body met again a hundred times.
This is especially so since we have heard the representative of one of the permanent members declare
officially &,d before all the world that any proposal for
any candidate other than the ,.~ndidate he supportsthat ~s, the present Secretar:? C:.eneral-.would be vetoed
by him. In that case what would be the use of nominating candidates who would be opposed and vetoed by one
of the permanent members of the Security Council? So
!ong as any pe~ma~ent member of the Security Council
mtends to use Its rIght of veto against any candidate it
does not approve we cannot reach any solution of the
problem.
.
?O: Is it true, in.the light of what the sponsors of ~he
JOInt ~raft resolutIOn and the President of the Security
C?uncII have reported to us, that the Council has in fact
failed to find a way out of the difficulty ? We must find
some 'Yay out of this impasse whkh they claim exists.
What Is~he way out? I have a way to suggest, and if
the SecurIty Council were to adopt it, it would extricate
the General Assembly from the difficulties with which it
now finds itself faced.
71. Is it necessary for the Security Council to recommend to .the General Assembly one candidate only?
l?oes Artl<:le 97 of the Chart~r impose upon the SecurIty ~ouncd the recommend!1bonof .one candidate only,
a':ld IS such a recommendation consIstent with the digntty of the General Assembly? Should the General
Assembly be dictated to and instructed or ordered by
the Security Council to appoint this gentleman and no
o~her? Is it proper for the Security Council to say: "we
gIve you one name only"? This matter was discussed in
San Francisco when Article 97 was drawn up and as
I. remember it, the general conviction there was that'the
Security Council was not bound to recommend only
one candidate but could nominate two or three or even
more, and thus leave the General Assembh ~ free to
choose among them by majority vote.
..
72. "yvhy?O the members of the Security Council not
exercls.~ thIS tolerance and accept candidates proposed
by theIr colleagues? They shOUld not veto candidates
proposed by o!her representatives. If .the candidacy of
Mr. Trygve Lie, proposed by the Umted States, were
not vetoed by the Soviet Union, and if a candidacy
proposed by the Soviet Union were not vetoed by the
United States, or any other permanent member of the
Council, then two candidates could be presented to
the General Assembly, and whichever received the majority of votes in. the Assembly could be. appointed.
Would there be any harm in that method? The final
choice would be left to the General Assembly. The 1l1ajority .of votes would go to the person in whom representatives had the most confidence, and he would be
apponnted as Secretary-General. ..
"
73. Th~ question of the appointme~t J~ a. SecretaryGeneral IS now before the General J\ssemMy. A .pro-

General Assemblyooo:--Fifth ,Session-Plenary Meetings

286

posal has been submitted by ~fteen delegations that
]\IIr.Lie'=:! term of office should be extended for three
~'Years. Its authors feel that there is no other way out of
the impasse.· . , "
'
74. The representative of Egypt has stated that the
General Assembly should not be bound by 'anyone procedure, that'it should have full liberty to decide whether
to extend the term of office of the present SecretaryGeneral or to choose among other candidates. .
'75. Some representatives have asked whether there is
'any provision in the Charter permitting an extension of
the ,Secretary-General's term of office; they have said
there is none.' Others have asked: HBut is there any
provision in the Charter prohibiting an extension?"
76. It is true·that the Charter neither allows nor prohibits such an extension. But there is a procedure set
.Iorth in the Charter for the appointment of 'a SecretaryGeneral. It is therefore the legal procedure, and any
other is out of order. For instance, let us suppose that
a certain door was designated as the entrance to an
official reception, a.nd a person came in through another
door. He could say: HIs there anything in the invitation
which 'prohibits the use of another door?" The answer
,is: "N 0, but the entrance has been fixed and you may.
not use any other".
7-7. The procedure for the appointment of a SecretaryGeneral. is fixed by Article 97 of the Charter. Any other
procedure is illegal. I do not think that the proposed
extension of the term of office is a co!'rect procedure.
Some maintain that, since the General Assembly itself
fixed the term of office at five years in 1946, the Assembly may now adopt a new resolution changing the term
to eight years or ten years, if it so wishes. But could
.such a provision be applied retroactively to the previous
appointment, or must it Qpply only to future appointments? I think it must apply to future appointments.
If the Assembly wished to apply the provision retroactively, it could so vote upon. a proposal to that efiect.
There is, howe;ver, no such proposal before; the Assembly now.
78. , In fact, we know that ,during the last two weeks
we have been met in the General Assembly 'by different
int~rpretations of the Charter. Attempts have been made
to interpret the Charter in a way which is not clear
from the text. Attempts have been made to find other
interpretations which might satisfy a '.need in which
we finci ourselves.
0

o

00

79. What are the reasons and the necessity for these
interpretations? All have been created by the rule of
unanimity which exists in the Charter. These vetoes,
which have been repeatedly exercised by the privileged
permanent membr5 of the Security Council, lead the
opponents t· ~ipd other interpretations of the Charter in
order to gel. .- it of the impasse in which they find themselves. I COlh;ider that the permanent members of the
Security Council conceived all these interpretations and
produced all the impasses into which w~ have fallen.
The permanent members should be more tolerant in
their behaviour to each other. Why should they not try
to limit their use of the veto, especially in such a cas ~ ?
• Why should they veto one canoidate for the office of
SecretaryaGeneral? They should not veto any of the
candidates; they should give a chance to all the memo

. bers of the Security Council tq present. names of
candidates.
80. I was certainly pleased to hear Mr. Austin, the
representative of the United States, saying from this
rostrum [296th meeting] that the other candidates pro~
posed by the representative of the Soviet Union were
all respected people, that they were liked and esteemed
and that they were considered able and fully qualified
to fill the post.. Mr. Austin said, however, that he did
not wish the present Secretary-General to be punished.
81. I do not know why he considered that the presentation of more than one candidate to the General Assem~
. bly would be a punishment for Mr. Lie. Mr. Lie has a
very good majority in the General Assembly, it would
appear. If other candidates were proposed at the same
time, he might win in a legal manner. He would then
enter upon his functions through the right door, and
there would be no chance then for the Soviet Union
representative to say that his government would not
recognize Mr. Lie. He would be recognized if he entered
through the right .poor. Why should we make him come
through the window '.'J:' through the back door? He is
big enough to enter through the door and perhaps too
big to enter through the window.
82. I think that Mr. Austin should appreciate this
situation, and that the Security Council should try, at
another meeting, to recommend more than one candi~
date to the General Assembly, thus'giving us a choice
so that all the delegations could give their vote to the
person in whom they have confidence. I think that now
there are. many who will abstain from voting on this
draft resolution, or who may l1ppose it, not because they
are hostile to Mr. Trygve Li,~, but becau~e they find
that the procedu:i:e is not legal. We do not. wish'to sup~
port. or to adhere to any procedure in the General .
,Assembly which could be opposed from the legal point
of view. So long as we c.at~ apply the law and act legally,
why should we go through the back door and try to find
a new interpretation of the Ch,!-rter? .
83. Appointment does not mean extension; appointment
means appointment. A re:ommendation by the Secw'ity
Council does not necessarily mean a recommendat.ion
'of only one person; the Security Council may recommend' more than one if its members wis~ to adopt that
approach in order to facilitate the task before the General Assembly and in order not to leave us in this
impasse.
.
84. The representative of China said yesterday [297th
meeting] that, although the. Security CouncU has not
agreed up to this point, that does not necessarily mean
that it will be impossible for the Security Cour.dl to
agree within the next three years. It is 110t inevitable
that the present animosity and opposition and hostility
will be continued for three years; the members of the
Security Council mn.y find a way out tomorrow, may
find 'a way next month. Why should we proceed, on t~e
assumption that it is impossible to reach agreement 111
the Security Council, to act in a way which is contrary
to the course indicated in the Charter? The representative of China said that we might change the draft res?lution to read that Mr: Trygve Lie should continue 111
office until the Security Council w~s able to make recommendations under Article 97 of the Charter. Well,
we might give the Security Council a chance to reconsider the situation and to try to harmonize matters

298',th Meeting-l November 1950
------------------r.

287

and to. reach agreement on more than one candidate.
91. It has joined other delegations in submitting the
As long as it is considered that the Security Council
draft resolution which provides for a three-year excan recommend only one candidate, it will be difficult to
tension of the term of office of the present Secretaryattain any results.
General, Mr. Trygve Lie, because the members of the
Security Council were unable to agree on a recommen85. This is the first time that we have been faced
dation
concerning the appointment of a new Secretarywith this impasse. But it seems evident that it can be
General ill accordance with the Charter. My delegar~peated. Who knows whether the same thing will
tion is happy to have taken this step; it considers that,
not happen again after three years, or after one year,
in yiew of the very special circumstances which have
or after five years? One permanent member of the
given
rise to this problem, essential and extremely im- \
Security Council nil.ay declare-as one has declared
portant principles are involved.
this time-that it will veto any candidate except its
own. Then they will come to us and say: uWe are in an
92. Indeed, what in normal times would have been
impasse. We should extend the term of office. Why
merely an administrative matter, a purely personai
should we extend the term of office? Because it is imquestion, bc.:omes in these historic days, when the
possible for an appointment to be made. Under Article
future of the United Nations is at stake, a most impor97 of the Charter, an appointment has to be made upon
tant question of principle.
.
the recommendation of the Security Council. As long
93. Mr. Lie, because of his great personal qualities,
as there is no recoinmendation, we cannot appoint.
his administrative ability and his valuable experience,
What should we then do? VYe should extend the term
to which my delegation is pleased to pay a public tribute,
of office."
fully deserves to be appointed unanimously for a fur86. That is the way out which is likely to continue,
ther term as Secretary-General, in t:ecognitiol1 '0f his
which is likely to be repeated forever'. I do not think
meritorious services in permitting the Organization to
that the members of the General Assembly are willing
function effectively in its difficult initial stages.
to .establish such a precedent al~d to leave themselves
94. That in itself would be more than ·enough, but, as .
and the Organization in such an impasse for the future.
I said before, a question of principle is involved. I shall
87. I am sorry; I should have liked to have' before
not attempt to prove this, because that has already been
me some legal draft resolution which I could have supbrilliantly done by other sponsors of the draft resolu-'
ported. But I consider that the draft resolution which . tion. I shall not repeat their arguments which have eshas been presented is not in conformity with the Chartablished so securely the opinion whiCh my delegation
ter, and I have given a pledge never to support any
fully shares.
action which is not legal. I appeal to all the delegations
95. Basing itself on these considerations, and faithful
to be interested' irt the legal aspects of any question put
to the spirit of co-operation which it has shown in con"
before us. It would be much better for the reputation
and the solidarity of the General A.ssembly to stick to . nexion with any measure calculated to raise the prestige .
of the United Nations and strengthen the principles and
that principle and to keep that doctrine sacred. I say
aims
which constitute the foundation of the Organizaagain that I am sorry, but I cannot support this draft
tion,my.country
could do no less than take part in
resolution.
the effort to safeguard that prestige and uphold those
88. It seems that there is practically a revolt in the
General Assembly against the Security Council. It has " principles and aims in this specific question, which is
so closely linked with the whole problem of Korea, a
been manifested in different forms during this session
problem which endangered the' very existence of the,
from 19 September until now. I may comment that this
United Nations.
revolt is not unexpected. It was preceded by many
96. To replace Mr. Lie at this crucial time, just as'
warnings to the Security Council and its permanent
he
has displayed such efficiency and energy in car.:ying
members to take heed of such a future explosion which
out
the duties incumbent UfJOn him under the decisions
might come about as a result of the obstructions and
vv:hich the Security Council took. to counter the unfrustrations practised in the Security Council .on many
justified l~ggression against the little Republic of Korea,
matters, which have beet1 patiently endured by the
could
have no other effect upon world public opinion
Member States.
.
than to lower the prestige of the United Nations, which
89. Another way in which the Member States have
has risen so greatly on acr.ount of the swiftness and
been frustrated has been iri .regard to the question of
efficacy
with which it has repelled. aggression.
the admission of new Members: I believe that there
97. My delegation considers "'l}at the weaker COunwill also be a revolt in connexion with that matter.
tries can obtain a genuine guart
only if the system
Nobody can endure for a long time the elimination of
of collective security is strengtheu(;u and if it inspires
large States like Italy ftom the United Nations. They
ever grea~e1' confidence; otherwise they must depend
have the right to be among us, but the veto in the
on the good will of the great Powers, and only for so
Security Council has prevented their admission to the
long as those great Powers decide to ·act in that spirit
UuiteCl Nations. We also hope that this situation will
of good will. .
'.'
.
.
. .
be .remedied sO,as to avoid another revolt by the bold·
a~tIon of the General Assembly against the veto exer98.. For this re~son we believe that everything that
CIsed in the Security Council, even though it may lack
helps to maintain the prestige and increase the moral
a certain legality.
force of our present system of collective security,
90. 'Mr: CHAMORRO (Nicaragua)-. (translated
which we are all striving to perfect,. ~oncerns the smaller
fro~ Spanish): My delegation wishes simply to ex·coofuntries. more vitally than the great Powers. It is
platn briefly why it has joined in sponsoring the draft
obvious that the latter can maintain·their own collecresolution under consideration.
tive security with their own forces, whereas the weaker

288

.

f

I

I
t

I

t

-

General Auembly-Fifth Senion-Plenary Meetings

countries can nnd a real guarantee only in the growing
recommendation in the present situation, this means
strength of the Organization, for the defence of interthat the deadlock must continue indefinitely.
national peace, security and justice.
105. Having failed in our own endeavours to secure a
99. Thus my delegation, representing a small country,
positive recommendation from the Security Council,
has enthusiastically joined other delegations in sponsorand anxious to see that the United Nations is not deing this draft resolution.
prived of its chief administrative officer indefinitely,
my
delegation has joined others in sponsoring the
100. Sir Benegal RAU (India): In the somewhat
present
draft resolution.
heated atmosphere that this issue has created, it is inevit~ble ~hat actions should be misinterpreted and
106. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
motives Imputed. I shall therefore try to explain as . The list of speakers is now closed and the general
objectively as I can the situation as it appears to nrlY
discussion is also closed. We shall ptoceed to vote on the
delegation and the part which we have tried to play.
various draft resolutions before us.
101. As you all know, under Article 97 of the Char107. The representative of Iraq wishes to speak. If
ter, the General Assembly has· to appoint the Secreta~r­
he wishes to explain his vote, I shall ask him to be
General on the recommendation of the Security Counci:.t.
kind enough to wait until after the voting. The represenI believe the International Court of Justice has advisc<l,
tative of Iraq wishes to submit a draft resolution;
in another connexion, that a recommendation does n(lt
if there are no objections, therefore, I shall give him the
include the absence of a recommendation-which, in.floor.
deed, requires no authority. There must be a positivte
108. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq) : My delegation has not
recommendation. So we tried hard in the Security
participated in the discussion but we have listened most
Council to arrive at a positive recommendation. We first
carefully
to all that has been said by other speakers.
considered two candidates, A and B. I shall not men··
tion their names. A was rejected; B was '\1etoed. TherE\
109. We certainly feel that the Security Council has
was thus no recommendation at that stage, and the
been completely paralysed by the veto and the counter
Security Council reported accordingly to the President
veto. In other words, the veto has paralysed the Securof the General Assembly.
ity Council and we consider it impotent 011 this issue.
We have considered the grave legal and political prob102. It then occurred to my delegation that a further
lems which have been discussed here. We feel that if
attempt should he made to achieve a positive recommenthe United Nations is to act in the true spirit of the
dation, if possible. In order to convince the General
Charter, we must have a calmer atmosphere. We must
Assembly and the world generally that the Security
have clearer views and a more conciliatory spirit. That
Council had attempted to exhaust all possibilities, I
is why my delegation is convinced that the General
suggested, on the analogy of the plan by which we
Assembly is now seized of the problem of. the appointelected the judges of the International Court of Jusment of a Secretary-General and that, SlDce the Setice, that each of the eleven members of the Security
curity Council has failed to' do so, it is now the duty of
Council should put forwar.d two names. These twentythe General Assembly to deal with the matter afresh and
two names were then to be submitted confidentially to
to study it anew, uninfluenced. by any arguments
the permanent me1nbers which, after mutual consultation,
brought to the General Assembly by the Securi~y
would submit to the Security Council a revised list comCouncil, which has failed to reacQ. agreement on thiS
prising only those names that none of the permanent
issue.
members would veto. From this revised list the Security
Council would then proceed to elect a person to be
110. We believe that it is the duty of the General Asrecommended for appointment as Secretary-General.
sembly to take 'up the matter again and, for that purpose, to appoint a committee to· study all the aspects
103. This suggestion, although welcomed at first, did
tOf
the issue and to report to the General Assembly within
not find sufficent support in the Security Council. How'ttwo weeks. I shall, therefore, read the draft resolution
ever; after some further consultation amongst the perwhich my delegation is submitting:
manent members, the Security Council voted upon two
other candidates, C and D. Neither of them secured the
((The General Assembly,
necessary number of votes. The deadlock therefore con((Recognizing that the Security Council has failed
tinued. Indeed, it became quite clear from the proceedsof;w
to Tecommend a candidate for the post of
ings in the Council that the deadlock would continue
S~cretary-General
of the United Nations,
whatever names were proposed.
i'( Recognizing that the General Assembly is faced
104. In. this situation my delegation had to consider
with
the question of appointing the Secretarywhat to do. On the one hand, there waS this continuing
General,
deadlock;. (In the other hand, the United Nations had
to have a Secretary-Gerteral. We have been advised that
((Appoints a committee of seven representatives of
legal experts consider that the only possl.ble courSe is
:M:ember States to meet to study the matter and to
for the General Assembly to decide that the present
rt~port to the General Assembly within. two weeks
Secretary-General should continue in office for a cerabout ways and means of solving the m~tter."
tain time, and they further tell Us that the General As111. Th~ PRESIDENT (translated from French):
sembly can legally do this. I am aware that according
There were already two draft resolutions before the
to another school of thought the General Assembly canG-L'11eral
Assembly: the joint draft resolution [A/1464
not do even this legally. In their view the deadlock must
and
Add.1]
and the dtaft resolution submitted by the
continue until the Security Council produces a positive
Soviet Union [A/1471].
.
recott1!tlendation. Since 'there is no prospect of such a

298th Meeting-l November 19S~~
112~ A further draft resolution has just been submitted
121. I think thll1t the representatives in the General
to the Assembly but the t~ has not yet been dis.. . Asset:nbly will appreciate. Mr. Trygve Lie's gesture
tributed. It would be difficult for me to put that draft
and, If they agree, we shall vote by secret ballot. I must
resolution to the vote. unless the Assembly so agreed.
make it clear, however, that, in my opinion as FresiThe d.raft resolution is very simple. I~ proposes that a
dent, the acceptance of my suggestion would mean suscommittee of seven should be set up to study the quespending one of the rules of procedure and it must theretion and report to the General Assembly.
fore be approved unanimously. If a single delegation
objects to my suggestion, I shall have no choice but
113. If I were to follow the chronological order, I
to put the draft resolution to the vote in the normal
should put the joint draft resolution to the vote first.
manner.
I feel, however, that the draft resolution submitted by
122. Are there any objections to my suggestion?
the USSR delegation should be put to the vote first,
Since the representative of Chile objects, we must proas there would be no point in taking a vote on it if the
ceed in the normal manner.
joint draft resolution were adopted.
123. I shall put to the vote the joint draft resolution
114. I suggest that we should vote first on the draft
[A/1464 and AtJfd.1] ,
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union d~legation;
if that text is adopted, the question will be settled. If
The dntft resolution was adopted by 46 votes to 5,
it is rejected, I shall put to the vote the suggestion of the
with 8 abstentions.
representative of Iraq. If that is rejE.cted too, we shall
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
come back to the original draft resolution. If there are
As
the draft resolution has been adopted, Mr. Trygve
no objections, we shall follow that procedure.
Lie, Secretary-General of the United Nations, will reU5. I shall put to the vote the draft resolution of the
main in office for a period of three years.
Soviet Union [A/1471].
125. The representative of Iraq has asked for the
The draft resolution was rejected by 37 votes to 9,
floor in order to expla·tn his vote.
i
with 11 abstentions.
126. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq) : My delegation had sin- 1
116. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
cerely hoped that the question of the selection of the j
I shall ask Mr. Cordier to read the ·text of the draft
Secretar;y-General would be one of those to be dis- 11
resolution which has just been submitted by the reprecussed among the five permanent members of the Sesentative of Iraq. The question is simple and I do not
curity Council in accordance with the draft resolution 1
think that there is any need to have the written text
[A/C.1/585] whic:h we had the honour to co-sponsor i
distributed.
in the First Committee with Syria, as being one of 1
The Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General
those problems which l'xe outstanding among the great
read the draft resolution submitted by Iraq.
?owers. Weeathad hoPded for ffurthetr study of thIe Tatter ·
In
a more
m an peace ul a mosphere. t IS re- 1
117. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
grettable that the matter has taken such a tense and .
I shall put to the vote the draft resolution of Iraq.
highly controversial c h a r a c t e r . !
The draft resolution was rejected by 35 votes to
15, with 7 abstentions.
127. As regards the fifteen-Power proposal for the
118. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):· extension of the term of office of Mr. Trygve Lie, mYj
delegation deeply regrets that it could not vote for it,
We shall now return to the joint draft resolution
and
had to abstain. This was not due to lack of respect
[A/1464 and Add.1]. Before putting it to the vote,
and
admiration for Mr. Lie and for his many fine
I shOUld like to give my opinion and to make a sugqualities. On reviewing the Palestine tragedy since j
gestion. I shall try to be as clear as possible and would
1947, the tragedy which has led to the homelessness of i
ask the representatives for their undivided attention.
nearly
one million Arabs, we find that Mr. Lie had notl
119. As the Assembly knows, the rules of procedure
been
entirely
impartial. His activities, and his state- •j.
do not provide for a secret ballot except in the case of
ments as revealed in the Atnerican Press, show hitn to
the election of persons and States. All other draft resoha}ie taken sides in many situations. Mr. Lie did not
lutions must be voted on in the normal manner, namely,
react
towards recent Jewish aggressions in Palestine
by show of hands, unless a delegation asks for a vote
with anything like the zeal which he displayed on the
by roll-eall.
.
question of Korea.
120. If we wished to apply the lwes of procedure
128. I need not emphasize here that Palestine, the
strktly, I should have to put the draft resolution to the
heart of the Arab world, is today bleeding. Unless jusvote in the normal way. It is true that the draft resolutice
iI;; done to the million Arabs of Palestine, the United
tion does not involve art election; however, since it
ati~.)ns record in promotil1g world peace and justice
N
concerns a person, namely, the present SecretarJ~
will. not be a clear one. With due respect to Mr. Lie,
General, I think that it would be advisable to apply the
we
do not believe that he has helped enough to make the
rules of procedure mutatis mutandis and to have a secret
United
Nations bring about peace and justice to the
ballot. I must inform you that the person concemed,
Arabs
of
Palestine.
Mr. Trygve I~ie, has asked me to request the Assembly
129. The PRESIDENT: I am sorry, but that is not
b a.gree to a secret ballot on this occasion because
an explanation of a vote. You cannot continue this way
that would. give delegations more freedom of action.
to attack a person who is not present here anq who has
Furthermore, when the authors of the Charter' agreed to
received the confidence of the General Assembly by its
the secret ballot, one of their reasons for so doing was
46 votes in his favour. I am sorry, but. I shall be
to ensure that after the vote had been taken, no one
obliged to stop the reprtsentative' of Iraq.
should ](now who had voted in favour and who against.
·.1

I
111.1

J.

J!.

I

290

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

------------------=---~-------..::.---.........,;;;...-.--------,,-

130. Mr, AL-]AMALI (Iraq): It would certainly
have been a betrayal of Arab public opinion and sentiment if we had not abstained.
131. Sir Keith OFFICER (Australia): I thank the
President for giving me this opportunity to explain the
vote of the Australian delegation on this matter.
,132.. First of all, I wish to make it clear that we are
entirely at one with those countries in the General
Assembly which wish, by this resolution, to prevent 'any
attempt by any nation to punish Mr. Lie for doing
what was, by all standards, his clear duty as regards the
actio,n of the United Nations in Korea. It should be plain
from the statements which have been made by Mr.
Spender, both here and in the Committees of the General Assembly, where Australia stands in relation to
Soviet methods of standing over us arid endeavo':1ring to
iatimidate us. No nation has made its position on this
question clearer than we have done.
.
. 133. I should like to make it crystal clear that we are
glad to see Mr. Lie as Secretary-General for a further
term. Our abstention on the vote in no .way relates to
Mr. Lie. We have abstained because we feei that the
action which the General Assembly has taken may
create a precedent, both as regards Article 97 and
certain other articles of the Charter, with which Australia could find it hard to agree. The words of the
Charter seem to' us to be clear, They are confirmed by
the understanding of them which was recorded J>y the
General Assembly in 1946 when the original appointment of the Secretary-General was under consideration: They are confirmed by other authorities on the
Charter such as, for instance, Professot: Kelsen, whose
work has been so much quoted in recent weeks. While
we 'realize the case that can be made out on the other
side, Australia entertains genuine doubts about it and
has felt ther.efore that abstention is the proper course.
134. We shouid not like to see the events of the past
month or so repeated. We hope, thereforet that the
General Assembly, over the next two years, will give
careful consideration to the possibility, as a matter of
practice, of the Secretary-General in the future being
appointed for a term of perhaps seven years and not
being eligible for reappointment. First-class men can be
found, and such a provision would mean that we should
be forced to make a :real effort to look for them, while
pro,:,iding by the increased term of seven· years for
reasonable administrative continuity.
135. I should like to repeat that our abstention had
nothing to do with Mr. Lie himself, whom we congratulate most heartily on his new term in 9ffice, and
we wish him very well in it.
Question of the majority required :for the adop.
tion by the General Assembly of anlendments to
and parts of proposals relating to important
questions: report of the Sixth Committee
. (A/1433)
.
[Agenda item 49]
136. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The draft resolution which the Sixth Committee has
submitted to the Assembl~ was approved unariiP10tisly
Printed in U.S.A.

-or at least without opposition. It is t:=ontained in the
.committee's report [4/1433]. ~ call upon the Rapporteur.
137. Mr. KURAL (Turkey),' Rapporteur of the
Sixth Committee (translated from French) : You know
that our rules of procedure, as they now stand, do not
specify whether the important parts of a proposal, or
amendments to such a proposal, must be adopted by a
simple majority or by a two-thirds. majority when the
proposal as a whole, in order to be adopted by the
Assembly, normally requires a two-thirds majority.
138. That problem has given rise to certain difficulties in the past. It was studied in turn by the Special
Committee on Methods and Procedures of the General
Assembly, and by the General Assembly at its fourth
session, and the Secretary-General subsequently produced a brilliant report [A/1356] on the question.
Finally the Sixth Committee, this year, has arrived at
a solution.
139. The details of the discussion on the subject appear in the Sixth Committee's. report. I should like
simply to read to you the new rule of procedure which
the Sixth Committee proposes that you should adopt.
It reads as follows:
"Decisiotls of the General Assembly on amendments to proposals relating to important questions,
and on parts of such proposals put "to the vote separately, shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of
the Members present and voting."
140. I should like to draw your attention' to. the fact
that, under the draft resolution before you, this new
rule 84 (a) will become effective immediately upon its
adoption, that is to say, should you adopt it, this very
day.
141. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As I said before, the proposed new rule of procedure
was unanimously approved by the Sixth Committee.
If there are no objections to this rule, we shall consider that it has been adopted.
.
142. 'Mr. BARTOS (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): Mr~ President, may I be permitted to make
a slight correction to your statement. There were three
abstentions during the vote in the Sixth Committee;
two delegations explained their votes in writing and
those explanations are included in the report.
143. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Thank you for that expl2.D.ation. In my earlier statement I said that the proposed new rule of procedure
had been approved unanimously or at least without opposition. My own view is that when there is nu opposition to a draft resolution, it is adopted unanimously,
since in my opinion-and that is my ruling-an abstention is equal to non-participation in the vote. However,
as the Yugoslav representative has just stated, explanations of votes are already contained in the teport of the
Sixth Committee.
.
144. I therefore put to the vote the draft resolution.
proposed by the Sixth Comlr!ittee.
.
The. draft resolution was adopted by 57 'Votes, to
nonel 'with 1 abstention.
.

'The meeting rose at 1.5 p.'1n.
A-40464--,November 1950-3/600
