58

General Assembly-Thirty-first Senion

and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 3403 (XXX) of 28
November 1975 on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 which set in motion measures that form
the basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research;12
2. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to continue concentrating its work in
the sphere of economic and social training and research
so as to include specific projects on the problems in
the areas identified by the General Assembly at its
sixth and seventh special sessions and in the relevant
decisions of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Institute for Training and Research will have greater and
wider financial support from Member States and organizations.
10 I st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/108.

United Nations Conference on Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided to initiate concerted
international action to combat desertification,
Recalling further its resolution 3511 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on the United Nations Conference on
Desertification,
Having considered the relevant parts of the report
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its fourth session relating to
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
3337 (XXIX), 13
Noting decision 73 (IV) 14 of 13 April 1976 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme acting in its capacity as the intergovernmental preparatory body for the Conference,
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
2013 (LXI) of 3 August 1976,
l. Urges Member States to continue to co-operate
with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Desertification in the preparations for the Conference, including the case studies and the proposed transnational activities to combat desertification;
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in addition to his

other responsibilities as Executive Director, to assume
the responsibility of Secretary-General of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices
in the capacity of observers, in accordance with Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate as an observer;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs of
the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers;
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to invite other
interested non-governmental organizations that might
have a specific contribution to make to the work of
the Conference to be represented by observers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions for their travel
expenses and per diem;
6. Decides to include Arabic as a language of the
Conference;
1. Approves the provisional agenda for the Conference annexed to the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
results of the Conference, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
ANNEX
Provisional agenda for the United Nations Conference
on Desertification

1.

2.

Opening of the Conference and election of the President.
Organization of the work of the Conference:
(a)
( b)

Adoption of the rules of procedure;
Adoption of the agenda;

(c)

Establishment of committees and other sessional
bodies;

(d)

Election of officers other than the President;

(e)

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
appointment of the Credentials Committee.

12 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/31/14).
1 3 Ibid., Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25), chap. VII and annex II.
14 Ibid., annex I.

59

V, Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3.
4.
5.

General debate.
Processes and causes of desertification.
Plan of action to combat desertification.

6.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: report
of the Credentials Committee.
Adoption of the report of the Conference.

7.

31/109.

Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3001 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3128 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973,
3325 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 and 3438 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975 on the preparations for Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Considering that solutions to human settlements problems around the world are urgently required,
Bearing in mind the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order1 G and the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States 16 and the importance for the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade of improving human
settlements around the world as a major component
in improving the quality of life,
Noting that Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements was held at Vancouver from 31
May to 11 June 1976:
(a) To stimulate innovation, serve as a means
for the exchange of experience and ensure the widest
possible dissemination of new ideas and technologies
in the field of human settlements,
(b) To formulate and make recommendations for
an international programme in this field which will
assist Governments,

( c) To stimulate interest in developing appropriate
financial systems and institutions for human settlements among those making financial resources available and those in a position to use such resources, considering that the most appropriate and effective action
for dealing with human settlements problems is action at
the national level, but that such action will require
assistance and co-operation between and among all
States,
1. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the
Government of Canada for the excellent organization,
facilities and generous hospitality provided for Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements;

2. Expresses appreciation to the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme for the
guidance as well as the generous support it provided
for the Conference;
3. Takes note of the report of the Conference, including the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 17 the recommendations for national acrn Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI); see also resolution 3362 (S-VII) entitled "Development and international
economic co-operation".
16 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
17 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.

18

tion
and the resolutions for international co-operation ;19
4. Commends the Secretary-General of the Conference on the successful preparation and organization
of the Conference;
5. Urges the Goverments of all Member States to
consider, on a priority basis, the recommendations for
national action contained in the report and to take
those recommendations into account when reviewing
their existing policies and strategies in the field of
human settlements;
6. Calls upon the regional commissions and urges
all other international organizations within and outside
the United Nations system to take intensified and sustained action in support of national efforts, including
exchanges of information and assistance, at the request
of Governments, in the formulation, design, implementation and evaluation of projects to improve human
settlements;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene regional meetings, as appropriate, within the framework
of the regional commissions, to establish guidelines for
the co-ordination, within each region, of action to be
taken in order to deal with human settlements and to
report to the General Assembly on the results of their
deliberations no later than at the thirty-second session;
8. Takes note of the notes by the Secretary-General
transmitting reports on the regional meetings already held within the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Economic Commission for Europe.20

101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/II0.

Living conditions of the Palestinian
people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 197 6, 21 and the recommendations for national action 22 adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, held at Vancouver
from 31 May to 11 June 1976,
Recalling also resolution 3 of the Conference28 on
living conditions of the Palestinians in occupied territories, and Economic and Social Council resolution
2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Recalling further the recommendation adopted at the
Regional Preparatory Conference for Asia and the Pacific, held at Teheran from 14 to 19 June 1975,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the relevant United Nations organs and specialized
agencies, to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report on the living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories;
tS Ibid., chap. II.
10 Ibid., chap. III.
20 A/C.2/31/5, A/C.2/31/9.
2 1 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human

Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.
22 Ibid., chap. II.
2 3 ibid., chap. Ill.
