UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/51
12 October 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3586th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 October 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s report of
4 October 1995 (S/1995/842) on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 1008 (1995) of 7 August 1995.
"The Security Council has noted the positive developments in Angola
since the Secretary-General’s report of 17 July 1995 (S/1995/588). The
Council is encouraged by the meetings in Franceville and Brussels between
President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi which provided the opportunity to
discuss the critical issues and reach agreement on consolidation of the
peace process. These meetings, particularly the round table in Brussels,
provided important reassurance to the international community. The Council
welcomes the continued commitment of both parties to the process of
dialogue. The Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, of the observer States to the Angola peace
process, and of States in the region, to help in carrying forward the
process.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) including the
reduction of cease-fire violations, the disengagement of forces, the
enhanced cooperation between the parties and UNAVEM III, the signing of the
status of forces agreement, the provision of logistic facilities for the
mission and the conclusion of the joint declaration on the free circulation
of persons and goods. The Council also welcomes the ongoing deployment of
UNAVEM III support units and stresses the importance of a timely deployment
of the infantry battalions of UNAVEM III. The Council stresses the
importance of an independent UNAVEM radio and urges the Government of
Angola to provide, without delay, the facilities to allow it to operate.

95-30776 (E)

121095

/...

S/PRST/1995/51
English
Page 2

"The Security Council none the less remains concerned at delays in the
peace process, in particular in respect of quartering of UNITA and the
Rapid Reaction Police, demining, disarmament, the return of the FAA to
barracks and the formation of the new armed forces as well as the
repatriation of mercenaries. The Council underscores the peril that may
result from further delays. The Council is also deeply concerned at
allegations of renewed laying of mines and demands that all parties refrain
from such actions.
"The Security Council emphasizes that continuing cooperation between
the parties is essential if a sustained cessation of hostilities is to take
hold. In this regard, the Council calls on the parties to refrain from
troop movements or military activities that might create tension or lead to
renewed hostilities.
"The Security Council is concerned about the continuing complaints of
human rights violations, and endorses the decision of the Joint Commission
to inscribe human rights in the agenda of all its regular sessions.
"The Security Council wishes to emphasize that post-peace-keeping
elements can make an important contribution to a viable long-term peace.
The Council notes the linkage between political and economic well-being and
the need to ensure that displaced people and refugees are able to return to
their places of origin. The Council reaffirms the Secretary-General’s call
for a comprehensive coordinated and integrated effort on the part of all
relevant international organizations to help rebuild the Angolan economic
infrastructure. The Council requests Member States to continue to support
the ongoing humanitarian activities in Angola. It welcomes the commitments
made at the Round Table Conference, held in Brussels, in September 1995 and
urges those that have made pledges to fulfil their commitments as soon as
possible.
"The Security Council will continue to monitor closely the situation
in Angola and looks forward to future reports of the Secretary-General."

-----
