United Nations

S/PV.3429

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3429th Meeting
Thursday, 29 September 1994, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Solana Madariaga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cardenas
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Wang Xuexian
Mr. Bratinka
Mr. Olhaye
Mr. Juppé
Mr. McKinnon
Mr. Ayewah
Mr. Bin Abdulla
Mr. Marker
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Bakuramutsa
Sir David Hannay
Mr. Christopher

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 27 September 1994 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1994/1107)

94-86445 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of welcome
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like, at the outset of the meeting, to acknowledge
the presence at the Council table of the distinguished
Minister of External Relations of the Federative Republic
of Brazil, His Excellency Mr. Celso Luiz Nunes Amorim;
the distinguished Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Czech Republic, His Excellency Mr. Pavel Bratinka; the
distinguished Minister for Foreign Affairs of the French
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alain Juppé; the
distinguished Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of New Zealand, His Excellency The
Right Honourable Donald Charles McKinnon; the
distinguished Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the
Sultanate of Oman, His Excellency Mr. Yousef Bin
Al-Alawi Bin Abdulla; and the distinguished Secretary of
State of the United States of America, His Excellency The
Honorable Warren Christopher. On behalf of the Council,
I extend a warm welcome to all of them.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 27 September 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1994/1107)
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Haiti in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1994/1107, which contains the text of a letter dated
27 September 1994 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the report of the multinational
force in Haiti.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1994/1051 and S/1994/1054, letters dated 13 September
1994 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council, respectively;
S/1994/1077, letter dated 20 September 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
the text of a declaration by the European Union on Haiti
issued on 19 September 1994; and S/1994/1097, letter
dated 26 September 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of a statement by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide
dated 25 September 1994.
The first speaker is the distinguished Secretary of
State of the United States of America, His Excellency
The Honourable Warren Christopher. I invite him to
make his statement.
Mr. Christopher (United States of America):
Mr. President, distinguished members of the Security
Council, Mr. Secretary-General, colleagues and friends, I
am particularly honoured by the presence of each of you
this morning and thank you for your attendance and
attention. I am pleased to have an opportunity to review
with you the status of our joint efforts in Haiti.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Longchamp
(Haiti) took a place at the Council table.

2

The Security Council, of course, continues to play a
vital role in giving Haiti and the people of Haiti a chance
to take back their destiny. Our shared determination is to
deliver tangible results: The Haitian military leaders will
step down. Legitimate government will be restored. The
people of Haiti will have a chance to rebuild their country

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
on a stable foundation of democracy and respect for human
rights.
The multinational coalition in Haiti is the culmination
of three years of intensive, coordinated efforts by the
United Nations, the Organization of American States and
the friends and neighbours of Haiti. Since the 1991 coup,
this Council has viewed the overthrow of democracy in
Haiti as a threat to regional security and to international
norms. We recognized our responsibility to stand together
for stability and the restoration of democratic government
in the Western Hemisphere. Together, we explored every
avenue to achieve a peaceful resolution. We negotiated in
good faith. We imposed and then strengthened sanctions
against Haiti. We made plain to the military leaders that
their tyranny in Haiti was neither tolerable nor tenable.
For almost three years, these military leaders met our
efforts with defiance and disdain. In 1993, General Cédras
signed the Governors Island Agreement, which had been
negotiated under United Nations auspices. But thereafter he
refused to implement the accord. Instead, widespread
atrocities continued in Haiti. Three months ago, the
military leaders expelled the monitors sent by the United
Nations and the Organization of American States to
encourage respect for human rights in Haiti. After that
happened, this Council determined that the time had come
to take decisive action.
As we all know, Security Council resolution
940 (1994) and the multinational coalition that it authorized
are an expression of our collective resolve. An expanding
coalition of 28 nations, so geographically diverse as to
include Bangladesh and Bolivia, has been forged in pursuit
of a common cause. This coalition is in the best tradition
of the United Nations. It is grounded in principled
diplomacy and it is backed by the determination to use
force if necessary.
Our willingness to exercise military force, pursuant to
resolution 940 (1994), has allowed us to reach an
agreement for the peaceful restoration of democracy that
has made the Mission safer for our coalition and for the
Haitian people. It is enabling us to implement our common
goals: the departure from power of the de facto leaders, the
restoration of Haiti’s legitimate Government and the return
of President Aristide. It is allowing us to establish a safe
and secure environment much more quickly than would
otherwise have been possible.
As leader of the multinational coalition in Haiti, the
United States values and depends upon close coordination

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
and consultation with other Member States. To that end,
today I want to report to the Council on our progress to
date; I hope this will be a very up-to-date report.
As the Council knows, the first 3,000 soldiers
stepped off their helicopters and landing craft on
19 September, less than two weeks ago. Since then their
ranks have grown to almost 16,000. The coalition has
taken swift and important steps towards establishing a
secure and stable environment in Haiti.
Among the immediate priorities was to secure the
airport in Port-au-Prince and the seaports around the
country. With the transportation hubs under control, we
have moved nearly 42,000 tons of supplies into Haiti.
Another important element of promoting security is
reducing the number of guns on the streets, and our
coalition is taking a variety of measures to achieve that
goal.
Hundreds of coalition forces are in training in Puerto
Rico, on their way to oversee and monitor the police in
Haiti. The first group of international police monitors
will arrive in Haiti in the next few days.
With the coalition’s deployment, the time has come
to prepare for the resumption of normal economic
activities in Haiti. The United States and Haiti have
introduced, with President Aristide’s support, a draft
resolution in the Council to lift completely United Nations
sanctions when President Aristide returns. By adopting
this draft resolution, we will reinforce Haitian democracy
and we will signal our readiness to support Haiti’s
recovery as soon as democratic government is restored.
As President Clinton announced on Monday of this
week, we will also act expeditiously, consistent with
resolution 917 (1994) and the "all necessary means"
provision of resolution 940 (1994), to allow goods
essential to the coalition’s efforts to enter Haiti. In
addition, the United States will lift all unilateral sanctions
on Haiti except those targeted on the coup leaders and
their named supporters. We urge other nations that may
have unilateral sanctions to consider and take similar
steps.
Part of the coalition’s task is to create conditions in
which the refugees from Haiti can safely return.
Hundreds of Haitians, now reassured that they can walk
their streets, sleep in their homes without fear and speak
their minds, have voluntarily left Guantánamo since

3

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
26 September to return to Haiti. We are confident that with
President Aristide’s restoration many more will make the
right choice and go back to their homeland.
I believe that political developments in Haiti are a
reason for cautious optimism. Two weeks ago, President
Aristide eloquently demonstrated his commitment to
democracy when he said very forthrightly that the true test
of a democracy is in its second free election. He also said
that he would not be a candidate for re-election in the
campaign, but would ensure that the election took place. In
recent days and weeks he has repeatedly called for a spirit
of reconciliation, and he has been making frequent radio
statements urging the people of Haiti - his supporters - to
remain calm and not to disrupt the peaceful transition.
President Aristide has also called the Haitian
Parliament into session, with the amnesty law as the first
order of business. As the Council knows, the Parliament
began its deliberations only yesterday. It is interesting to
remember and important to note that only two weeks ago
many Haitian parliamentarians were in hiding, fearful for
their lives, and many were also in exile. Now the presence
of the coalition permits them to emerge and to represent the
people of Haiti in safety.
Another hopeful step will be occurring today: Mayor
Evans Paul of Port-au-Prince, who has been barred from
City Hall by armed thugs for the last year, will reclaim his
rightful office.
I think we can all take satisfaction in the superb
efforts of the coalition forces in Haiti. We should
remember that only two weeks ago elements of the Haitian
security forces and the attachés were free to intimidate the
public with impunity. Today, coalition forces allow
Haitians to enjoy their first respite from terror in three
years. The competence and, indeed, the compassion of our
troops have inspired the confidence of the Haitian people.

I do want to note, however, that the international
community has taken on a very serious challenge in Haiti.
Our courageous troops will face difficult, and sometimes
dangerous, situations; that moment is not yet completely
past. There will be risks, even setbacks, and we must be
ready for them. Our hard work and commitment are
essential. But we must know that we have the plans and
the determination to move ahead - and we will.
A top priority for the coalition, of course, is to enable
the United Nations mission to enter Haiti promptly and

4

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
under conditions that will allow it to assume its full
responsibilities. The United States will do its part to
ensure an early and smooth transition of authority from
the coalition to the United Nations Mission.
Twelve observers from the United Nations Mission
are already in Haiti to plan for the coordination of this
important change. They are working closely with General
Shelton of the coalition forces.
Just as the coalition is fulfilling its mandate in Haiti,
so the United Nations Mission must be ready to assume
responsibility when a safe environment has been secured.
Most of the nations participating in the coalition,
including, of course, the United States, have indicated that
they will also participate in the United Nations Mission.
A number of other nations have expressed an interest in
joining. Clearly, the support of this Council, of Member
States and of the Secretary-General will be essential to
ensure that the transition is seamless and effective.
Our mission in Haiti reminds us once again of the
importance of United Nations peace-keeping operations.
The United States is providing $1.2 billion for peacekeeping this year, a step which will bring up to date our
arrearages and be a major step towards meeting our
overall obligations. We have also proposed reforms to
improve the way in which the peace-keeping operations
are financed, equipped and organized.
When we act, and when we ask the United Nations
to act, as we have done in Haiti, we must provide it with
the means for mounting successful missions in a timely
manner. The multinational coalition will establish, and
the United Nations Mission will help maintain, a secure
environment in Haiti. But the broader international
community must provide Haiti with the economic,
humanitarian and technical aid that will spur development
and consolidate democracy. As members of the Council
know, an intensive and extensive humanitarian assistance
programme is already under way. Food, medicine and
medical supplies are being distributed. Sanitation is being
improved. Engineering teams are helping to restore
electricity throughout the country.
Last month, a World Bank meeting of many
countries represented here favourably reviewed President
Aristide’s economic recovery programme. One of the
striking things for us in the United States has been to
witness the technical expertise that President Aristide has
assembled in planning for his return. I think we can draw

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
some confidence from the way that that has been
undertaken and planned.
The United States is already committed to providing
$100 million, and we are ready to provide additional aid.
But our effort here must be part of a larger undertaking,
and we look to other nations and the international financial
institutions to respond rapidly and generously.
The importance of supporting Haiti’s recovery and
reconstruction in the months ahead cannot be overstated.
Assistance will be essential to provide balance-of-payments
support and to clear up the Haitian arrears, an effort that
will begin in earnest with a support group meeting which
our Treasury Department is hosting on 7 October 1994. On
behalf of the United States, I strongly urge the members of
this Council and other nations to do everything possible
now to support Haiti on the road to economic recovery.
Haiti is the poorest country in the Western
hemisphere, and one of the poorest in the world. But Haiti
is not a State without institutions or without promise. It is
a State with an elected government, an elected parliament
and a democratic constitution, all of which were pushed
aside in 1991 by the de facto regime and its coup. The
coalition’s mission is not to reinvent or to provide new
institutions, but to create conditions that will allow Haiti’s
legitimate institutions to return.
All of us know that the coalition, the United Nations
Mission and economic assistance cannot and should not be
a substitute for determined efforts by Haiti’s Government
and by its people to build a democratic and prosperous
society. The hard work of rebuilding Haiti rests with them
and with Haiti’s democratic leaders, who fully understand
what their responsibilities and obligations are.
Haiti has an opportunity to replace the rule of fear
with the rule of law, to take its rightful place in the
growing community of democratic States, to work with the
international community to solve the transnational problems
we all face, and, very significantly, to become an
international inspiration and not an outcast.
In closing, I wish to reaffirm the indispensable role
that the international community has played in bringing
Haiti to this hopeful point. By our joining together in
strength, the burden that each of us must bear is reduced
and the prospect of overall success is increased. Our
nations understand that the best way to achieve our goal is
by acting together. That is what we reaffirmed, that is
what we indicated so strongly when we adopted resolution

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
940 (1994); that is what we are doing today, and that is
what we must do in the months ahead: using our
collective strength to restore democracy within our
hemisphere and to create the important precedent that
would come from success in Haiti.
I thank the President and the members of the
Council for their attention.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the distinguished Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the French Republic, Mr. Alain Juppé. I invite
him to make his statement.
Mr. Juppé (France) (interpretation from French): I
should like to thank the Secretary of State of the United
States for the very precise account he has given us of the
deployment of the multinational force that was authorized
under Security Council resolution 940 (1994). As the
Council is aware, France voted unhesitatingly for that
resolution because we were aware that only a radical
solution could make it possible to get this crisis off dead
centre. My country welcomes the peaceful circumstances
under which this operation is taking place, and we would
like to pay a tribute to those who are conducting it, as
well as to the troops who are participating in it.
Today, therefore, we can contemplate with some
hope the situation in Haiti. After three long years of
usurpation of power by the military, during which the
principles of democracy were flouted, human rights were
violated, the economy was devastated and the agreements
signed never respected, the people of Haiti can finally
hope to resume their journey towards democracy and
development.
A date has been fixed for the departure of the
military. It must be respected, and the presence of
several thousand troops and police is a guarantee that it
will be. In the streets, fear has started to recede; in the
parliament, political life has resumed since the Haitian
deputies were finally able to meet yesterday at an
inaugural meeting, and it should now begin to discuss the
legislative texts needed to pursue the process of
democratization in the country. I am thinking in
particular of the amnesty bill and the law concerning the
separation of the army and the police. The adoption of
these texts was a part of the Governors Island
Agreements, which were and remain the basis of France’s
policy towards Haiti.

5

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
In a few weeks, perhaps - or even, we hope, in a few
days - the legitimately elected President will return to his
country and to his people. France which, together with the
other Friends of Haiti meeting at the United Nations with
the Secretary-General, has constantly been making efforts
to permit legality to be restored to that country, is gratified
with this result. We hope that this return will mark a new
era of peace, justice, democracy - which implies the
organization of elections in accordance with the timetable
laid down - economic recovery and, in particular, national
reconciliation.
The time has now come for Haiti to regain its rightful
place in the international community. France believes that
now a very clear political signal needs to be sent out by a
decision, as has been proposed, to lift the sanctions in
accordance with the Security Council resolutions, a decision
which will take effect the day after the return of President
Aristide to Port-au-Prince. France, for its part, is prepared
to lift the unilateral sanctions that it imposed as soon as
technical conditions make this possible.
My country has long-standing historic ties with Haiti
and, as is known, will contribute 100 police officers and
gendarmes to the United Nations mission. We are also
prepared to resume bilateral cooperation programmes as
soon as conditions make this possible. This cooperation
has in the past been substantial, as is well known.
Thus, according to what President Aristide himself has
said, Haiti can now resume its journey from destitution and
poverty to the recovery with dignity and with the assistance
of the international community. This is earnestly desired
by France.
Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Permit me very briefly to express my thanks to
the Secretary of State of the United States for his update on
developments concerning the multinational force in Haiti.
Our contribution to that force is a contingent of
gendarmes who will act as police monitors. They are
already in Puerto Rico and, as of next week, will begin
their work on Haitian soil. Immediately afterwards,
medical personnel and engineers of the Argentine armed
forces will arrive in Haiti. Similarly, two ships of our navy
will supplement their verification tasks under the embargo
imposed by the Council, which it has been carrying out for
months, with logistical support for the multinational force.
The Argentine Republic, which belongs to the
Secretary-General’s Group of Friends for Haiti, has also

6

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
been very actively involved in several aspects of the
Haitian crisis with a view to reaching a peaceful solution.
We reiterate that the only viable solution requires the full
restoration of constitutional order and the return of
President Aristide in the context of compliance with the
Governors Island Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We believe that the present situation is a positive
one and that we are closer than ever to the solution
foreseen by the international community, in keeping with
the Charter of the United Nations and the will of the
legitimate Government of Haiti. In this regard, we
eagerly await the return of President Aristide so that the
sanctions imposed on Haiti can be lifted. We hope that
a resolution foreseeing that eventuality will be adopted by
this Council in a matter of hours.
The people of Haiti has noticed that the hope of
escaping from its past is beginning to materialize. The
Argentine Republic is pleased to be able to contribute to
this cooperative effort to restore to Haiti its plundered
sovereignty.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the Minister of External Relations of the
Federative Republic of Brazil, His Excellency Mr. Celso
Luiz Nunes Amorim, on whom I now call.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil):
Let me express my
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our
deliberations. I also wish to thank Secretary of State
Warren Christopher for the information he has just
provided the Security Council on the situation in Haiti.
This has been very useful.
The Brazilian Government continues to follow very
closely the situation in the sister nation of Haiti. Since
the disruption of constitutional rule in Haiti, we have
consistently supported the restoration of democracy in that
country with the return to power of President JeanBertrand Aristide.
The seriousness of the crisis in Haiti requires the
continued attention of the international community, but as
expressed on several occasions, we think that whatever
action is taken should be fully consistent with the
Charters of the United Nations and the Organization of
American States, and especially with the basic principle
of non-intervention.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
We have taken note that a traumatic military operation
was avoided. Nevertheless, I must express my concern and
the concern of my Government over the very fact that
foreign military forces are deployed in the territory of a
Latin American country. This is a disturbing precedent.
We continue to support the diplomatic efforts of the
international community towards the peaceful and prompt
solution of the crisis in Haiti. Of course, my country will
not fail to support the democratic reconstruction of Haiti in
full respect of its sovereignty and in compliance with the
principles of non-intervention and self-determination.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain.
I wish to thank Secretary of State Christopher for his
presence here today. We listened with interest and
attention to his statement, which has brought clarity to the
situation in Haiti and to the activities and objectives of the
presence in that country of the multinational force
authorized under Security Council resolution 940 (1994).

3429th meeting
29 September 1994
manifested in assistance to the Haitian people and
institutions, so that reconstruction and economic and
social development in Haiti can follow the restoration of
its legitimate authorities.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Haiti has asked to make a
statement, and I now call on him.
Mr. Longchamp (Haiti) (interpretation from
French): I should like first of all to thank Secretary of
State Warren Christopher for his statement on the
progress being made in Haiti thanks to the presence of the
multinational force.
Next Tuesday, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide will
address the General Assembly of the United Nations and
he will then have the opportunity, on behalf of the Haitian
Government, to express the gratitude of the Haitian
people to the international community for its efforts to
restore constitutional order in Haiti.

I believe that it is quite appropriate to pay a tribute to
the multinational force and to the countries that contribute
to it. The force is acting in compliance with the objectives
of the international community as expressed in successive
Security Council resolutions. We hope that task of the
multinational force can be carried out as foreseen. We
welcome the fact that it has so far developed in what might
be called a satisfactory manner.

In the meantime, I should like to express our full
satisfaction and our particular thanks to the Security
Council, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
his staff, the Secretary-General’s Group of Friends and
the countries that have joined the multinational force. I
should like to assure them all of the complete cooperation
of the Haitian Government during this delicate transition.

We are on the eve of the restoration of the legitimate
authorities of Haiti and the return of President Aristide as
foreseen in the Governors Island Agreement. In and of
themselves, these two circumstances do not protect Haiti
from prevailing dangers and political threats, or from
difficult economic and social realities. They are of crucial
importance nevertheless as a point of departure on the road
to hope which we share today with the entire Haitian
nation.

We hope that, over the coming days, President JeanBertrand Aristide will be back in Haiti. When that
happens, the Haitian Government will have to address
itself immediately to an extremely difficult situation.
That said, and until this afternoon’s meeting, we wish to
express the support of the Haitian Government for the
initiative contained in the draft resolution to be submitted
with a view to lifting the sanctions the moment President
Aristide is back in Haiti.

This Council will continue to follow developments of
the situation in Haiti. The international community has
shown its commitment to that country, a commitment that
is firm in all its dimensions.
The nature of that
commitment requires that it be ongoing, which should be

The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
are no further speakers.
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue
the consideration of the item on the agenda will be fixed
in consultation with the members of the Council. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

7
