THIRTY-SIXTH

3

YEAR

t11

MEETING:

18 DECEMBER

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2320) . ..I.....I,...,..II.....I............

1

Adoption of the agenda . ..*.................,..........,........*...,,,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/14789 and Corr. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.........

1

SlPV.2320

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of sxh a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~tppIcmwts
of the Ojjkirrl Records of the Security Courtc~ii. The date
of the, document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which iabrmation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutitm
cd
Dccishrs
oj’ //I(’ Sccrrrity Corr~il. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to re?olutions adopted before I January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2320th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 18 December 1981, at 4.55 p.m.
President:

Mll-

ited

Mr. Olara A. OTUNNU

(Uganda).

of the League of Arab States to the United Nations,
to participate in the consideration of the item entitled
“The situation in the Middle East”, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

Preserrt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.
It was so decided.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2320)
cl in
ate
k-”
Sa
Iilll
ied
ive

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council
have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) for the period 16 June to 10 December
1981 [S/14789].

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/l4789
and Corr. 1)
The meting

wus called

to order

4. The first speaker is the representative of Lebanon, upon whom I now call.

at 5.05 pm.

5. Mr. T&N1
(Lebanon): This may be the last
debate on Lebanon with which Mr. Kurt Waldheim
is associated in his capacity as -Secretary-General,
Ever since his election 10 years ago, Mr. Waldheim has
constantly had Lebanon on his agenda in one way or
another. Interpreting the responsibility of the Secretary-General in a manner that went beyond the letter
of the law, he often said more than off%Al Lebanon
could afford to say in defence of our cause-the cause
of Lebanon’s right to sovereignty and peace. His
concern for my country was not only reassuring; it
brought home to us the warmth and comfort that
helped us keep our confidence in the community of
nations and men of goodwill, when all the world
around us seemed to slip away.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Natlons
Jnterlm Force in Lebanon (S/14789 and Corr.1)
1. The PRESIDENT: I should like t9 inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. On a night in March three years ago in this very
chamber, those of us who were here then undoubtedly
remember that a tremendous challenge had to be met,
in a matter not of days but of hours. The response was
UNIFIL, whose fate we are again discussing. Were
it not for the consummate diplomacy of X:. Kurt
Waldheim, we would have never seen such a meeting
of incompatibles, a unity in action of seemingly irreconcilable positions. From the ashes of battlefields,
great hopes for peace were almost miraculously
created.

At the itnitotiotl
of the Presidetlt,
Mr. Ttte’tri (Lebanon) took (I p/are (III the Couth/
t&/e and Mr, Blrm
(lsrcrel) took the plrrce reserved for him at the side of
r/w Corm-i/
ht?lber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 December from the representative of Tunisia
[S/148041 which reads as follows:

7. Romanticism and nostalgia are not usually welcome in the Security Council. Yet, I cannot but ask:
where have the hopes all gone? The drama of UNIFlL
is best summarized in concrete terms in these few

“I have the honour ta request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer
I

I-+::to assure the effective restoration
~sovareiglltyl.‘.[ibirl,.pn~n.
61.
~~ ~

lines fi;>m the Secretary-General’s report which is
~before us: I‘the situation in southern Lebanon remains
~Precari IUS and fundamentally unstable”; “no ceaseafire, peace-keeping” can continue without negotiaiions; :md “as regards the mandate of UNIFIL, the
~~ difficu’ties” are tremendous, and so on. I am quoting
from paragraphs 54 and 55 of that report.

of Lebanese

c/

13. The situation in the Middle East this week has
been very much the concern of the Council and the
General Assembly. The Council debate on the Golan
Heights, concluded yesterday by the unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (1981), was very reassuring. It
praved once more, but this time with g&u vigour,-that
the Council is aware of the tremendous dangers to
peace inherent in the Middle East situation and that
its members-individuallv
and collecrivelv-are
determined to prevent anoiher war. But the danger of
war is still real. It is still there in the Golan Heights.
as well as in Lebanon br the West Bank. Yet we in
Lebanon were hoping that the establishment of
UNIFIL would help to insulate the very explosive
situation in our country, not only to alleviate the plight
of our beleaguered country but also to prevent events
in the south from suddenly becoming the detonator
for a more general war. We are still very hopeful,
despite events in the past week, it will be possible
to maintain the cease-fire and to develop the area of
relative cahn and tranquillity established under
UNIFIL’s authority into a broader zone of peace,
which would be our contribution to a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East problem.

8. U,~doubtedly, all members of the Council have
read the report as carefully as I have, and I need not
dwell on it much longer. I should like, however, to
sum up the problem in the following terms.
9. UNIFIL was sent to southern Lebanon on -a
dynamic mission-yet,
with only static means and
prerogatives, Having been unable to bring about
peace, it soon became a static reality caught in the
dynamics of an ever-expanding war. Its limited area
of operation became a haven of calm, but it has also
been held hostage in an Israeli-Palestinian war which
seems to continue despite the precarious cease-fire
and everyone’s commitment to consolidate that ceasefire.
10. From the north, the so-called armed elements
continue their attempts at infiltration; in the south,
the so-called tie .fc~~o forces, with the active assistance
and participation of Israel, not only prevent UNIFIL
from deploying to the internationally recognized
boundaries but also engage in acts of harassment and
constant attempts at eroding the present area of operation of UNIFIL, its positions and even its headquarters.

14. It is in this spirit that we wrote to the SecretaryGeneral on I4 December [Sli*:792], asking for what
could be described in generic terms as a strengthening
of UNIFIL without a change of its mandate, for we
know all the reservations that such a proposal would
at present arouse. What we are asking for is a more
dynamic, more forceful and more determined exercise
of the mandate.

11. Now we are told that the situation, which is
already unacceptable, is the lesser of two evils, the
other evil being what preceded the cease-fire called
for by the Cout&il on iI July, after a full-fledged war
had been conducted by Israel. The caoital citv of Beirut
was savagely bomba;.ded, with the-heaviest civilian
casualties ever. All the bridges between southern and
central Lebanon were destroyed, two major cities and
a number of refugee camps were shelled from the sea,
in addition to savage artillery shelling against civilian
targets at random from Israel and the so-calledenclave.

15. The original draft resolution which was distributed as the Council was preparing to meet expresses
what we felt would have been a new lease on life that
this Council should give to UNIFIL, if we do not want
that valiant Force to blend helplessly into a most
complex political and military landscape. In this
landscape, Lebanon’s -real borders risk, in reality,
being moved north of the so-called enclave, and
Lebanon’s sovereignty could be condemned forever
to become a fluid notion, despite all the Government’s
attempts at reinforcing its national authority. The
present cease-fire obtained at great cost might, in this
landscape, remain at the mercy of capricious initiatives, threats of pre-emptive strikes and the goodwill
of peace-makers whose efforts are constantly preempted as well,

12. Where, if not here, and when, if not in such
instances, is UNIFIL expected to use its right of selfdefence, as explicitly stated in its terms of reference
approved by resolution 426 (1978)? Self-defence, we
are told. would include “resistance to attemuts bv
forceful ‘means to prevent it from discharging i&
duties.” ISll2611 of I9 Matrh 1978. Dara. 4 Id).1 It
seems to-& that tie time has come ‘to redef& &
mandate in a most unequivocal manner, so that the
Force may enjoy the full support of the Council and
exercise its deterrent prerogatives fully unhindered,
namely, itrlrr trlitr, to

16. We have stated in this Council over and over
again that we are not interested in asking UNIFlL to
go to war and enforce peace. Hence, the increase in
the number of troops we have requested is not a first
step towards the conquest of the enclave. But WCwant
the Force to be prepared to deploy efficiently there
and elsewhere, and we want it to be able to perform
“its very demanding tasl
without being “stretched

“supervise the cessation of hostilities, ensure the
peaceful character of the area of operation, control
movement and take all measur’es deemed necessary
2

I

to the limit”
[S//4789, gala. 631. Indeed, we fully
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Council should “continue to give serious
m-attention to the appropriate strength of UNIFlL %
relation to the tasks which-it performs under the
Council’s direction” [ibid.].
Our proposal must be
considered in this perspective, and only in this perspective.

inese

k has
e+l the
solari
;ldOPrig. It
I, that
$3 to
I that
--are
pr of
lghts.
we in
jr of
osive
plight
oator
>eflll,
ssible
‘ea of
.I ndel
eace,
psive

stribesses
: that
Want
inost

this
ality,
and
fever
Ient’s
The
n this
nitiarciwill
tme-

21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, to whom the Council
has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

17. In the same spirit, we hope that the Council
will reiterate its position concerning the joint phased
Programme of activities. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral has explained better than we can the reasons
which have prevented the completion and implementation of such a programme, which was first
requested in September 1978, when resolution 434
(1978) was adopted. We have gone a long way since,
but, if we have to obtain a complete fulfilment of the
mandate within a visible time-frame, it is imperative
that we should have a precise, but flexible, programme
of action supported hy the Council and to which every
p3lty will adhere in good faith and responsibility.

vents

:tal ywhat
&ing
G- we
arould
mmore
:rcise

and security. I should like to single out my brother,
Ambassador Slim of Tunisia, who, in his capacity as
-the Arab member of the Council, carried the burden of
presenting an often arduous, sometimes popular and
sometimes impossible case. His consummate diplomacy has made my voice in the Council susceptible of
beitlg listened to more than once.

I

22. Mr. MAKSOUD: The debate on this conflict and
on the implementation of resolutions 42.5 (1978) and
490 (1981) seems at times to repeat well-established
arguments. Israel’s non-compliance with those resolutions is an attempt to render futile all the resolutions
of the Council. Israel is attempting to impress upon
the world community that only its lawlessness should
be recognized as the law in the region, that the legitimacy which is spelled out by the international community must be considered to be an exercise in irrelevance and futility. Hence, when Israel violates the
integrity and territorial sovereignty of Lebanon in the
same manner as it violates the integrity of Palestinian
and other Arab territories, it does so not only to pursue
its own expansionist and annexationist policies but
also to demolish the mechanism of the Un:’ %??’ *:nns
and the implementation of its resolutiorc

18. The withdrawal of Israel from southern Lebanon
is the first and paramount objective of resolution 425
(1978). Israel has not withdrawn, and we areconstantly
treated to variations on the theme of security designed
to justify Israel’s continued occupation of Lebanese
territory north of the internationally recognized
boundaries, as confirmed by the General Armistice
Agreement of 1949.’ Soon it will be four years since
the Council established UNIFIL with the express
mandate of supervising Israeli withdrawal. It is the
express decision of the international community
represented by the Organization that there should
be a zone of peace in southern Lebanon. We are all
committed to this-all
except one, Israel, which
visualizes against all odds its security and international
peace in terms of continued warfare. Israel’s noncompliance with resolution 425 (1978) has had serious
consequences. But, in all honesty, the most serious of
all those consequences was the cycle of violence which
we all deplore.

23. On 25 November, the twelfth Summit Conference
of the Arab League, at the highest level, met an?
reaffirmed in its resolution concerning Lebanor,
[S/14779] the commitment of the Arab States and the
members of the League of Arab States to resolutions 425 (1978) and 490 (1981) and committed itself
unequivocably to support the Lebanese Government’s efforts to deploy the Lebanese army in the
south, enabling it to carry out its national responsibilities, and to extend the required assistance so
that Lebanon could reinforce its capability to bear
the burden that will result from restoring to normalcy
all State administrative organs and civil and military
institutions and returning them to the full exercise of
their authority and functions, especially in the south.

19. I am not speaking here in the name of international
morality alone, nor merely in terms of international
rights. Peace in southern Lebanon is now a practical
necessity, a pragmatic imperative. Non-peace, even
in the form of a cease-fire, is a hazard which we cannot
afford, which the region cannot afford and which the
world cannot afford. It is a hazard which this Council could not and should not permit. The gallant men
of UNIFlL areconfronted with a tremendous challenge
in my country, and it would be criminal indeed to
allow 1JNlFIL to continue with no hope of success.

24. Furthermore, the Conference expressed its
commitment to continue to observe and to be committed to the contents of resolution 490 (1981). It
further asserted that every possible effort should be
exerted to ensure the full implementation of resolution 425 (1978) and the ensuing Council resolutions,
including the total withdrawal of lsrael to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon. so that
the south would be under the exclusive authority of
the Lebanese State as a zone .Jf peace and stability.
It added that every necessary and possible measure
should be taken by the representatives of the Arab
Governments at the United Nation5 10 clabor;~rc ;L

20. In conclusion, I should like to address myself
!o members of the Council who are taking part in the
debate on Lebanon probably for the last time in their
current mandate. They have all given us more than
their unyielding support: they have
given ~1s thei
understanding and conccni fill ilitcrnational peace
3

programme- for the -implementation of the Council
resolutions concerning southern Lebt+non and the
c$solidationof-tthq
pm%cnt~$:a+ire,~
z- _

homes and their homeland. It is thus that they try to
plan a-wider qbjective-namely,
to reduce the Palestinian people from a people to mere -demographic
additions in -the respective communities of their
temnorary abodes, It is this scheme that makes Israel
addicted io preserving in Lebanon a status of hegemony-strategic,
military, political and ideologicalin order to deprive Lebanon of the resilience of its
unity and to prevent the legitimacy of the United
Nations from being fully implemented.

25. In reiterating and underlining the Security Council resolutions, the Conference is committing itself
to acquiesce in and accept as legitimate the international authority of the Council resolutions. That
commitment is very significant, because it indicates
that the Arab League and the Arab States are committed as far as they can be to the diplomatic United
Nations option as a mechar.;sm and a vehicle to resolve
the crisis in the Middle East pertaining to Lebanon.
Their faith in the Security Council is their faith in its
ability to render its resolutions implementable.

29. That is why the Arab League, at the highesr of
its councils, reaffirms its commitment to the Lebanese
State and to United Nations resolutions, in the hope
that we do not merely rearm previous resolutions.
It is our hope that UNIFIL not only is made deployable
but is given the ability to deter aggression and expansion. Only then can our faith in the United Nations
be creditable to our people and the world community.

26. The Arab League at the highest level has singled
out Lebanon as a framework for expressing instant
unanimity, while seeking to achieve unanimity on the
more complex and complicated issues that challenge it.
It is therefore a realization on the part of the Arab
States at their highest level that it is the Lebanese
State. the centre! authoritv of Lebanon. that should
exe&se its full power, bdministrativeiy and militarily, and be enabled to deploy its forces in order to
carry out not only Lebanese legitimacy in Lebanon’s
territory, but Arab legitimacy and international legitimacy. Those three legitimaciss reinforce each other,
and therefore one cannot exclude the other.

30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Israel, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
31. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Once again the Council is
about to renew the mandate of UNIFIL. The Council
has on its record Israel’s position with respect to the
more complex issues arising in this context, especially
as regards UNIFIL’s three-fold mandate, as laid down
in resolution 425 (1978). The Council is also acquainted
with our position regarding the broader context of the
tragedy in Lebanon. This being the case, I can be very
brief, and I shall therefore refrain from addressing
myself to the rambling harangue of our scholar-inresidence, Mr. Maksoud..

27. However, by flouting all resolutions, by its
attempts to transform the south of Lebanon into an
arena for settlinp. bia issues in a small area. Israel is
seeking to destroy t& ability of the Lebanese State to
exercise its sovereignty over its territory, to bleed the
Palestinian refugees, to bleed Lebanese villages and
towns, to create new refugee problems-Lebanese
refugees in their own hoses. It creates a new status
whereby it can manipulate things, through its own
mercenaries, so that the legal authority is pre-empted
from taking over its own land.

32. The tragic reality prevailing in Lebanon must be
recognized by all of us. Lebanon still remains a country
occupied by alien forces. While Syria still maintains
in Lebanon a sizable portion of its army-that
is.
about 25,000 troops and upwards-the
PLO [I’ulcsthe Liberation Orgunizufiart] still has over 15,000 terrorists operating in the country, of whom over 2,000 are
positioned south of the Litani River. About 1500 of
these terrorists are located in the so-called Tyre
pocket, and around 700 are deployed in some 40 pockets and nests within the UNIFIL area of operation,
with the clear intention of using that area as a springboard in their attempts to terrorize Israel’s civilian
population. As long as those non-Lebanese elements
are allowed to operate within and from Lebanon, no
real progress will be achieved towards the return of
the effective authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the length and breadth of that country.

28. Thus, as long as Israel is capable of maintaining
military and strategic hegemony over southern Lebanon, deploying and threatening to deploy its armed
forces in order to strike at will at Lebanon, it will be
disabling our desired territorial and other unity and
preventing us from exercising full sovereignty. It
seeks to do so because Israel considers Lebanon an
experiment in a humanist, integrationist philosophy,
according to its own exclusivist racist ideologies.
It considers Lebanon to be the civilized answer to
Zionist egocentrism; it considers Lebanon to be the
anchor of Arab intellectual renaissance; it considers
Lebanon to be one of the major correctives, one which
blends all civilizations and cultures into a pluralistic
expression of a new humanity. It is that which Israel
is seeking to destroy, because it seeks to partition
Lebanon by all means, and to threaten Lebanon’s
existence, because it feels that if it can stimulate a
partitionist tendency it can then prevent the Palestinians from exercising their right to return to their

33. UNIFIL’s mandate was originally set out in
resolution 425 (1978). At the time that resolution was
adopted, the Council took cognizance of the problem
of Lebanon in its entirety, recognizing that the presence of Syrian troops and the PLO terrorists on Lebanese soil constituted a major obstacle to the reestablishment of Lebanon’s authority over its own
4

I,,

try to
Pales:r.aphic
P their
i ISPCl
‘.
f hegegical:; of its
United
hesr of
banese
e hope
titions.
loyable
expandations
Iunity.
is the
a place
.
lncil is
zouncil
t:to the
,ecially
d down
uainted
t of the
be very
lressing
alar-intrust be
country
tintains
tllat is,
[Pules000 ter,UOOare
&KKl of
d Tyre
0 pocksr‘ation,
springcivilian
I~meIlts

n0n, no
:furn of
.c banon
Iliry.
<Jut in
km was
3) oblem
I(% presoil Leblhe reiCs

own

territory and to the res oration of international peace
and security. With those considerations in mind, the
-Council in that resolution called for “strict respect for
the territorial integrity, soverei8nty and political independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries”, and UNIFIL was entrusted with
an appropriate three-fold mandate, namely: first, to
confirm the withdrawal of Israeli forces; secondly,
to restore international peace and security; thirdly,
to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the
return of its effective authority in the area.

recovery to the officers and men of UNIFIL who have
been injured in the same cause-the cause of peace.
39. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Kuwait and the Syrian Arab
Republic in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite them to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of :he Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.

34. In co-operation with the Israel Defence Forces,
UNIFIL has successfully carried out the first part of
its mandate. The completion of Israel’s withdrawal was
confirmed by the UNIFIL Commander on 13 June
1978 and recorded in the progress report of the Secretary-General on the same day [S/12620/Add.5].
Regrettably, the remaining two parts of UNIFIL’s
mandate have not yet been implemented: international
peace and security have not been restored in Lebanon
because of the continuing presence of the Syrian army
of occupation acd the massive presence of PLO
terrorists on Lebanese soil.

At the invitafiott
of the President,
Mr. Ab~dhasscttt
(Kuwait)
and Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrior
Arub Republic)
took the places reserved
for them at the side of the
Council chumber.

40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait, who wishes to make a statement
on behalf of the Group of Arab States at the United
Nations. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table an to make his statement.

35. Although Israel’s position of principle concerning Lebanon is well known, I should like once
again to reaffirm that Israel continues to support the
independence, sovereignty, territorial and- political
integrity and unity of Lebanon withill its intemationally recognized boundaries. Israel wants peace,
both- in and with Lebanon.

41. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait): In my capacity as
the Chairman of the Arab Group at the United Nations
for this month, I have the honour of making the following statement.
42. The fact that the cease-fire on the southern
borders of Lebanon is still holding should not mislead
us to believe that peace and stability have been established in that !uea. The situation is still precarious, and
even the mdst unexpected event could trigger new
rounds of hostilities on various fronts.

36. The restoration of peace in Lebanon and the
solution of all its problems must not be contingent
on the attainment of an overall solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict and should not await that overall solution. Regrettably, it is precisely those alien forces in
Lebanon which have been working against peace in
the Middle bast in general that have also undermined
its sovereignty and are impeding the restoration of its
national independence.

43. The sudden, but not totally unexpected, annexation of the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights by
the expansionist Israeli occupiers is only a reminder
of the kind of events which could plunge the whole
area into a new chain of violence alld hostilities.
Besides, it is now an established fact that the Israelis
have in recent years been using their northern border
with Lebanon as a soft spot to be encroached upon
every time the Israeli le. ders want to make a political
point or to create diversionary tactics. Tlte New! York
i’itnes supported that idea in its editorial comment 011
the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights by saying:
“Begin does not hesitate to solve his domestic problems at the expense of his diplomacy.”

37. In concluding, I wish to take this opportunity
to pay a tribute to the Commander of UNIFIL, Lieutenant-General William Callaghan, and his staff, as
well as to the officers and other personnel, both military and civilian, serving with UNIFIL. They are
carrying out their duties in arduous and often trying
circumstances and have been courageous and enterprising in the fulfilment of their tasks. My Govemment wishes to express its appreciation for the constructive and efficient manner in which they have
tackled and solved practical problems at hand.

44. With the impending threat of more Israeli incursions into southern Lebanon to suit the Israeli political
designs, the situation in that area will remain mercurial
and thus require more efforts to stabilize the situation
in a more solid way.

38. I should also like to express Israel’s appreciation
to the countries contributing contingents to UNIFIL
in the service of international peace. Furthermore,
we shouid like to take this oppo&ity
to extend our
condolences to the families of all those who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace during the
period under review and to wish a speedy and full

45. UNIFIL, the renewal of whose mandate is the
subject of our discussion at this Council meeting 10dny,
has undoubtedly played a role in such efforts to solidify
5’

the situation in southern Lebanon, Nobody denies
that the task of UNIFIL is cumbersome and that it
~has been working against odds; and that is because the
challenge of the Lebanese situation is of the greatest
magnitude. However, I should like at this point to
express, on behalf of the Arab Group at the United
Naticl*?, support of the Lebanese contention, as
exprt,;ed by the representative of Lebanon: that
the cease-fire should never be considered as an end in
itself but merely as a step towards the full implementation of resolution 425 (1978).

all of which call for the total withdrawal of Israeli
forces back to the internationally recognized borders.
But despite these resolutions, -Israel has exerted all
efforts to keep southern Lebanon a powder keg. Israel
has not fulfilled its obligations under the various
Council resolutions; therefore, it is the duty of the
Council to denounce its aggressive policies and practices, which prevent the restoration of Lebanese
sovereignty over the entire area of southern Lebanon
controlled by Israel and its puppets.
52. The Syrian Arab Republic has time and again
called for respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integl:ity of Lebanon; despite its clear
stand, the Israeli representative distorts the Arab
role in Lebanon in order to deflect attention from his
country’s aggressive policies and armed attacks against
the people and the land of Lebanon and from its continuing occupation of parts of southern Lebanon.
The Secretary-General’s report amply demonstrates
that Israel and its puppets prevent the extension of
legitimate Lebanese authority to the internationaily
recognized borders of Lebanon.

46. The Arab summit at Fez made it abundantly
clear in its resolutions on the Lebanese situation that
the Arab countries are greatly concerned about the
maintenance of the territorial integrity of the whole
of Lebanon as well as of safeguarding stability in
southern Lebanon.
47. With all that in mind, thk Arab Group would like
to make the following observations. First, since any
threat to southern Lebanon jeopardizes other Arab
countries in general and the Palestinian cause in particular, its problem is increasingly becoming an Arab,
as well as a Lebanese, problem; the Arab Follow-up
Committee which includes my country, Kuwait,
does not, therefore, spare any effort at seeking solutions for all aspects of the unfortunate Lebanese
situation. Secondly, the main threat to southern
Lebanon still comes from the Israelis, who, as I have
already stated, use Lebanese soil as a soft spot to
carry out their expanding political purposes. Thirdly,
the friends of Israel, notably the United States, should
contribute to the efforts to stabilize that area by pressuring Israel to stop its cheap exploitation of a dangerous and explosive situation in Lebanon. Fourthly,
the Security Council bears responsibility for the
implementation of its resolution 425 (1978), with all its
ramifications.

alien to the
53. The Israeli representative-an
region, astranger, an occupier-cannot beexpected but
to try to twist facts and misinterpret realities, as he
did yesterday in regard to Israel’s annexation of the
Golan Heights.
54. When they should be crestfallen and apologetic,
the Israelis mount their attacks in an effort to absolve
themselves and their actions. They falsify history;
they rewrite international law to accommodate theil
objectives; they misquote out of context. They will
resort to all means to legitimize every new usurpation.
They truly believe that by extolling themselves and
by continuing morally and physically to assault their
victims they will eventually triumph. But we are too
familiar with these tactics to be intimidated by Israel.

48. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

55. Need we remind the Council that whenever a
national reconciliation process dawns on the Lebanese horizon, Tel Aviv or Washington, or both, see
to it that that new incentive, particularly if it is purely
Arab, is subverted and shelved. Miraculously we do
not despair, nor do the brave Lebanese people for that
matter.

49. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republicj:
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you once again
and to express my admiration for the wisdom and
patience you have shown in conducting the deliberations ofthis Council during a particularly busy month.

56. The Syrian Arab Republic wishes to reiterate that
the sole purpose of the establishment of the Arab
Defence Force in Lebanon is to terminate a tragic
fratricidal war and to grant the Lebanese people the
opportunity to determine its own destiny in unity
without external interference. Let it be quite clear that
the Syrian Arab Republic will never relinquish its
national duties and obligations to defend sisterly
Lebanon’s unity and internal peace, 2nd the Arab
Defence Force will continue to fulfil its duties under
a mandate determined and renewed by the Arat
l.eague. To portray us as the Israelis have portrayed
us must be undcr\lood m the c<)nlext of Zionist colo-

50. We should also like to express our thanks to
Ambassador Slim, your predecessor, who has shown
considerable skill as a negotiator during the discussions on the latest grave violation of the Charter when
Israel defiantly annexed the Syrian Golan Heights.
51. We are all aware of the fact that the Council has
unanimously and constantly upheld the position that
Israel should totally withdraw itself and its puppets
from southern Lebanon. There is no ambiguity in
resolulion 425 (1978) and subsequent ICW~II~IOI~~,
6

of Israeli
~1 borders,
exerted all
keg. Israel
162 various
LIPY ~of the
i; and pracLebanese
ti Lebanon
land again
ependence
ie its clear
-the Arab
lh from his
cks against
im its con: Lebanon.
monstrates
:tension of
matio?ally

m to the
ipected but
eies, as he
tion of the
+ologetic,
to absolve
‘y history;
<date theh
They will
i?+urpation.
&Ives and
ioault their
we are too
by Israel.
‘henever a
the Leb<both, see
it is purely
isly we do
pie for that
it crate that
the Arab
:(I a tragic
pRopIe the
y in unity
: clear that
mcluish its
ICY.sisterly
<he Arab
al ies under
jhe Arat
I3ortrayed
0 llist colo-

as well as the foundations of an exemplary COCXiStence among the various Lebanese~communities.=

nialism and expansionism. In order to absolve himself,
the Zionist colonizer_has to resort to projecting his
policies onto others; in order to justify his tyranny
he has to resort to the false assertion that the Arab
Defence League is, like his,-an army of occupation.

62. The Israeli delegation may repeat its hypocritical
concern for Lebanon and the Lebanese; yet Israeli
pilots drop bombs on Lebanese villages and cities.
The latest such incident was the Beirut carnage. The
Israeli air force spares neither hospital nor school nor
archaeological treasure; the Israeli army burns and
destroys agricultural crops and attacks civilian installations. This scorched-earth policy is aimed at emptying the south of its inhabitants, of both Lebanese
and Palestinian refugees, in preparation for a new
Israeli Lebrrrsrurr~n.

57. The Syrian Arab Republic has a national duty
to Lebanon and for Lebanon. We were called upon by
Lebanon to perform a fraternal duty, to stop a civil
war and to prevent the partition of the country into
“mini-States”.
58. Syrians and Lebanese alike have since 1948
realized that Zionist expansionism will not spare
them. Nor have the Zionists hidden their intentions,
territorial or otherwise, in regard to Arab sovereign
countries bordering on Palestine. As early as 1919,
the Zionist movernent, in collusion with the colonial
Powers at the time, who were busily dissecting the
Arab nation, made it clear in their plan submitted to the
Versailles Peace Conference that southern Lebanon
and the Golan Heights, as well as neighbouring zones
in Jordan, were sooner or later to be inc1udeL in the
so-called Eretz Yisrael. As early as 1919, the Zionists
realized that they could not create a State for all the
Jews and for Jews alone without controlling the water
sources of Palestine, which lie in Syria, Lebanon and
Jordan. Occupation and control of those parts of the
Arab homeland was a prerequisite for the strengthening of the demographic, agricultural and industrial
capabilities of an ever-expanding Zionist militaristic
State. Indeed, Israel accomplished part of its design
in 1%7 by occupying the Golan Heights and its water
resources, and pending before the Council today is the
illegitimate Israeli act of annexing the Syrian Golan
Heights, which a shocked Security Council and an
indignant General Assembly have declared null and
void.

63, We believe that nothing will prevent Israel from
continuing its acts of aggression against Lebanon
unless the United States of America, which has concluded with Israel a pact of aggression against the Arab
nation, is prevented from reaping the fruits of this new
pact. The Arab nation is totally prepared to abort such
a belligerent attitude by the United States. Ultimately,
the United States has to realize that the Arabs arc not
the natural protectors of the United States and Western
interests in the Middle East.
64 Whoever claims to have an interest in the Middle
East must prove first that he respects the interests
of the Arab nation-interests
which claim nothing
more than respect for the Charter of the United Nations, that is, the non-acquisition of territory by force,
which means total Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, and first and foremost from
Palestine.
65. Whether we speak about Lebanon, Syria, Jordan,
Palestine or Egypt, we have to speak louder in order
to inform the American public that the course pursued
by its Administrations, including the present one,
will not help their interests or ours.

59. A question that may occur to us is why in 1948,
again in 1%7, aqd between those two dates and since,
Israel has refrained from extending its domination
over southern Lebanon, a highly coveted region.

66. Mr. DORR (Ireland): The Secretary-General,
in paragraph 62 of his current report on UNIFIL.
states that UNIFIL’s ~~~~ ~.~~ ~
“presence and activities in southern Lebanon are an
indispensable element in m&ntaining peace, not
only in the immediate area but in the Middle East
as a whole.”

60. Israeli literature reveals that in 1954 a bitter
debate began as to ways and means of dismantling
a flourishing Lebanon, a controversy which arose not
011
substance but rather on timing. The Ben GurionSharrett correspondence remains the best example of
that debate. The Israeli intervention did not start to
assume its ominous course openly until the year
1973. The timing was propitious, for it accompanied
the beginning of the process of Egyptian capitulation.
In order to deflect public attention from the Second
Sinai Agreement ofseptember 1975 (S//1818/Add./4],
which neutralized Egypt, Israel calculated that the
time was ripe for it to strike and restrike at southern
Lebanon under the pretext of pre-emptive and protective self-defence operations.

Ireland agrees fully with that assessment. My dclegation believes, therefore, that the Council should
now extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a furthe!
six-month period, that is, until 19 June 1982.
67. UNIFIL faces a difficult task and an unstable
situation in the area. But, despite the difficulties pbdced
in its way, UNIFIL’s success in helping to maintain
peace in the region is clear for all to see. To appreciate this fully, one need only consider what the situation would now be if UNIFI’, did not exist.

61. Simultaneously, Israel is engaging in subversive
activities to destroy the fabric of Lebanese society,

68. I do not want to speak here nt great length. cithcr
the mandate of the I+rcc or nbout the dc\clol>

about

7

,-

men& in the six-month period under review. The
have no enemies. On the contrary, it should receive
-:Secretary-General covers both points in his clear and
full co-operation from all concerned. I want to emphaexhaustive report on thjs-period. We thank hi_mforfiis .~size this point. The mandate of UNIFIL and, indeed,
its very presence in the area were based on cleal
understandings which should apply to any peace69. I want simply to refer to some developments
keeping force. These were that the Force would meet
over the past six months which we feel to be of particwith the necessary co-operation from all of the parties
ular importance.
concerned and that it would be allowed to deploy and
to have full freedom of movement through the whole
70. After the hostilities of last July in Lebanon.
area of operation assigned to it up to the international
Irtland co-sponsored and supported council resolu;
boundary. This understanding has not been fully
tion @Xl (19811, which called for an immediate cessacarried out,
tion of all armed attacks, The cease-fire is still holding,
despite the continued tension in the area, and UNIFIL,
76. We have been encouraged by certain improveby its presence, has been able to make a particular
ments, but we insist on the need for full co-operation
contribution in support of this cease-fire of July.
with UNIFIL. from all parties.

81.
thos

71. But in the Council we must always keep in mind
UNIFIL’s basic mandate. For its part, Ireland, as a
member of the Council and as a troou contributor.
attaches the greatest importance to piogress in thd
fulfilment of this mandate as set out bv the Council
in resolution 425 (1978). This, as we knbw, had three
elements: to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli forces,
to restore international peace and security and to
assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the
return of its effective authority to the area.

77. Equally, it should ?e a basic principle that the
despatch by the Council of a peace-keeping force is
not a substitute for the effort to negotiate a settlement.
What the work of any peace-keeping force does is,
rather, to allow an opportunity for peace-making,
that is, allow an opportunity for the parties concerned
to seek a more permanent and lasting solution to their
differences. The Secretary-General emphasizes this
point also in his report. He states, in paragraph 54:

84.
(Bl
aga
the
as :
call
tor.
of1
terl
the

7?. It is clear that UNIFIL has achieved a considerable measure of success. This is evident. for example.
from the Secretary-General’s report. In paragraph-33;
he speaks of “an influx of people into the UNIFIL
area ..om other parts of Lebanon seeking safety”.
Indeed, it is principally this which has stretched the
manpower ofUNI$ILio
its limits-a point which the
Secretary-General has noted in paragraph 63 of the
same report. But it remains the case that, as he also
points out, in paratwph.Y,
~~

“No cease-fire, peace-keeping operation, ot
other expedient for containing the conflict can, in
the end, prevent new outbursts of violence as long
as the basic elements of the problem are not tackled
in negotiations involving all the parties concerned”.

85.
adc
-rea

byi
COIlI
fUl!J
82.
befc
text
co1

the
rest
it tc
83.
wis

78. It remains very important, in our view, while
extending the mandate of UNIFIL, to try to ensure
that all basic elements of the problem will be dealt
with through negotiations.
79. In cdnclusion, I wish, on behalf of the Governmen: of Ireland, to express our very sincere and
special appreciation for the untiring efforts of the
Secretary-General. It is customary, I know, to use the
phrase “untiring” efforts. In this case, I believe the
adjective is fully merited by Mr. Waldheim. I should
like to thank him most warmly on behalf of my Government for the efforts he has made in regard to UNIFIL
and in SO many other matters over many years.

“the difficulties which the Force has experienced
since its inception have continued to obstruct the
full implementation of the task allotted to it by the
Security Council. The full co-operation of all parties
which such implementation wou!@require is, regrettably, still not forthcoming.”
73. This failure by all parties to give full co-operation
is a failure to respect previous decisions of the Council. This is dangerous, in our view, because it can lead
to increased tension and violence in the area as a
whole. Lives are lost as a result, including the lives
of innocent civilians and those of members of UNIFIL.
who serve the cause of peace.

80. I also want to thank very warmly Under-Secretary-General Urquhart and his staff and also, 1 should
like to mention, the Force Commander, my fellow
countryman, Lieutenant-General William Callaghan.
I also join sincerely in the tributes to the courage,
dedication and skill of the officers, men and civilian
staff who make up UNIFIL. WL:n the United Nations
is criticimd, as it sometimes is, the efforts and dedi..
cation of the 6,000 men of UNIFII, in southern Lebanon and of the many other United Nations peacekeeping forces over the years, which total, I believe,
over 3oO,OOOfrom SO many diverse countries, should
be remembered and recognized.

74. On the one hand, the persistent attempts at infiltration through UNIFIL’s ar9a and. on the other hand.
the continu& harassment, including most recently thd
serious incidents at Hill 880, which involve the Irish
contingent, have given us particular cause for concern.
‘IS. I have had occasion to say before in the Council
that Ireland believes that a peace-keeping force should
8

86
cii
1-e
to

:;
ISI
cc
th’
us
Is,
re
ru
a1
ca
in
th
87
of

;
:

East has encouraged those aggressive circles who wish
by force to hinder the peaceful coexistence of peoples
and States in_tllafregion,
~~

81 I WC express the-wish that the sacrifices made by
those men and their predecessors will be recognized
by all and that all the parties concerned will permit
conditions which will enable UNIFIL to carry out
fully the mandate it received from this Council.

88. The German Democratic Republic, together
with other socialist States and peace-loving countries,
has unswervingly supported a comprehensive, just
and durable political settlement of the Middle East
conflict, It is essential that Israel withdraw from all the
Arab territories which it occupied in 1967; that the
inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine be
guaranteed, including the right to return to their homeland, to self-determination and to establish their own
independent Palestinian State.

82. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them document S/14803, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council’s consultations. It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to a vote on that draft
resolution. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
it to the vote.
83. I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to make a statement before the vote.

89. Unfortunately, the draft resolution before us does
not contain any vigorous steps that would be conducive
to ending Israel’s aggressive actions and the actions of
Haddad’s bands against Lebanon and the Palestinian
people. That being so, we should like once again to
draw attention to the fact that armed forces acting on
behalf of the United Nations must act solely on the
basis of decisions of the Security Council.

84. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(irrferrweMwr
J?UI~ZRussim):
The Council is once
again compelled to take up the question of extending
the mandate of UNIFIL. Despite the fact that, as early
as 1978, in its resolution 425 (1978) the Council directly
called upon the aggressor, Israel, to respect the tcrritorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon and to withdraw completely from Lebanese
territory, the ruling circles in Israel have intensified
their aggressive policies towards Lebanon.

90. Although we have no objection to extending the
mandate of UNIFIL, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic, however, will abstain in the
vote on the draft resolution, since we maintain our
previous reservations in connection with the terms of
.reference of the mandate, the composition and tinancing of UNIFIL.

85. The General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
adopted resolution 36/226 A, paragraph 9 of which
reads:- ~~
.~ ~_~
condetnns
the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon and the continuous bombardment and
destrnction of its cities and villages, and all acts
that constitute a violation of its sovereignty, indcpendence and territorial integrity and the security of
its people, and prevent the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March
1978, including the full deployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in LebP,non up to the internationaliy recognized borders”.

-_ “Strmgly

91. Mr. LEPREmE
(France) (intrrprefafion
jiwar
Frerrch): Aware of the important role played by
UNIFIL in maintaining stability in southern Lebanon,
my delegation unhesitatingly took part in the work of
the Council on this subject. In doing so, my Government wished to express its attachment to resolution
425 (1978) in all its provisions. It endorses the three
fundamental objectives set for UNIFIL: to confirm the
withdrawal of the Israeli forces, to restore international peace and security and to help the Lebanese
Government to ensure the restoration of its effective
authority in the region.

86. As a result of the aggressive policy of the ruling
circles in Israel and Haddad’s bands in southern
Lebanon who are in their pay, it has not been possible
to carry out the mandate of UNIFIL. In view of that,
we cannot but refer to the responsibility of the United
States, which has given comprehensive support to
Israel and has blocked any steps on the part of the
Council against the aglrressor. Instead of doing what
the circumstances obviously dictate, that is, making
use of every available opportunity that would force
Israel to withdraw completely from Lebanon and to
refrain from giving support to Haddad’s bands, the
ruling circles of the United States quite obviously are
attempting to use the unstable position which has been
caused by Israel in r ’ “anon to serve their own interests
in order to satisfy their aspirations for domination in
the Arab region.

-92. -It is necessary to point out, however, as the
Secretary-General states in his report, that UNIFIL.
has not been able thus far to fulfil all the terms of its
mandate, despite the praiseworthy efforts made at
various levels. Of course, thanks to its action, the
cease-fire called for by the Council in resolution 490
(1981) of 21 July last has been maintained and the are;,
in which UNIFIL operates has been un~ually quiet,
despite the persistence of latent tensions. But there
are still too many incidents, and the obstacles which
are raised to prevent the Force from carrying out its
mission are still too many to allow us to pass 0~~1
them in silence. Those incidents, most of them +::>
orately provoked by the parties in the field, call fr ;:I in
disapproval on our part I quote from paragrar ’ 14 ‘1:
the report of the Secretary-General in this connectru!l.

87. It has once again been confirmed that the absence
of a con~prchcnsive political settlement in the Middle
9

:

=- “Certain armed elements, moreover, are still
_-attempting to establish their presence in some parts
-of the Scncgalese battalion area. These attempts
-=havecontributed to tension in the area and, on occammsion, have led to clashes between sympatvzers of
-~ various factions.“.

remarkable way in which he has been discharging his
tasks as Force Commander, My congratulations and
good wishes go also, ~of course, to the officers and
troop* of !he Force.
98. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/14803.

93. The dr frrcm forces have continued successfully to thwart any new deployment of UNIFIL in their
enclave; they have been preventing the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL and United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization personnel in their zones.
They are maintaining their presence in four positions
in the Force’s area of operations. Hence we fully
support the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report. It is absolutely essential that all parties
in the field give their full and unreserved co-operation
to the Force in the implementation of its mandate.

A vote wus taken by show of hatrds.
Iti .favour: China, France. Ireland. Japan, Mexico,
Nige;, Panama, Philippines; Spain, i‘unisia, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against: None
Abstaittittg: German Democratic Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics

94. In that synit, we urgently appeal to all the parties’
to continue to respect the cease-fire and to refrain from
any action liable to lead to violent reactions, and to
make a resolute effort- to allow consolidation of the
UNIFlL area,

The &oft resohtiotr was adopred by 13 votes 10 none,
willi 2 ahrenrions (resoMott 495 (1981)).
99. The PRESIDENT:
General.

95. In that connection, I wish to pay a due tribute to
the efforts made in very difficult circumstances by the
I.ebanese Government to help ,UNIFIL carry out its
tasks. As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
1,350 officers and troops are currently under the
operational control of the Commander of the Force.
l%lrthermore, a Lebanese engineering unit is endeavouring to repair existing buildings and to construct
shelters: it is also carrying out projects for the benefit
of the civilian population in the zone of operations.
Together with those efforts, co-operation between
UNIFIL and the Lebanese internal security forces has
been further strengthened.

I now call on the Secretary-

100. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken
note of the resolution just adopted by the Council and
its decision to extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a
further p&pd of-six-months, until 19 June 1982.
101. I have on numerous occasions drawn the Council’s attention to the root-causes of the difficulties faced
by UNIFIL, and I do not need to reiterate them today.
Needless to say, with this renewed expression of
support by the Council UNIFIL will continue to
exert all possible efforts to carry out fully the tasks
entrusted to it. I am sure that my successor will, as
I have done, do all that he can to promote the full
implementation of the Council resolutions on UNIFIL
in all their parts.

96. These are encouraging signs on the road towards
gradual restoration of Government authority in that
part of the country. Need I say that France is still
attached to the territorial integrity, sovereientv and
political independence of Leb&on; That isw6y my
delegation, which rightly values the determination of
the Lebanese Government to enhance its presence,
both military and civilian, in the region, is ready and
willing to support any initiatives that might be undertaken by the Lebanese authorities to improve the
situation. The French delegation favours the earliest
possible resumption of the activities of the IsraelLebanon Mixed Armistice Commission and also
welcomes the idea of strengthening the means and
objectives of UNIFIL as advocated by the Beirut
Government.

102. I would hope, at the same time, that the members of the Council will bring their fullest influence
to bear on the situation so that the parties will heed
the position taken by the Council, without furthe]
delay. I consider this fundamentally important if our
objectives are to be fulfilled.
103. I wish to pay a tribute once again to the Commander, the officers and men of IJNIFIL. In this, one
of the most important and most difficult United Nations peace-keeping operations, they have carried
out their duties with exemplary efficiency, dedication
and courage.
104. Finally, may I take this opportunity to express
my warm thanks to the members of the Council for
the kind words addressed to me.

97. Before closing, I should like to pay a particular
tribtltc to the Secretary-General for the outstanding
contribution he has made over all these years to a
much-needed restoration of peace to that sorely tried
l?i\rt of the world. I also offer the congratulations and
thanks of my delegation to General Callaghan for the

105. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those
members of the Council who have expressed the wish
to make statements following the voting.
IO

106. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inrerpueration
Ifrotn
Rttssiaw):
Once againthe Security Council has met and ha&takej!
a decision to extend the mandate of UNIFIL.
107. As everyone is well aware, that Force was set
up on an interim basis in March 1978primarily in order
to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanese territory. It has now been in existence for
practically four years. However, it still has not carried
out its mandate, and there is no foreseeable end to its
activities.
108. The reasons for such an abnormal situation are,
as is known, the virtually constant aggressive armed
provocations by Israel and its agents, the separatist
contingents of Haddad, against Lebanon, against the
Palestiniansin that territory, and against various units
of UNIFIL. At the same time, we cannot fail to note
that Israel has quite clearly expressed expansionist
designs towards southern Lebanon. This is borne out
by the fact that in the course of the Council’s recent
consideration of Israel’s illegal activities concerning
the Syrian Golan Heights,- many representatives,
including the representative of Lebanon, clearly
indicated that, after Jerusalem and the Golan Heights,
southern Lebanon may well becomethe next target of
israel’s expansionist and annexationist policy.
109. In this connection, the Soviet delegationbelieves
that in considering the extension of UNIFIL’s mandate
the Council should have focused its attention on
aspects of the situation prevailing in southern Lebanon,
such as protecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country. It should have taken vigorous
and effective steps to counter the implementation of
Israel’s aggressive, expansionist designs towards
Lebanon and to secure the fuullwithdrawal of Israeli
troops from all Lebanese territory,
110. Ths position of the Soviet Union with respect
to UNIFIL is one of principle and remains unchanged.
It is based on the needto protect the victims of Israel’s
aggression and to ensure the complete withdrawal of
Israel’s troops from all Lebanese territory without in
any way encroaching on the sovereign aghts of the
Government of Lebanon.
111. At the same time, we should like to confirm
that UNIFIL should function in strict conformity
with the Charter, under the control of the Security
Council, particularly with respect to its functions, its
total strength, the principles underlying the selection
of national contingents and the procedures whereby
those troops are financed.
112. The delegationof the Soviet Union abstained in
the vote just taken on the resolution to renew the
mandate of UNIFIL for the same reasons which
caused it to abstain in the vote on the original resolution which established the Force-resolution 42s
(1978).

113. Mr. LICHENSTEIN (United States of America): Today we have considered the renewal of a body
that has performed a crucial role in preserving peace
in the Middle East. The existence of UNIFIL, with all
its imperfections, has helped materially to reduce
dangerous confrontations among the various antagonists. This, in turn, has made it possible not only to
work towards a peaceful evolution of Lebanon’s
domestic political development with, it is hoped, the
co-operation of certain other States in the region but
also io maintain momentum towards a peaceful settlement of the broader Arab-Israeli conflict towards a
negotiated settlement-let me add-on the basis of
the Council’s resolutions 242 (1967) and 338(1973) and
the Camp David framework.
114. The cease-fire recently put in place in Lebanon
-which UNIFIL helps substantially to preserveserves the interests of all the parties involved. As we all
recognize, however, the situation remains precarious,
and the distribution of forces in the region on which
the cease-fire is based cannot be considered permanent. But the only way to reach a final settlement is
first of all to avoid eruptions of violence, and achieving
that is the role which the cease-fire in general and
UNIFIL in particular must be allowed to play.
115. We are pleased that this renewal resolution
contains language firmly recognizing the Lebanese
Government’s sovereignty in the region and the
integrity of its national territory. The authority of the
Lebanese Government must be restored with all
possible speed in that region, and my Government
pledgesitself to help in any way possible towards that
g0d.

116. We applaudthe efforts of the Lebanese Government to deploy its army in operations with UNIFIL
in the south. We encourage the Government of Lebanon to continueefforts to extend its authority throughout its territory.
117. Far all those reasons, we have supported the
resolution and the renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate for
another six months.
118. Finally, we wish to express our admiration and
support for the Commander, officers and personnel
of UNIFIL whose braverv and dedication in the
cause of aeacedeserve the gratitude of us all. It would
be well if th world’s political leaders would follow
that example.
119. The PRESIDENT: The representative of
Lebanon has asked to be allowed to speak and I call ou
idm.
120. Mr. TUfiNI (Lebanon): I have asked to be allowed to speak principally to address to you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Co&il the thanks
of the Government of Lebanon for yet another prompt
response.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATlONS

United Nalions publications
may be obtained liom bookstores and distributors
ibroUk!bOUl Ihe
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: Uoiled Nations. Sales Section. New York or Ge~le’~a.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LEX PUBLICATIONS

DES NAllONS

Lcs publications
des Nations Unies som en venledans Its librairiesct
monde emier. Informez-vow
aupr-3 dc vow libraire ou adrcsswvow
des venles. New York o” G&VC.

MJ3M)

UNlI?S
lcsa~encesdeposilaircsdu
A ; Nadons Unies. ticlion

li6.611034une

1988-2.050
