IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Requests the International Law Commission, in con­
formity with resolution 36/106, to submit a preliminary
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session
bearing, inter alia, on the scope and the structure of the
draft Code;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his in­
vitation to Member States and relevant international inter­
governmental organizations to present or update their
comments and observations on the draft Code with a view
to their submission to the International Law Commission;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Draft Code of Of­
fences against the Peace and Security of Mankind''.
/07th plenary meeting
16 December 1982

37/103. Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the pur­
pose of encouraging the progressive development of inter­
national law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Eco­
nomic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, con­
taining the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/150 of 17 December 1979
and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation
and progressive development of the principles and norms
of international economic law relating in particular to the
legal aspects of the new international economic order", and
its resolution 36/ 107 of 10 December 1981 , entitled "Pro­
gressive development of the principles and norms of inter­
national law relating to the new international economic
order",
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 10 par­
ticularly of the progress report prepared by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, 11 of the ana­
lytical papers and analysis of texts of relevant instruments
and of the views submitted by States in response to General
Assembly resolution 36/107, 12
Taking note, in particular, of the recommendation that
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research should
complete the analytical study on the progressive develop­
ment of the principles and norms of international law relating
to the new international economic order, in accordance with
the fifth preambular paragraph and paragraph 2 of resolution
36/107,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
l. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to prepare the third and final phase of the
analytical study and to complete it in time for the Secretary­
General to submit it to the General Assembly at its thirty­
eighth session;
10
11
12

A/37/400 and Add.1-3.
A/37/400, sect. II.
See A/37/409/Add. l-3.

265

2. Urges Member States to submit not later than 31
May 1983 relevant information with respect to the study,
including proposals concerning further action to be taken
on the final study to be submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on Inter­
national Trade Law, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Industrial Develop­
ment Organization, the regional commissions, the United
Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other
relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organi­
zations active in this field, as determined by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, to submit rel­
evant information and to co-operate fully with the Institute
in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research to select, on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, taking into account the different legal and
economic systems of the world, experts who will help it to
carry out the last phase of the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on the
final study prepared by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research for its consideration, on a priority
basis, under the item entitled • 'Progressive development of
the principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order" to be included in the
provisional agenda of that session.
107th plenary meeting
/6 December 1982

37/104. Observer status of national liberation move­
ments recognized by the Organization of Af­
rican Unity and/or by the League of Arab States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/167 of 15 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 13
Bearing in mind the resolution of the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their Rela­
tions with International Organizations relating to the ob­
server status of national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the League
of Arab States, 14
Noting that the Vienna Convention on the Representation
of States in Their Relations with International Organizations
of a Universa! Character, of 14 March 1975, 15 regulates
only the representation of States in their relations with in­
ternational organizations,
Taking into account the current practice of inviting the
above-mentioned national liberation movements to partici­
pate as observers in the sessions of the General Assembly,
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and in the work of the conferences held
under the auspices of such international organizations,
Convinced that the participation of the national liberation
movements referred to above in the work of international
organizations helps to strengthen international peace and
co-operation,
A/371326 and Add. I.
See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Rep­
resentation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations.
Vienna. 4 February-14 March 1975. vol. II (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.75.V. 12), document A/CONF.67/15, annex.
"Ibid.. vol. 11. p. 207.
13

14
