United Nations

:

·',i

(

98th

.•

G,E,NERAL,,~

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 15' Dece/llber /981",
at /0.55 a.m.

'FHIRTYcSIXTH SESSION,

OffiCial Records

NEW YORK

Assembly and thi/ Chairmen of the Main Committees took
places on the platform.

CQNTENTS
Agenda hem 16:
Appointment of the'Secretary-General of the United Nations

,ad:

,1759

Mr. Aly /. Teymour, Chief of Protocol, conducted Mr.
Perez de Cue",:r to the platform.

President: Mr. Ismat T. KITTANI (Iraq).

5. The PRESIDENT: I have the honour to inform Mr.
Perez de Cuellar officially that the General Assembly' has
appointed him Secretary-General of the United Nations
for a term of office beginning I January 1982 and ending
on 31 December 1986.

lUr

IIr.
to

AGENDA ITEM 16
Appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations

6. I ask Mr. Perez de Cuellar to repeat after me the oath
of office.

I, The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has before
it a letter dated 11 December 1981 from the President of
the Security Council to the President of the General Assembly [A/36/820]. It reads as follows:

7. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR: I, Javier Perez de'
Cuellar, solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to me as Secretary-General of the United Nations, to discharge these
functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of
the United Nations only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any Government or other authority external to
the Organization.

"I have the honour to inform you that the Security
Council, at its 2312th meeting, held in private on I1
December 1981, unanimously adopted resolution 494
( 198 i) concerning the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. The resolution reads as
follows:

8. The PRESIDENT: I am certain that on this occasion I
speak for every member of the General Assembly in extending our sincere congratulations to the Secretary-General-elect. We welcome him most warmly. and we pledge
him our full co-operation and support. We wish him a
very fruitful term of office and extend all our best wishes
to him in his future endeavours in the interests of the
international community. May the United Nations. under
his leadership, move further forward in becoming the
centre for harmonizing actions as foreseen in the Charter.

" 'The Security Council,
"'Having considered the q~estion
recommendation for the appomtment
Secretary-General of the United Nations,

of
of

the
the

'" Recommends to the General Assembly that Mr.
Javier Perez de Cuellar be appointed SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for a term of office
from I January 1982 to 31 December 1986' ...

9. I now invite Mr. Perez de Cueliar to make a statement.

2. In connection with this recommendation of the Security Council, the General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution in document A/36/L.56, the only document before the Assembly on which action is required.

10. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, I am greatly honoured and
moved by your kind and generous words of welcome.

3. In view of the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council and in the light of the wish expressed by
many delegations. may I take it that it is the desire of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/36/L.56 by
acclamation?

11. The trust and confidence placed in me fills me with
deep gratitude and humility. I am profoundly grateful to
the President and the members of the Security Council for
recommending my appointment and to the General Assembly for accepting the recommendation by acclamation.
I stand here before ihe entire membership of the United
Nations. mindful that the support it has given me is an
expression of its solidarity. This is and will be my ultimate source of strength. I fully realize that the task that
has been entrusted to me is unique in its nature, complexity and magnitude. I pledge to you my utmost dedication
and impartiality in discharging the responsibilities deriving' from that task.

The draft resollltion was adopted by acclamation (resoIlItion 36/137).
4. The PRESIDENT: I have the honour to' announce
that Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar has been appointed by
acclamation Secretary-General of the United Nations for a
term of office beginning I January 1982 and ending on
31 December 19860

The President of the Security Council, the President of
the Economic and Social Council, the President of the
Trusteeship Council. the Vice-President (do the General

12. I am also aware that my appointment indicates recognition of the important role being played by Africa,
Asia and Latin America in our collective struggle to realize the aims and purposes laid down in the Charter of the

1759

A/36/PV.98

1760

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session~Plenary Meetings

-United Nations. I believe that, in consequence of the near
universalityl'lf representation achieved' by the Organization. one of the essential conditions for strengthening the
foundations of peace, justice and progress throughout the
world is a practical awareness of the vital aspirations of
the majority of mankind consistent with the requirements
of stability and balance.
13. This is not an election campaign 'speech, as I have
already been elected. Hence, I do not propose to offer a
programme or to make promises. This would not be appropriate to the nature of the function that I am going to
fulfil. The General Assembly, whose session is drawing to
a close, has reviewed the major issues for which the
Organization has responsibility: disarmament; social and
economic matters, including human rights; the vestiges of
colonialism, and the development of international law,
among others. As an important part of my service to the
Organization, I shall assist in the implementation of the
Assembly's decisions in these fields.
14. I am aware-and the ever-vigilant international
press has made it its business to keep us mindful of the
fact-that we are going through a period of intense and
renewed criticism of the United Nations.
IS. The Secretary-General is usually an easy target for
such criticism, which sometimes can be attributed to
other bodies in the United Nations. They have had to be
faced by the four Secretaries-General, but perhaps now
they are more intensive because of the renewed international tension, a growing feeling of frustration among the
developing countries and the proportionate disappointment
on the part of the world public. We may also glimpse a
sort of groundswell which could almost be described as
revisionist.
16. I shall resist the temptation to answer those cntlcisms with the platitude that the United Nations is merely
a reflection of the political will and actions of the States
Members. As its name indicates and as is apparent from
the Charter, the United Nations is a body of States
gathered together for purposes and ends which go beyond
and above purely national motives. Hence this house
symbolizes an entity that is conceptually different from
the component parts. It is almost possible to say. paraphrasing Darwin, that. being a more complex entity, the
Organization is a more advanced evolutionary form, since
it represents a kind of community life that is higher than
what would prevail if it did not exist.
17. For these reasons, I think that the United Nations
does not need to apologize for the fact that it is in the
forefront and for possessing this element of futurism
which of necessity must appear in its activities. There
will always be someone to tell us that we are an idea
whose time has not yet come, but we have to ann ourselves not only with courage but also with the feeling of
reality which is necessary so as not to be overcome by
discouragement. like the mythological character who was
for ever pushing a rock uphill.
18. I must say that I do have a clear and at the same
time a sober and positive idea of the responsibilities given
to me by the General Assembly's decision. In the past 10
years I have been almost constantly linked to the Organization. A good part of those years I have spent exclusively in the Organization's service. I have been able
to get the feeling of its political dramas, both in the Security Council. where I had to preside at difficult times,
and in the Secretariat. on delicate missions in various

countries. I have had the opportunity also, as Chairman
of the Group of 77, to participate' fully in the frustrating
endeavours to bring about a new international economic
order. I have seen for myself, as an international official,
the requirements of the Organization's staff.
19. I was trained in law, and therefore I am aware that
the Secretary-General is at the service of the international
community and specifically of this Organization. I know
that he does not have a supranational function, but an inherent part of the responsibility of the Secretary-General
to the community-and the practical consequence of the
existence of a body such as this-is that he become the
advocate of the causes of common interest. No one is
more clearly above national or regional considerations.
20. The Secretary-General, in order to fulfil his responsibilities properly, must be able to rely on the understanding, the patience and the support of Member States, particularly when he has to adopt attitudes which may seem
to run counter to their positions or short-tenn inclinations.
His sole guiding star must be the promotion of. causes
favourable to the progress of all, for the benefit of all, on
the basis of international peace and security and Unswervingly directed towards justice, in confonnity with the mandate given him by the Charter. It is my firm purpose in
this regard to reactivate the political role of the SecretaryGeneral within our constitutional parameters, always attentive to the very rapid development of events and takingcarenot to be dragged along by them. I clearly perceive the importance of the trust that has been placed in
me by all Members of the Organization, and it is my
intention to make use of it by consultation and in the
interest of consensus, because these constitute the very
essence of our common task.
21. I am assuming the post of Secretary-General at a
time when, after a long period of delay, the long-standing
initiative for the renewal of global negotiations between
North and South is coming back within the purview of
the United Nations. This coincides with one of the most
serious world economic crises of the past few decades.
the most sorely pressed victims of which are the populations of the developing countries. The social and political
thrust of the crisis is axiomatic. In so far as the just and
proper expectations. for so long unfulfilled, of thousands
of millions of human beings are disappointed yet again.
and at a time of political confrontation, the most fundamental human rights. particularly the right to a better distribution of wealth and social well-being. are in fact
being infringed.
22. Despite the ecumenical nature of the task that I am
going to assume as Secretary-General of all the United
Nations. I am a Peruvian. and I cannot and must not
separate myself from my origins in a developing countr~.
and. furthermore, from the fact that I have represented It
as a diplomat throughout almost my entire adult life. It
has been my fortune to participate in the preparation and
execution of the foreign policy of my country and of the
third world many times. Therefore I am very much aware,
of the need to provide an impetus to the renewal 01
global negotiations. and I wish to say now that. beyo.nd
the contribution that the Secretariat can give in its admlOistrative and advisory functions. I will always be ready.'o
give my personal co-operation. if that should prove deSIrable.

[The Secretary-General-elect cominlled in English. 1

4

98thmeeting~15, December 1981
~

lan
ng
l1ic
ai,

hat
l1al
DW

inTal
the
the
IS

ns.
:>n-

I1dlarem
ns.
ses
on
rve

anin
ry-

ataklerin
my
the
ery

.1 a

ing
een
of
lost
les,
Jlaical
and
nds
:Iin.
idadisfact

am
ited
not
try.
d it
It
and
the
,are
of
ond
niny.to
:slr-

l'

23. r could not hope to act fruitfully in any of the, areas
to which I have alludyd if I were not able to avail myself
of one of the most capable and dedicated civil services in
the world. I have witnessed its qualities personally. I am
aware, however, that there may be a kind of revolution of
rising expectations brewing. I wish to launch an appeal to
those men and women, whom I admire and respect so
much for their support, in order that we may turn the
Secretariat once again into an active organization for
peace and development,' an instrument ever less bureaucratic, ever more integrated and efficacious., The fact that
greater responsibility goes hand in hand with an improvementin working conditions does not escape me; I trust
that I can count on their understanding, co-operation and
imagination in the search for satisfactory solutions to their
problems, to the examination of which I propose to' give
priority.
24. In order to galvanize the Secretariat and to integrate
it more organically into the action of the United Nations
as a whole, I need to count on the support of Member
States. I am to head a Secretariat which must preserve its
basic sense as an authentic international civil service so as
gen_uinely to serve the interests of the international community. In accordance with the Charter, this necessarily
entails strict independence with respect to the national interests of the States which are a part of the Organization. I
fully trust the General Assembly, which lays down the
rules for the appointment by the Secretary-General of
Secretariat personnel, to provide me with tools required
for the full discharge of my task-not for the purpose of
promoting greater growth in the Secretariat than is necessary, but rather with the main purpose of making the
present Secretariat ever more efficient, morally committed, as I hope it will feel, to the goals of the international community as reflected in the Charter.

[The Secretary-General-elect continued ill French.]
25. I wish to assure you that my sole ambition is to
serve the higher interests of the international community
and to work for the realization of the ideals and aspirations of which the Organization is the repository and of
which it must remain the symbol.
26. It is my conviction that the Organization must constantly represent the expression of the universal con- science. To that end I shall do everything within my
power to ensure that the purposes and principles of the
Charter are scrupulously observed. I shall take up every
problem or issue in an open-minded fashion and I shall
act with awareness and according to conscience, on the
basis of right, law and justice.

[The Secretary-General-elect resumed in Spanish.]
27. I am sorry that I cannot speak Arabic, Chinese or
Russian, which are admirable languages, and thus better
express my thinking to the representatives who use those
official working languages.
28. I do not wish to close this my first statement to the
General Assembly as Secretary-General without paying a
,proper tribute to Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who on various
occasions in the last decade, has done me the' honour of
,showing his confidence in me in many areas. His devotion to peace is deservedly on record for history. I wish
as a close colleague and co-worker in the diplomatic service to bear witness to his outstanding skill as a negotiator
and to his untiring tenacity in the service of the international community.

1761

29. The noble oath that I have just taken before the Assembly as the consummate democratic body of the Organization might have exempted me from reading out this
statement. Hence I wish to conclude by reiterating· that I
shall carry out· that oath with loyalty, discretion and conscientiousness. ,
30. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of Botswana to address the Assembly on behalf of the
group of Afri~an States.

31 . Mr. LEGWAILA (Botswana): I speak on behalf of
a group of States whose commitment to and faith in this
the United Nations are well known. Africa has always
regarded this global Organization, this United Nations, as
a place of refuge for the weak and the vulnerable-a
place where the weak and the powerful, the rich and the
poor, the North and the South, are given equal opportunity to dream dreams, to aspire and to hope; to participate freely and actively in the never-ending quest for
peace, for love and for the brotherhood of man; for it is
only too obvious that in the final analysis it is we, the
poor, the weak and the vulnerable, whowill benefit most
from the successful creation of a world without conflict
or war, a world without discrimination based on colour or
race or on the extremities of wealth and poverty, a world
with unlimited opportunities for both the strong and the
weak.
32. Therefore this occasion is of great importance to us,
for we share in the abiding hope that the new SecretaryGeneral, like his predecessor, will continue to spend restless days and sleepless nights in the service of the United
Nations, in the service of mankind. We from Africa
promise nothing less than full and active co-operation
with the new Secretary-General, just as we indeed extended to ,his predecessor nothing less than full and active
co-operation in the discharge of his enormous responsibilities.
33. The new Secretary-General is of course only too familiar with what fate has plunged him into. He has
served the United Nations for many years and knows the
well nigh impossible tasks the Organization faceswhich, by this act of inauguration, are being unloaded on
his shoulders, with our goodwill and best wishes assured,
of course. Our support for your exertions, Sir, will always be without reservation or equivocation.
34. You know the problems of Africa, Asia, Latin
America and the Middle East. They are still there, stubbornly refusing to be resolved. Some, like those we have
in Africa, were there even before the United Nations was
formed and have continued to haunt every Secretary-General who has served the Organization.
35. We in Africa have no doubt that the new SecretaryGeneral is a man of vision, whose shoulders are broad
enough to carry the responsibilities which this office, the
office of Secretary-General of the United Nations, imposes. It is an honour and a privilege therefore, on behalf
of the group of African States, to congratulate you, Sir,
on your election to this high office. In the African group
you have friends and supporters who will always wish
you every success in your endeavours.
36. It is my pleasant duty also to extend to the outgoing
Secretary-General our sincere gratitude for a job well
done. You, Sir, discharged your responsibilities as an international civil servant par excellence with a skill and
tenacity of purpose which history cannot afford to forget,

1762

Generat Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

any more than can we who nave been so fortunate as to
serve at the United Nations under your quiet but deliber. ate and purposeful leadership; May you continue to be of
service to your fellow men.
. 37. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Philippines, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Asian States.
38. Mr. YANGO (Philippines): We have just witnessed
a ,solemn and momentous event. We have just marked a
milestone in the history of the United Nations with the
swearing-in of the fifth Secretary-General of the Organization.
39. On behalf of the group of Asian States. allow me to
congratulate Mr. Perez de Cuellar of Peru as the new
Secretary-General, who, in the words of the Charter, is
the chief administrative officer of the United Nations.
After six weeks of intense anxiety and uncertainty on the
part of all concerned, the Security Council, under the capable leadership of its President, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda,
finally broke the impasse and recommended the appointment of Mr. Perez deCuellar as the new Secretary-General. to commence his duties on I January 1982.
40. I am sure I speak for the Asian group when I say
with candour and sincerity that the new Secretary-General
is both a wise and an eminently suitable choice for the
post. Mr. Perez de Cuellar is no stranger to the United
Nations having had a highly regarded career in the
Organization, where he first served as Permanent Representative of Peru to the United Nations. Subsequently he
served in the Secretariat with the rank of Under-Secretary-General and was assigned by the Secretary-General
to be his Special Representative in Cyprus and· later his
Personal Representative in Afghanistan. In terms of education, he is well qualified and prepared for the job, having been a professor of international law and the author of
a number of books on that subject.
41. To know the man is to admire and respect him. The
country of Peru and its people should be proud of him.
not only because he has proved himself to be a noteworthy representative of his country, but also because he has
brought honour and distinction to it by having been selected as Secretary-General.
42. The Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, should also
be proud of him, because it can be said that it was during
his term of office, that the Under-Secretary-General displayed his talent for leadership. We in the Organization
are equally proud, because he was one of us, he rose
from the ranks and he made it to the top. He possesses
qualities that seem to be opposites but are complementary-he i~ gentle but cautious in his dealings and patient
but determined in his endeavours. I know him personally
to be a skilful and seasoned diplomat, because at one
time he was also assigned by the Secretary-General to
work on the problem of Kampuchea.
.43. We in the Asian group look forward to working
with the new Secretary-General and we here and now assure him of our co-operation in his new tasks and respo'nsibilities. It has been said that the post of Secretary-General is an impossible one. But this should not discourage
, or deter our new man, because previous Secretaries-Gen, eral have accomplished much for the good of the Organ:lzation and of the world at large. Knowing as we do Mr.
,Perez de Cuellar as a person, we feel no doubt that he
will be equal to the job and that as a man from humble
I

beglnning-s ne war try -everharder to acquit himself well
in this so-called impossible job. It is in this sense and on
behalf of the group of Asian States that I welcome Mr.
Perez de Cuellar and wish him a most fruitful and distinguished term of office.
44. At this point, may I also say that what we have just
witnesse'd meant the changing of the guard at the United
Nations. As the new Secretary-General assumes his post,
Mr. Waldheim. the admired and highly respected Secretary-General. will be leaving the Organization, which he
has headed and administered for the past 10 years. Having been personally associated with the Organization during that period of time. I must say that my first impression of Mr. Waldheim when I met him in 1966, when he
was the Permanent Representative of Austria to the
United Nations, proved to be very much justified. He has
always conducted himself as a true diplomat. in appearance, in demeanour. in speech and in every sense of
the word.
45. These past 10 years in the life of the Organization
have been exciting, eventful and at times even tumultuous. As events continued to unfold, Mr. Waldheim
left his imprint on each one of them. To know and to
understand-the man. -I recommend a rereading of his
book, Building the Future Order: The Search for Peace
in an llllerdependelll World. which is a compilation of his
innermost views, feelings and sentiments about the
United Nations. Thus. through his book, we can see the
man, his true worth and his lasting contribution to the
Organization.
46. As chief officer of the Organization he has shown a
remarkable capacity for hard work, devoting long hours
with patience and determination to the problems of the
United Nations. We admire the man for his skilled and
unobtrusive performance in this complex job. He certainly deserves praise and commendation. Because of his
eminent qualifications and achievements, I am confident
that greater things are in store for him. Fondly shall we
recall the last 10 years as the "Waldheim" years. We are
sad that he is leaving but we sincerely wish him and Mrs.
Waldheim all the best for the future.
47. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Romania. who will speak on behalf of the group of Eastern European States.
48. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interpretation from
French): This solemn moment in the life of the Organization offers me the unique opportunity and the signal honour of extending, in my capacity as chairman of the
group of Eastern European States for this month. heartfelt
congratulations and best wishes for complete success in
the fulfilment of his lofty responsibilities to Mr. Perez de
Cuellar, whom the General Assembly has just unanimously appointed Secretary-General of the United Nations.
49. It is especially pleasurable to welcome the happy
choice of Mr. .Perez de Cuellar for the highest post within
the United Nations since I, like many of us here, have
long had the personal privilege of knowing and apprecia~­
ing his eminent qualities as politician and diplomat. hIS
profound knowledge of international affairs and his un~
swerving commitment to the cause of the Organization.
50. As is well known, Mr. Perez de Cuellar has already
served the Organization with distinction for many ~~ars
and the difficult and delicate missions of great polItical

98th meeting-IS December 1981

Import that ~he has discharged have amply proved his
great competence.

well
jon
Mr.
dis-

51. This appointment constitutes a tribute both to the
noble Peruvian nation and to the front-rank contributions
to the activities of the United Nations made by the Latin
American countries, which have inherited a rich tradition
in the struggle for independence and national sovereignty,
for the promotion of justice and law in relations among
States.

jU~t

lit(:d
lqst,
:crehhe
-IavdurJresn he
the
: has
ap;e of

52. I should like to refer on this happy occasion, to the
relations of friendship and co-operation which my country, Romania, as indeed all the countries in the Eastern
European group, have developed with Peru, the affinities
of language and culture which bring us close, and to extend to Mr. Perez de Cuellar the heartfelt congratulations
of my Government.
53. We also see in the appointment of the new Secretary-General a highly important confirmation of the preeminent place in international life taken by the developing
and non-aligned countries, whose growing participation is
an essential condition for resolving the most serious problems facing our contemporary world.

Ition
tu1eim
d'to
his

54. In welcoming his nomination to the post of Secretary-General, we should like to assure Mr. Perez de
Cuellar of our full support in the discharge of his great
responsibilities and to express the conviction that his activity will help to strengthen, in keeping with the hopes
of people, the role of the Organization in the solution of
the crucial problems confronting the intern;ltional community, particularly those of disarmament, and especially
nuclear disarmament; the elimination of under-development and the establishment of a new international economic order; a just and lasting solution to disputes and
conflicts by peaceful means; the complete elimination of
colonialism and neo-colonialism and of all forms of foreign domination; and respect for international legality in
relations among all States.

'i!{/('e
,f his

the
~, the
the

i

i

~
j

1

.'In a
tours
the
and
cerf his
ident
I we
~ are
Mrs'.

55. At the same time, we should like to express our
profound gratitude to Mr. Waldheim, for his tireless activity on behalf of the international community and for
his devotion to the United Nations. He has discharged the
functions of Secretary-General with distinction and selfdenial for a decade, that is to say, for a significant portion of the history of the Organization. throughout a period when the Members of the United Nations were confronted by problems of a complexity and scope never
before known and by a series of international crises and
conflicts.

'e of
East-

from

niza~

I hof the
rtfelt
ss in
:zde

56. The great competence and high sense of duty demonstrated by Mr. Waldheim throughout that lengthy period, and the eminent service that he has rendered to the
United Nations have won for him well-deserved esteem
and appreciation throughout the world. Having been associated for a long time with the name and activities of the
United Nations, Mr. Waldheim transmits to us a vivid
example of devotion. of tireless efforts in the service of
international peace and co-operation, for which we are
profoundly gratefuL to him.

man~

NaapPY
,ithin
hav,c,
~ciat"

, hi,s
; uni'

Itio5:~

57. It is a particular pleasure for me to extend to Mr.
Waldheim. on behalf of the delegations in the group of
Eastern European States" our feelings of gratitude and our
deep appreciation and to extend to him every 'wish for
':; success in his future activities. as well as our good
;kwishes for his personal happiness.
;;.-

1763

58. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Nicaragua, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Latin American States.
59. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) (illlerpretalion from Spanish): It is with great satisfaction that I
speak on behalf of the group of Latin American States on
the occasion of the Assembly's appointment for the period from January 1982 to December 1986, of the new
Secretary-General, a representative of the third world, of
the non-aligned movement, of Latin America and of the
brother republic of Peru.
60. We are in very difficult times. The Middle East,
southern Africa, and Central America, among others, are
in critical situations which must be handled with caution,
consideration and good sense, conducive to dialogue and
a political solution which will enable us to find appropriate means to avoid or at least diminish the devastating
effects of wider conflagrations.
61. The United Nations, of which we are all honoured
to be Members, has a great responsibility particularly towards the underdeveloped countries. This body must
therefore be led by a person who has both knowledge and
skill, prudence and decision-making ability, calm judgement and astuteness, the wisdom called for to deal with
weighty responsibilities and also the skill, political grasp
and independence of thinking, which coupled with
serenity and the ability to weigh things in the balance are
necessary in order properly ·to deal with the great tasks
entrusted by humanity to the United Nations and to the
Secretary-General.
62. It is a source of deep satisfaction to Latin America,
to the non-aligned movement and to the third world in
general that this man with those necessary qualities for
taking on major responsibilities should be one of their
beloved sons. We welcome this because, among other
things, we feel the time has come for the world to realize
that in these regions there are people able, to direct the
future of mankind just as well or better than those from
other more privileged regions or nations.
63. The third world's time has come. We in the United
Nations are living through an historic moment in swearing in a Secretary-General who represents the third world
and the non-aligned movement under the presidency of
another third world and non-aligned representative, Mr.
Kittani of Iraq. In assuming our great responsibilities today. we must realize that the Secretary-General needs our
understanding and support.
64. We are profoundly grateful that this historic moment for the third world has been understood by the community of nations and that Mr. Perez de Cuellar has been
elected Secretary-General by acclamation. We regard this
as unanimous support I~)r the recommendation made by
the Security Council which will strengthen his administration. and as acknowledgment of the personal merits of
this son of Peru. heir to all the tradition and culture of
the Incas.
65. Mr. Perez de Cuellar. whom we honour, is furthermore a very cultivated man. an experienced diplomat
well-versed in the ways of the Organization. A lawyer, a
graduate of the Faculty of Law of the Catholic University
of Lima. he entered the diplomatic service in 1940 and
was the Ambassador of his country to Venezuela,
Switzerland. Poland and the Soviet Union. He was Spe~
cial Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus

General Assernbly-Thirty·sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

1764

and was appointed Under-SecretilI:Y~General for SpecTal
Political Affairs in 1979. Subsequently, in 1981 he was
appointed Personal Representative of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan.
66. £: ,reryone is conversant with the wisdom, skin and
good judgement the new Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de
Cu~lIar, has shown in every responsible post that he has
held. We are sure that his activities have promoted the
strengthening of international peace and security. We
know that in the future his efforts and devotion will be
even greater. We hope that the responsibilities he is soon
to take up will mean even greater commitment to mankind.
67. The election of a Latin American is a triumph not
simply of a region but of the collective effort of the developing and the non-aligned nations. It is a triumph for
the historically significant causes of Latin America,
which are shared by the large majority of the world.
Hence we are sure that in the delicate task now entrusted
to him, this erudite lawyer and able diplomat with a long
and varied, brilliant relationship with the United Nations-in other words with the preservation of peace and
with decolonialization-will be able to rely on the full
support of nations here represented.
68. In closing I would express the gratitude of the
group of Latin American States to Mr. Waldheim, whose
contribution to the strengthening of the Organization is
recorded in the annals of the United Nations. Recorded
also are the tact and the singular discretion with which he
dealt with the most serious international conflicts. and his
commitment to the just causes of the third world countries, recognized by the international community.
69. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of France, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Western European and other States.
70.

Mr.

LEPRETTE (France) (illtel1JretatiOl/ ji'olll
French): As chairman of the group of Western European
and other States, I wish to extend our best wishes and
congratulations to the fifth Secretary-General. whom the
General Assembly has just appointed by acclamation. It is
a joy and a privilege for me to welcome Mr. Perez de
Cuellar. Although I am far from being the doyen of the
Permanent Representatives in New York, I find it a pleasant task to greet a friend of long standing. We know him
as a diplomat of great experience, whose career has
caused our paths to cross several times, in his function as
Permanent Representative of Peru to the United Nations,
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cyprus and as Under-Secretary-General.
71. For 10 years Mr. Perez de Cuellar has linked his
fate with that of the Organization, and we can only welcome the fact that the great qualities he has thus acquired
have today been consecrated. The United Nations and its
bodies, beginning with the General Assembly and the Security Council. in their quest for peace, their will to ensure tolerance and justice, and their fulfilment of their
task of serving social and economic progress. need tlie
guidance of a man of conciliation and wisdom. who. with
respect for the principles of impartiality established by the
Charter, will for five years be the unchallenged mandated
representative of our common will. Mr. Perez de Cueliar
will certainly be-we are privileged to be· aware of this
already, because we know him-the right man. We
pledge him our support.

7-2. r add how happy the group of Western European
and other States are that the Secretary-General who has
just been appointed comes from a Latin American Country, Peru, which very early affirmed its vocation as an
active, genuinely non-aligned country. Through its history, culture and trade Europe feels close to Peru and
Latin America. It is fortunate that a representative of that
continent has today been called upon to give real meaning·
and full value to the interdependent future of our entire
international community.
73. Finally, while saluting Mr. Perez de Cuellar. I
should like to pay a tribute to his predecessor. who has
done great honour to the office of Secretary-General. The
trust that we placed in him was never betrayed. He not
only witnessed the great international changes that We
have been experiencing for 10 years, but often was able
to foresee them, understand them, and even more important, make them accepted. We shall never forget that he
was, among other things, the indefatigable promoter. on
behalf of us all, of a new international economic order.
of a new law of the sea, of the solution of acute problems
such as the independence of Namibia and the question of
Cyprus, and the commitment of the United Nations to the
great cause of disarmament. On every occasion he
showed clear thinking and courage. He always proved
himself equal to the most difficult missions that we entrusted to him, which he accepted in order to serve the
international community. We remember them all. The
group of Western European and other States will not forget him. Mr. Waldheim, who has so well represented his
country, Austria, a faithful supporter of the United Nations, will leave us with the memory of a statesman who
has devoted all his activities to the cause of international
peace. We are extremely grateful to him for that.
74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I
call on the representative of Kuwait. who will speak on
behalf of the group of Arab States.
75. Mr. ABULHASSAN (Kuwait) (illterprelalio/l FIIIII
Arabic): The General Assembly has today placed its full
confidence in Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar by entrusting to
him the post of Secretary-General of the Organization for
the next five years. On behalf of the group of Arab
States, I wish to express to him our most sincere congratulations on the trust shown in him as he takes on his
tremendous responsibilities at a crucial stage in the history of the United Nations.
76. Before I continue my remarks about this very correct choice made by the Assembly. I wish to pay a trihute
to the important, excellent part played by the current Secretary-General. Mr. Kurt Waldheim. He has conducted the
business of the United Nations with sincerity and devotion. acknowledged by everyone. over a very difficult ~e­
riod. On behalf of the group of Arab States. I wish hll11
every success in this future life.
77. The group of Arab States. in transferring its trust in
the purposes and principles of the United Nations to t~e
person of the new Secretary-General. wishes to convey Its
esteem for his high degree of competence and talents. and
his wide-ranging experience in the political and dIplomatic fields. He has also in the eyes of all those who
have worked with him in other·bodies in the United Nations. distinguished himself as the representative of his
country and. as a part of the Organization.
78. The new Secretary-General will take up his post at
a very dangerous time in international relations. Interna-

98th meeting-IS December 1981

:an
has
lInan
lislrid
hat
ing
tire
, I

has
rhe
not
we
Ible

':"1 ;.'

'.~; :.'

..• . •.~'..,.J
.f!

IOr~

he
on
ier,
:ms
lof
the
he
ved

;

en~

the
The
for-'
his
Na~

Nho

:;,

i'l

'r

)nal'
): I
. on
i'olll

full
g to
for
~rab

trat, his
his~,

st in
I the
y its
and
ipl()",
whdj
Na~l

. hi~)'·

. ,:i;:

".

ti-onal conflicts have worsened, the tension of the cold
war has been aggravated and the foundations of world
peace have been disturbed because of flagrant violations
of the principles and purposes of the Charter. The international economic situation has been affected and has "
even deteriorated. The gap between the developed and the '
developing countries has widened, while the economic
burdens upon the developing countries have increased due
to the inflationary and other policies of some developed
countries. That is because the developed countries have
neglected the needs of the developing countries. We believe that the responsibility for reducing the burden of
underdevelopment and encouraging the process of development in the developing countries must be taken at the
international level. We are fully persuaded that the new
Secretary-General will expend every effort and use all
means at his disposal in the Organization to serve the
noble objectives of the Charter and to fulfil the hopes and
expectations of all mankind.
79. I wish to convey the congratulations of the Arab
group to the new Secretary-General, while recalling that
the Middle East, which is one of the most sensitive regions of the world because of its strategic importance,
continues to be one of the most dangerous flashpoints,
posing a threat to peace and security in the region and
throughout the world. We are convinced that the qualities
which the new Secretary-General possesses will enable
him to participate fully in the solution of the problems in
that region, on the basis of logic and of justice for the
Arab cause. Equitable treatment of the question will prevent further crises in that region. We wish, therefore, to
welcome the new Secretary-General as a fellow citizen of
the third world and of the non-aligned movement. We are
sure that this will be a determining factor in his perception of the problems of the third world. Those problems,
particularly the situations in the Middle East and in southern Africa, are now troubling the whole world .
80. The new Secretary-General, through his talents and
competence, will be able to hold pride of place for the
United Nations in the heart of peoples throughout the
world, and particularly among the third world.
81. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK (United States of America): It
is my great pleasure, on behalf of the United States in its
role as host country to the United Nations, to welcome
most warmly the selection of Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar
as the Organization's next Secretary-General. His selection is a well-deserved recognition of his long and dedicated service to his Government and to the United Nations. It is a recognition also of his superb qualifications
for this position. We have every confidence that Mr.
Perez de Cuellar will prove a most worthy successor to
Mr. Waldheim, who for 10 years has guided the Organization with such very great skill and dedication. I should
like to take this opportunity to express to Mr. Waldheim
our deepest gratitude for the energy, wisdom and statesmanship he has shown during his long years of service to
the United Nations.

" 82. Mr. Perez de Cuellar's qualifications are well
known to all of us here-too well known to warrant repeating at this time. I take great pleasure in the fact that
he is the first citizen of Latin America to be named to
this important post. It is a special pleasure and honour,to
all of us in the hemisphere. In this regard, I should like'
to share with the members the following message from
the United States Secretary of State, Alexander Haig, to'
Peru's Prime Minister:

1765

"I share your great satisfaction at the selection of
Ambassador Javier Perez de Cuellar to be the next Secretary-General of the United Nations. This action honours not only your nation but also the policies pursued
by your Government. We have the highest regard for
Ambassador Perez de Cuellar and for the diplomatic
tradition which he represents. My congratulations to
Peru for being the first nation in Latin America to have
a citizen elected to this high post. With personal best
wishes, I am, sincerely, Alexander M. Haig, Jr."
I might add here that our Vice-President, George Bush,
had the honour and pleasure of serving here at the United
Nations with Mr. Perez de Cuellar and has extended his
personal congratulations to the next Secretary-General.
83. Finally, I should like to add my own personal congratulations and personal best wishes to Mr. Perez de
Cuellar for his every success. I and my Government look
forward with great pleasure to working closely with him
in the months ahead. I wish to assure him of the host
country's fullest co-operation and support in discharging
the duties of his new, extremely difficult and most important position.

84. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, to address the Assembly.
85. The SECRETARY-GENERAL; I am deeply
touched by and most grateful for all the kind words addressed to me here today. This is for me a moving moment. To serve in this high office is a great and unique
privilege. It is an experience unlike any other. It provides
an unrivalled opportunity to assist in the affairs of peoples and of nations and to learn about the noble, as well
as the ignoble, side of human nature. It is an opportunity
to participate in the most important and difficult human
experime'nt ever undertaken-building the new structure
of an interdependent world. And this high office brings
one into active contact with the leaders and representatives of all the nations in a common effort to face the
challenges of the present and to build for the future. Naturally, I shall miss all these facets· of the office of Secretary-General.

86. This is also a comforting moment, because it is in
many ways a relief to lay down a great burden and to
look back over the long and hard road we have travelled
together since 197 I when I became Secretary-General.
The experience of· those 10 years has profoundly reinforced my conviction of the necessity to maintain, develop and strengthen the United Nations. The frustrations
and difficulties I have encountered have only confirmed
my view that the United Nations is an absolutely essential
institution, not only for present problems, but for the sane
and orderly conduct of human affairs in the future.
87. When we make judgements about the Organization
it is well to do so on the basis of its fundamental nature,
rather than on the basis of what this or that nation or
group of nations would wish it to be or to do. We must
always bear in mind that the United Nations is an organization of all nations and the property of none. It is the
place where nations should come together to harmonize
their actions for the attainment of the common ends of
the Charter. It should be used primarily for resolving disputes and conflicts, rather than as a forum for pursuing
them. It should not be viewed as the instrument of one
group or one nation against another.

1766

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

88. Our first and primary purpose -here is the maintenance of international peace and security and the development of a reliable day-to-day system of world order. respected and adhered to by all States. We are still very far
from such a goal. This vision of the founders of "the
Organization was inspired to a great extent by a major
world catastrophe, the Second World War. It was their
intention to provide. through the United Nations, an alternative to the international anarchy which. in this century
alone, has given rise to two world wars. We must never
lose sight of this primary goal.
89. We should not underestimate the successes of the
Organization in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We are developing. for example. with considerable success a means of conflict control-peacekeeping-which is an important part of wider political
and diplomatic efforts to keep the peace. Above all. the
United Nations is a place of last resort for Member States
when a fatal confrontation threatens.
90. I do not need to emphasize the historic importance
of the function of the Organization as an agent of peaceful change. It has acted as a catalyst in the process of
decolonization, and very successfully, and currently is
doing so in the effort to adjust relations between the industrial and the developing countries. Here again. the
magnitude and complexity of problems related to the
North-South dialogue and the interlinked question of
global nego~iations may seem at times discouraging. But
we must persevere with courage, patience and understanding. inspired rather than dismayed by the great mission
we have undertaken.
91. Another major purpose of the United Nations is the
development of co-operative approaches to the new generation of global problems which have grown out of the
technological revolution and the increasing interdependence of States. The United Nations has become a forum
in which these problems can be discussed with a view to
helping Governments to face up to these challenges together. The efforts of the United Nations on such problems have, I believe, had a decisive effect in raising the
consciousness of people all over the world. We must now
strive to achieve practical results.
92. It has always seemed to me that all our activities
can and should contribute to the progressive development
of an international system based on the rule of law,
which will increasingly benefit all its members and promote human rights. Obviously, we are only in the very
early stages of such a development, but unless we have
this very ambitious perspective in mind our efforts here
are likely to be fragmentary and to fall short of our professed aims.
93. I believe more strongly than ever that the United
Nations is the best available, if not the only, alternative
to the ever-present risk of nuclear disaster or international
anarchy. For this reason I am appalled at the superficial
judgements that are often made about the Organization
and at the levity and cynicism with which its activities
are all too often portrayed. Most great ideas and great in~
stitutions have gone through an initial period of denigration and scepticism, but we must not allow the United
Nations to be seriously undermined by such a process.
Sometimes I have the feeling that the lessons 'of two
woad wars have been forgotten' and that the privations of
more than half of the human race and the mortal danger
of most of the other half are not really considered to be
vital factors in the conduct of international affairs. The

nuclear threa( overshadows virtuaily the entire human
family. These are the true perspectives in which We
should evaluate the validity of what we try to do here.
94. It is true that, like many deliberative bodies. the
United Nations has its fair share of difficulties. frustrations and situations which should have been avoided by
common sense and vision. I do not have to stress this
here: members know it: they are going through this experience almost every day. Sometimes, for political and
emotional reasons, the efforts of the Organization to solve
great problems prove counter-productive and its approach
self-defeating. Often one group of nations conceives that
another group is leading the Organization in a direction of
which it does not approve and accordingly diminishes its
support for its work. Throughout the history of the United
Nations-and I go back to 1945-we have witnessed the
phenomenon of predominant majorities and bloc voting.
Sometimes these tendencies have taken us in one direction and sometimes in another. However, neither majorities nor blocs are immutable or monolithic. and all are
subject to the process of historic change, which we witness in this great Organization. What is unquestionably
true is that we need to consider issues on their merits and
learn to take decisions accordingly. Our present difficulties are not reasons for giving up the efforts to make the
United Nations work. On the contrary. they are reasons
for intensifying that effort.
95. In my 10 years as Secretary-General I have experienced exhilarating moments when the collective will of
Governments demonstrated the possibilities of the United
Nations if it is used in an imaginative and courageous
manner. The great relief operation in Bangladesh. for instance, in the early I970s showed dramatically how the
Governments of the world. the different organizations of
the United Nations system and various voluntary agencies
can work together under the overall co-ordination of the
United Nations to deal with a humanitarian emergency of
major proportions. We have since seen similar massive
international efforts to deal with humanitarian emergencies in Africa, in Asia. in Indo-China and elsewhere.
96. The efforts of the Security Council in the Middle
East war of 1973 were a remarkable example of the capacity of the Security Council to limit and control conflict, as well as the practical capacity of the Organization
to carry out decisive peace-keeping operations at short
notice in times of acute international crisis. Another vital
exercise in conflict control began in 1978 with the installation of the peace-keeping force in south Lebanon.
These are only a few examples of the proven ability of
the Organization to rise to the challenges of our time.
97. There have, I must admit, been other occasions
when I have found the inability of the United Nations to
take effective action profoundly discouraging. Unfortunately, there are many times when the collective will and
unity of purpose of the membership is definitely not sufficient to deal with critical situations effectively. If international problems can be resolved outside the United Na- .
tions, that is all to the good. But there is surely
something wrong when, as sometimes happens. the
Organization is unable to come to grips with situations
which are a definite threat to world peace or to world
stability. I strongly urge Governments of Member States
to pay far more attention to this absolutely fundamental
problem before we reach a situation where conflict an.d
confrontation run out of control and lead to massive dIsaster. The machinery is there. What is needed is a

98th meeting-IS December 1981

steady -dete-nnination to develop our institutions and to
make them work properly.

nan
we

ere.
the
lra-,
b"y
this.
.peand'
>Ive'
fach,
thai;

nor.

;, its,
ited
the
Ing,.:)
rec~Of:

are
wi(,

lbly~

and
cuii '

th~~

ions'

.";
.',i

lerk

lot
lited,
:ous)
. in"

th~l
s of
lcies,

, th~

yof)
sivei
gen';j

ddle
ca-!;(
con,;
ltion:
ihori'

~il!~~j ;J.
I

1767

.;_:.

non'I'[

y ~f!:

im~'l:

101. I wish also to express to the Permanent, Representatives of the Member States-my dear colleagues and
friends here in this Hall-my profound gratitude for all
98. I cannot, in all honesty, fail to refer to some of the
the co-operation and help I have received from them
basic causes of our difficulties. The United Nations is " again and again, and sometimes in difficult situatioJ:ls.
They carry a very special share of the workload of the
built upon some formidable divisions in the world. We
hayeto see that; we have to recognize it. The most promOrganization and are a tremendously important part of
inent rift is obviously the East-West division, which runs
the working life of the Secretary-General. I have greatly
valued their contribution-your contributions, disthrough the heart of the Organization and often weakens
or neutralizes its capacity and resolve to take action. The
tinguished representatives-and yopr friendship.
so-called North-South division is of a very different char102. I wish particularly to pay a tribute to you, Mr. Presiacter, and I sincerely hope that it will not be allowed to
play a similar role in inhibiting the effectiveness of the
dent, my former colleague in the Secretariat, and through
United Nations. We have to admit that these divisions
you to the presiding officers of the main organs of the
United Nations over the years. Your experience, wisdom
exist. And we must make all possible efforts to bridge
them' if we are. eventually, to overcome them. Oband diplomatic talents have contributed greatly to the
viously. this is one of the great roles of the Organization.
smooth running of this session. The presiding officers
play a very significant part in the life of the Organization.
99·. Above all, we must remember that the OrganizaTheir conduct of its business can often, especially in
tion. whatever its shortcomings, remains the world's best
times of trouble, be decisive in determining the success
or failure of our efforts.
means of avoiding massive disasters in the future. It
would be a tragedy if support for the United Nations were
103. Last but not least, I wish to express to my sucto be weakened because of its present difficulties and divisions. We must never forget, living as we do with the
cessor and friend, Javier Perez de Cuellar, my heartfelt
and warmest good wishes for his success in this offjce. I
extreme perils of nuclear confrontation and of economic
felt encouraged by the congratulatory messages addressed
and social anarchy. that the United Nations was set up to
by the representatives of the various regional groups a
provide an alternative to these nightmares. Because of the
few moments ago to my distinguished successor. The
existence of the United Nations, we have a choice-to
new Secretary-General has been a close colleague and a
accept the present terrifying uncertainties and inequities
and the privation and misery of a large segment of hudedicated worker in this house for many years. His integmanity. or to persevere in developing the better system
rity, judgement and diplomatic skill have already proved
which we know can be devised. The Charter is the bluethemselves. His outstanding personal qualities and long
print for that system. To make it a reality will require
experience in the work of the Organization command respect in all parts of the world. I feel very confident and
courage, vision and an immense amount of hard work.
But we cannot have any doubt as to which choice should
happy for the future in passing this, my great responsibility, on to him.
be made.
100. Finally, I wish to express my deep gratitude and
appreciation to all those with whom I have had the pleasure of working in the past 10 years. First of all, I want to
thank the members of the Secretariat, all of them, who
have worked hard and loyally in all the varied fields of
our activity to execute the plans and the programmes of
the United Nations. I am the first to understand that
working in the Secretariat can be frustrating and, at
times, discouraging. I therefore appreciate all the more
the dedicated and loyal support which I have enjoyed during my time here from all staff members, and especially
from the senior colleagues who have shared that great
burden with me.

104. May I conclude by saying from the bottom of my
heart how much I have cherished the opportunity to work
for this great Organization. The United Nations is not just
an institution, it is also a vision of a better future. Let us
all-those who are staying here and those, like myself,
who are departing from this house-dedicate ourselves to
work, wherever we may be. to make that vision a reality.
105. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank most sincerely the Secretary-General for the important statement he has just made.
The //lee/ill/{ rose at 12.30 lUll.

'it
