S/PV.9063

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9063

rd meeting
Tuesday, 14 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Asokan
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Ndung’u
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38167 (E)
*2238167*

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting Director,
Operations and Advocacy Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, and Ms. Azal Al-Salafi, Protection and
Advocacy Officer, Peace Track Initiative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I am pleased to be here with
Council members today. It is the first time that I have
had the opportunity to brief the Council in person since
I announced the truce in April (see S/PV.9017). The
truce has now been holding in Yemen for two and a half
months, a development that is unprecedented in this
war and that seemed unimaginable at the beginning of
this year. The parties recently extended the truce under
the same terms until 2 August this year, and I commend
the parties for their leadership and for listening to
the millions of Yemenis who have been calling for
respite and a chance for peace after more than seven
years of conflict. At two and a half months into the
truce, I would like to take stock of where we are on its
implementation, highlight challenges and delineate the
way forward.
First, the truce continues to hold in military terms.
There have been no confirmed air strikes inside Yemen
or cross-border attacks emanating from Yemen since
the beginning of the agreement, and there has been
a significant drop in civilian casualties. However,
casualty numbers due to landmines and unexploded
ordnance are unfortunately increasing as civilians,
including children, venture into contaminated frontline areas that were previously inaccessible.
2/20

14/06/2022

Despite the overall reduction in fighting, we
continue to receive reports from both sides about
alleged violations inside Yemen, including shelling,
drone attacks, reconnaissance overflights and the
redeployment of forces. Armed clashes have been
reported on several fronts, with the majority of
incidents reported in Ma’rib, Taiz and Al-Hudaydah
governorates. As the Council is aware, we do not
have independent monitoring capacities, but I take all
those allegations very seriously. It will be critical to
prevent such alleged incidents from provoking renewed
escalation and violence. In that context, I am pleased
to report that my Office has convened the first two
meetings of the Military Coordination Committee,
made up of representatives of the parties, in addition to
the coalition’s joint forces command. The Committee
agreed to meet on a monthly basis and to set up a joint
coordination room to address issues of concern in a
timely manner. The face-to-face meetings represent a
significant first step to building trust and improving
communication between the parties.
When I last briefed the Council, the first commercial
flight to Amman had just taken place the day before,
following nearly six years of the closure of Sana’a
airport. Since then we have also initiated flights to
Cairo. To date, we have had eight commercial round-trip
flights, which have transported 2,795 passengers from
Sana’a to Amman and Cairo. I would like to recognize
the efforts of the Government of Yemen for prioritizing
the needs of Yemenis by facilitating the opening of the
airport. I also want to reiterate my sincere appreciation
to the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for their
instrumental role in facilitating those flights.
The steady flow of fuel to the port of Al-Hudaydah
has been maintained throughout the truce. During the
months of April and May, more than 480,000 metric
tons of fuel products were cleared — more fuel than
entered Al-Hudaydah during the whole of last year.
Since the beginning of the renewed truce, two ships
have been cleared, and I hope the momentum of the
last truce will not be lost. The steady delivery of fuel
has taken the pressure off vital services, significantly
decreased the queues at petrol stations that dominated
the streets of Sana’a and allowed Yemenis to travel
more easily around the country. As we will hear from
Ms. Ghada Mudawi of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, those are some of the positive
humanitarian implications of the truce.
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

It is critical to ensure that the truce also delivers on
easing the suffering of the people of Taiz. Their freedom
of movement has been greatly impeded by the conflict
for years. As Taizis know all too well, the only open
roads to the city are long and arduous. Last November
I travelled for more than six hours along the narrow,
winding and rugged mountainous road from Aden to
the city of Taiz. Before the conflict, the same trip on
the main road would have taken only three hours. In
Taiz, I met with men, women and young people who
told me about their daily plight they suffer because of
closed access roads in and out of the city. I have also
witnessed first-hand how the severe restrictions have
crippled the economy, worsened access to health care
and endangered travel for civilians.
Following the nomination of their respective
delegations, I convened the parties in Amman to reach
an agreement on opening roads in Taiz and other
governorates. I would like to highlight the critical
role played by local mediators and civil-society
representatives present at the meeting, voicing their
views and priorities and providing their expertise
on road openings. After two rounds of frank and
constructive deliberations on the views and options
proposed by each side, I presented the parties with a
proposal for a phased opening of roads that includes a
main route from Taiz city to the Hawban area east of
the city, as well as additional roads in Taiz and other
governorates. The proposal also includes elements for
an implementation mechanism and commitments for
the safety of civilian travellers. While I am encouraged
by the positive response by the Government of Yemen
to the United Nations proposal, I am still waiting
for a response from Ansar Allah. In the wake of the
constructive discussions I had in Sana’a at the end of
last week, I urge Ansar Allah to respond positively and
without delay to the proposal.

S/PV.9063

has brought to the surface more contentious issues with
political implications, such as revenue management,
public sector salary payments, travel documents and a
more durable ceasefire. Those matters are political and
governance-related, and we need to move towards more
durable arrangements on those issues.
Some of those matters were indeed highlighted
during my ongoing consultations to help formulate the
priorities for a structured, multitrack process. During
the past month, I held consultations with Yemeni
public figures, diverse women constituencies and
economic experts and the private sector to inform the
design and substance of such a process. Certain themes
emerged from those consultations, including the need
to transform the truce into a durable ceasefire with a
view to achieving longer-term security arrangements
and an urgent call for the payment of public sector
salaries and the management of revenues, monetary
policy coordination and reconstruction. Participants
also emphasized the need to ensure that the political
process will be more inclusive, with women, youth and
civil society represented across the various tracks. My
Office has long recognized the valuable contributions
of Yemeni peace actors, and I therefore look forward to
listening to the briefing of Ms. Azal Al-Salafi.
The political, security and economic issues raised
by Yemenis during the various rounds of consultations
have given us a direction for the way forward. As we
are working to consolidate the benefits of the truce, it
is important to recognize that a structured, inclusive,
multitrack process can provide the platform required
to reach such durable solutions. It will also provide
an opportunity to move Yemen towards a sustainable
political settlement that meets the legitimate aspirations
and demands of Yemeni women and men.

Recent weeks have shown the fragility of the truce
and that delays to its implementation may threaten to
unravel it in its entirety. Resorting to transactionalism,
by threatening to make the implementation of one
element of the truce conditional against another, and
using escalatory media rhetoric, undermines the truce.
Ultimately, it is up to the parties to safeguard the truce
and deliver on its promise to the benefit of the people
of Yemen.

Over the next month and a half, I will pursue two
main lines of action. First, I will work with the parties
to ensure the implementation and consolidation of all
the elements of the truce, including the opening of
roads in Taiz and other governorates. Secondly, I will
work to achieve more durable solutions to pressing
economic and security needs. As such, I plan to initiate
negotiations on the economic and security tracks.
That work needs to be anchored in a political context,
gearing towards a political settlement.

Over the past two and a half months, the truce has
created a more conducive environment for the parties to
engage in good faith. Yet the implementation of the truce

I remain deeply grateful for the continuous support
I receive from the Council, as well as from the Sultanate
of Oman, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the broader

22-381673/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

international community. Such support will remain
critical in the coming months. However, it is ultimately
up to the parties to seize this opportunity, to negotiate
in good faith and to make necessary compromises for
the benefit of Yemen as a whole. The truce offers a
rare opportunity to pivot towards peace that should not
be lost.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.

14/06/2022

more than 160,000 who are at catastrophic levels of
starvation and on the brink of famine.
Nevertheless, food prices in Yemen have risen
by roughly another 10 per cent since February. That
increase comes on top of enormous hikes over the
previous year, when prices nearly doubled in many
areas. A recent analysis by the Ministry of Planning
projects that prices could rise another 50 per cent by
the end of the year. If that continues, many fewer people
will be able to afford to eat.

Ms. Mudawi: The extension of the truce that the
Special Envoy just described is extremely welcome. In
its first two months, the truce has had a tremendous
impact. We have seen a drop in civilian casualties as
fighting has subsided. We have seen an end to severe
shortages as more fuel comes in through Al-Hudaydah.
We have seen commercial flights resume from Sana’a
airport, allowing more people to move in and out of the
country. And we have seen better humanitarian access
in several areas.

Currency depreciation is making matters even
worse. In April, the Yemeni rial strengthened
considerably, helping to offset some of the impact of
higher global prices. But the April gains have now
been almost entirely erased, and people’s money is
again losing value. That too will mean less food for
hungry families. Let us not forget that most Yemenis
do not have much money to start with. That is a result
of broader economic decline, including the erratic
payment of civil servant salaries that up to one quarter
of the population relies on.

Extending the truce will — we hope — allow those
trends to continue. It will also provide more time for
efforts to reopen roads in Taiz and elsewhere. Improving
the freedom of movement is key to improving people’s
lives and humanitarian conditions, particularly in Taiz,
Yemen’s third-largest city.

We welcome recent discussions by the Governments
of Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
on financial support for Yemen’s economy. Once
disbursed, that support could quickly help to reign
in the exchange rate, boost purchasing power and
reduce hunger.

But I must be clear — Yemen’s humanitarian crisis
remains as severe today as it was before the truce. In
fact, the crisis could soon deteriorate. Allowing that
to happen would run counter to the momentum the
truce has generated and could undermine prospects for
further progress. Right now, aid agencies are especially
concerned by signs of growing needs, a shrinking
humanitarian space and dwindling budgets. We need
urgent action to address all three.

Beyond the food sector, needs also persist at or above
pre-truce levels. Huge gaps continue in the provision
of services such as water, health and education. Mine
action is becoming urgent as well, particularly as the
truce allows more civilians to move around front-line
areas, many of which are contaminated with mines and
other explosive remnants of war.

Let me start with the first threat — growing needs.
As members of the Council know, the war in Ukraine
is driving up the prices of food and other commodities
worldwide, as well as straining global supply chains.
Yemen is particularly vulnerable to those kinds of
shocks because almost everything it needs, including
nearly all of its food, must be imported.
We also know that more than half a million
children were already likely to suffer from severe acute
malnutrition this year. And we estimate that 19 million
people across the country are going hungry, including
4/20

In addition, more than 4 million people are still
displaced, including more than 7,000 who fled in the
past two months alone. Displacement during the truce
period was mainly due to people searching for jobs and
adequate food. People also fled due to clashes in some
areas, despite the truce. We hope that the extended
truce will see a more comprehensive end to fighting,
including localized clashes.
But the scale of the needs is not the only challenge.
Aid agencies are also dealing with a growing set of
access and security concerns. That leads me to a second
matter and a second threat — Yemen remains a highly
constrained environment for aid work.
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Despite limited access improvements in some
areas during the truce, agencies have actually faced
more restrictions on staff movements in recent months,
mainly due to regulations issued by local authorities in
several areas. We are working with the authorities and
other stakeholders to address those concerns as quickly
as possible.
Agencies are also facing alarming levels of
insecurity. Attempted carjackings, abductions and
other attacks are all on the rise. Two United Nations
staff members arrested in Sana’a last November remain
in detention, and five United Nations staff members
kidnapped in Abyan in February are still missing.
We renew our calls for the immediate release of all
detained staff.
In just the last few weeks, at least 10 attempted
carjackings have occurred in Lahj, Taiz, Abyan and
Ma’rib, including three attempts in a single day earlier
this month. In some cases, these incidents have forced
agencies to suspend activities, thereby diminishing
the humanitarian dividends of the truce. Amid these
attacks, agencies are also facing misinformation
campaigns that are making baseless allegations and
exacerbating insecurity. We are working with the
Government and local authorities to address the rise in
insecurity, strengthen public outreach on what agencies
are achieving and remind all actors that humanitarian
workers are not a target.
I also want to emphasize that, despite these
challenges, agencies are still delivering aid across
Yemen. More than 200 humanitarian partners — two
thirds of them Yemeni organizations — are reaching
11 million people every month with assistance, working
through the United Nations response plan. But that plan
is currently just 26 per cent funded, which is far from
enough to last through the year. Underfunding is the
third major threat facing the humanitarian situation right
now. It is also the reason many essential programmes
are scaling back when they should be expanding. Food
assistance has already been reduced for 8 million people.
Other sectors essential to preventing famine, including
nutrition, health, water and sanitation, are all currently
funded below 25 per cent. Services for displaced
people in Ma’rib, Hajjah, Taiz and other places are
also struggling. So far this year, shelter programmes
are just 14 per cent funded, while activities to provide
immediate relief for newly displaced families and
coordinate services at displacement sites have received
almost no funding at all.

S/PV.9063

To make matters worse, humanitarian aid in Yemen
is getting more expensive as a result of the rising global
prices I mentioned earlier. The World Food Programme
estimates its monthly operating costs in Yemen have
gone up by as much as $30 million, owing to surging
prices of food, fuel and transport. On a related note,
the United Nations plan to address the threat of a
catastrophic oil spill from the FSO SAFER tanker
remains stalled due to lack of funds. So far, the United
Nations has received about $60 million in pledges
for the project. We thank all donors for this support,
including pledges last week by the United States and
Saudi Arabia. But the full plan needs $144 million,
including $80 million to get started. This issue, as
Council members know, becomes more dangerous by
the hour.
We need urgent action on all these points to stop
Yemen’s crisis going from bad to worse. On 23 June,
Sweden and the European Commission will host a
meeting of senior humanitarian officials to discuss
many of the issues I have just described. We welcome
this opportunity to collaborate with donors on the
major strategic challenges facing the response. In
parallel, agencies are striving to improve the quality
of the response right now. Recommendations from the
inter-agency humanitarian evaluation are central to this
effort. The evaluation report should be finalized later
this month, and we look forward to sharing it with the
Council in the coming weeks.
In closing, the extension of the truce will, we
hope, bring Yemen one step closer to ending the war
altogether. The Security Council’s support for these
efforts, as members have just heard from the Special
Envoy, remains crucial. The Council’s support in
addressing Yemen’s humanitarian crisis is equally
important, not only to save lives right now, but to keep
Yemen moving towards the just and sustainable peace
that can finally end this crisis for good.
The President: I thank Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Salafi.
Ms. Al-Salafi: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on behalf of the Peace Track Initiative and the Women
Solidarity Network, which includes more than 350
Yemeni women leaders inside and outside Yemen.
Yemen continues to be ravaged by a devastating war
that has gone on for eight years now, disproportionately
affecting women, girls and marginalized groups

22-381675/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

and contributing to increased sexual and genderbased violence.
The United Nations-led truce has restored hope in
the hearts of the Yemeni people, yet much is needed to
be done to uphold the ceasefire and eventually reach
a just and lasting peace. While cross-border military
operations have halted, we still receive reports of
indiscriminate targeting of people inside Yemen,
especially in Taiz, Hajjah, Ma’rib, and Al-Hudaydah
We are also concerned about reported escalation
preparations, including the sending of reinforcements
to battle fronts, continued placing of landmines and the
digging of new trenches.
On a positive note, we celebrated the reopening of
Sana’a airport, which allowed many of our friends and
families to reunite with their loved ones after years of
separation. The airport is a lifeline for many civilians
in Sana’a who are fragile and unable to endure the long
and risky journey by road. However, not only do we
want free mobility to continue by opening ports and
airports, but we also demand that all roads inside the
country, especially in Taiz, which is one of the most
populated areas in the country, be opened immediately.
We continue to document cases of aid-relief convoys
tipping over and people, including pregnant women
seeking medical services, losing their lives because of
the siege. To this end, we welcome the internationally
recognized Government’s acceptance of the United
Nations Special Envoy’s proposal for opening five
roads, and we call on the Houthis to reciprocate and
accept his proposal. We hope it will be the first step to
opening all roads in the country, leading to unrestricted
and affordable mobility.
Although the city of Aden is serving as the
internationally recognized capital of Yemen, the
people in Aden are suffering. The Yemeni riyal used
in Aden is extremely devalued compared to that used
in Sana’a, owing to inconsistent economic policies and
lack of coordination between the two central banks.
Additionally, Aden suffers from poor basic-service
infrastructure, such as electricity, water and sanitation,
communication and Internet access and transportation,
affecting the ability to stabilize the city. Urgent support
is necessary.
Yemenis abroad also face challenges as they seek
refuge and safety in other countries. Yemeni women
human rights defenders and members of vulnerable
groups who relocated outside Yemen to escape arbitrary
6/20

14/06/2022

detention and life-threatening situations successfully
registered as refugees yet have been waiting for years
for resettlement opportunities. They are also unable to
move on in their lives, and many of them are not allowed
to work. This has aggravated their trauma, which led to
many of them having suicidal thoughts.
The participation of women in the peace and political
processes remains limited and way below the 30 per
cent quota we had committed to as a nation in 2014.
While the Special Envoy’s peace consultations made
progress in terms of including women in the political
party delegations, there are still no women among
the members of the committees formed as a result of
the peace process, including the prisoner exchange
committee, the military and security committee and the
Taiz committee. Similarly, while the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) intra-Yemeni talks also made progress
in women’s participation on various tracks, the
security and anti-terrorism track had no women at all.
Nonetheless, the entities formed as a result of the GCC
intra-Yemeni talks did make progress in the inclusion of
women, particularly in their appointment to the national
commission for reconciliation and consultation and the
legal and economic teams supporting the Presidential
Leadership Council.
That progress needs the support of the international
community to ensure that women’s participation in all
State entities during the peace and political process
increases by no less than 30 per cent, including in
any upcoming Government reshuffle. In June 2021,
we launched a feminist road map for peace that was
developed with women leaders in a participatory
manner through consultations with local communities
in Yemen. It is an expert document that was collectively
conceived by hundreds of Yemenis from all walks of
life. We would like to thank the Council for taking
account of our recommendations on inclusion and
multi-track design and reflecting them in its adoption
in February of resolution 2624 (2022), which eventually
materialized in the design of the recent United Nationsled peace consultations and in the outcomes of the GCC
intra-Yemeni talks. We hope that our recommendations
will continue to have a positive impact, and we hope
that the Council will continue to support the truce with
a view to transforming it into a sustainable nationwide
ceasefire with a clear implementation mechanism that
can be monitored.
We hope that the Council will support the opening
of all Yemeni entry ports and airports, allowing
22-38167

The situation in the Middle East

14/06/2022

civilian travel and commercial use and encouraging the
operation of more flight services, as well as the opening
of all roads inside the country, starting with Taiz, along
with lifting checkpoints and clearing landmines. We
would also ask for the Council’s support for restrictions
on the flow of arms into the country and the removal
of military camps and depots from densely populated
cities. We further ask that the Council urge the donor
community to fulfil its humanitarian, development and
reconstruction pledges to Yemen, ensuring sustainable
solutions that empower Yemenis and that focus on
stabilizing basic services, disbursing salaries and
strengthening infrastructure.
We hope that the Council will support the
establishment and financing of a fund for the survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence without delay, as
per the recommendations of the Panel of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). We ask for support for the Yemeni feminist road
map for peace by considering it as a point of reference
for the peace process. The Council should also
continue to call for inclusive peace talks that ensure the
participation of women, young people and civil society,
including on peace implementation committees.
Finally, we hope that the Council will support the
Special Envoy in creating a permanent position for a
gender adviser, ensuring the appointment of a qualified
expert with strong feminist values.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Al-Salafi

for

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of the latest note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank Mr. Grundberg, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Ms. Mudawi,
Acting Director of the Operations and Advocacy
Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their very
informative briefings. It was also very powerful to hear
from Ms. Al-Salafi the views of Yemeni civil society,
for which I thank her.

S/PV.9063

I would like to start by commending and thanking
Mr. Grundberg for the leadership shown by the United
Nations in extending the truce for a two-month period
on 2 June. We welcome the commendable flexibility of
the parties, which have shown that they are committed
to the opportunity the truce presents. We should build
on that positive momentum. Against that backdrop,
however, I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
concern about the grave humanitarian impact of the
continued road closures around Taiz. We call on the
Houthis to continue to demonstrate the flexibility that
they have shown so far in order to reach a compromise
as soon as possible and open the main roads. In the
meantime, the three-track process that Mr. Grundberg
outlined has allowed for positive progress on the
economic and military tracks. That includes dialogue
on the payment of salaries and initiatives to support
improved monetary policy coordination. The news that
the Yemeni parties’ Military Coordination Committee
intends to establish a joint coordination room is also an
extremely welcome step.
As the Special Envoy mentioned, the number of
civilian casualties remains below pre-truce averages,
but we must strive for that figure to be zero. The people
of Yemen deserve to live their lives without the fear
of being killed or maimed. Landmines and unexploded
ordnance were the most frequent cause of casualties
last month. I would therefore like to acknowledge the
crucial work of the United Nations Mission to support
the Hudaydah Agreement and General Beary in
accelerating demining efforts, and I call on all parties
to support their work.
As we heard from Ms. Mudawi, the Yemeni
people also continue to be threatened by acute food
insecurity. The future generation — 2.2 million
Yemeni children — are at risk of physical and cognitive
impairment due to acute malnutrition. At this urgent
moment, the United Kingdom calls on all donors
to ensure that funding is available and disbursed
without delay.
Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
announcement of further pledges towards the United
Nations operation to address the threat posed by the FSO
SAFER tanker. We call on all who have not yet pledged
to step up to meet the remaining $20 million shortfall.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Grundberg for his valuable
briefing and productive efforts to secure an extension

22-381677/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

of the truce. I also thank Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Al-Salafi
for their insightful briefings.
As we have heard, recent developments indicate
that Yemen is at a critical juncture. Today we have a
rare opportunity to achieve peace in Yemen and end the
war that has exhausted its people. As the Special Envoy
noted, the two parties to the conflict are currently
conducting negotiations aimed at de-escalating the
violence and alleviating the suffering of civilians. My
country welcomes those critical developments and
calls for building on them in order to reach a political
solution to the conflict. The remarkable progress of
the past two months brings hope that developments are
proceeding in the right direction, reflected in the lower
levels of violence and the improved movement of people
and goods across Yemen. We applaud the positive and
constructive engagement of the Yemeni Government in
the consultations process co-facilitated by the United
Nations, as well as the flexibility it has shown during
the negotiations.
We appreciate the efforts of the Council and
the Governments of the region in supporting the
negotiation process. In particular, we appreciate the
leading role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well
as the efforts of the Sultanate of Oman. We call for
intensifying diplomatic efforts at all levels so as not to
lose the opportunities available at this critical stage,
which also requires the continued commitment and
involvement of all sides in good faith.
We reiterate the need to ensure the meaningful and
active participation of Yemeni women in the political
process, given their important role in achieving
comprehensive and sustainable peace. It is also
imperative to ensure that young people be included in
the process so that their perspectives and aspirations
are reflected in the peace efforts, which will enable
them to play a positive role in their communities.
We also call on the Special Envoy to ramp up his
efforts during negotiations for the immediate opening
of not only secondary roads but also the main roads
leading to Taiz in order to alleviate the suffering of the
more than 3 million Yemenis in that city. That will also
contribute to confidence-building measures among the
parties, support the momentum of current developments
and move the political process forward.
Despite the current truce, the Houthis continue
their rallying and recruiting activities throughout the
areas under their control. They continue their broad
8/20

14/06/2022

campaigns to indoctrinate children with extremist
ideology in so-called summer camps. They also subject
children to military training, in violation of the action
plan that they recently signed with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
We also stress the need to swiftly address the
deteriorating state of the FSO SAFER oil tanker in
order to avoid a serious environmental catastrophe. In
that regard, we commend the recent announcement by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to contribute $10 million
to address that issue.
We are concerned about the continued worsening
of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, which could be
further exacerbated by the ongoing global food crisis.
The United Arab Emirates remains firm in its historical
commitment to support Yemen and its people during
these difficult times. Accordingly, my country, along
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, recently pledged
to provide a humanitarian and economic aid package
amounting to more than $3 billion. However, we reaffirm
that political solutions remain the only path towards
ending the humanitarian crisis. Therefore, those who
block that path must cease their activities, which are
prolonging the suffering of the Yemeni people.
In conclusion, it has become clear that extremist
activities pose serious threats to regional and
international peace and security when combined with
advanced and lethal weapons. Therefore, there is a
need to firmly respond to such threats and prevent
the Houthis from acquiring advanced weapons such
as drones and missiles. We also stress the need for
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
that regard.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg for his briefing on the
most recent developments in Yemen. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representatives of Yemen.
The extension of the truce in Yemen for another
two months provides hope for the Yemeni people and
the international community as a whole. It offers hope
of a lasting peace for the estimated 30 million Yemenis,
who have been exhausted by fighting, displacement,
hunger, disease, water scarcity and the collapse of the
economy. The series of measures taken in tandem with
the truce, such as the movement of essential goods and
people, the resumption of commercial flights at Sana’a
airport, the freedom of movement and the facilitation
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

of humanitarian access, are helping to improve the
socioeconomic situation and contributing to the
stabilization of Yemen.
However, the security situation in Yemen remains
fragile. The lack of progress on the issue of lifting
the siege of the large city of Taiz remains a matter
of concern. The Government and the rebels appear
to be unwilling to give up their respective positions,
despite international pressure. For example, while the
Government demands the reopening of main roads, the
Houthis demand arrangements for the payment of civil
servants’ salaries and basic services in the areas under
their control. Given those differences, we support the
efforts of Special Envoy Grunberg to hold a second
round of talks to improve the flow of goods and people
in Taiz.
The continued threat posed by mines and
unexploded ordnance, which has resulted in many
civilian casualties, is also a matter of concern. We
are further concerned about the increasing number
of attacks against the personnel of non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian workers operating
in various parts of the country, as well as attempts
to kidnap them. We call for respect for international
humanitarian law.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, we call on
the international community to ensure the availability
of food stocks and the maintenance of supply chains for
Yemen in order to prevent a food crisis that could affect
the precarious gains that have been made.
With regard to the FSO SAFER tanker, we note with
regret that the emergency transfer operation to remove
the ship’s oil has yet to begin, owing to insufficient
funding. We call for a greater effort on the part of
the international community to prevent a large-scale
environmental and humanitarian disaster. To that
end, we welcome the announcement by Saudi Arabia
to provide $10 million for the rescue plan involving
the tanker.

S/PV.9063

Director of Operations and Advocacy Division of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Azal Al-Salafi for
their briefings on the developments of the situation in
Yemen. We continue to closely monitor the situation
in Yemen, where we have recently seen increasingly
positive trends in the long-standing military and
political conflict.
We welcome the agreement reached between the
Presidential Leadership Council and the Ansar Allah
movement to extend the truce for another two months.
We understand how difficult it was for the Yemenis to
reach that compromise, which makes it all the more
valuable. Almost immediately, the tripartite Military
Coordination Committee resumed its work to ensure
respect for the United Nations-backed truce and the
implementation of ceasefire provisions. We consider
that the agreement reached within its framework to
set up a working group for permanent operational
communication on ceasefire violations is a very
encouraging sign. It is important that negotiations do
not become static.
In particular, we would like to underscore the
role of Special Envoy Grundberg, whose efforts
greatly contributed to reaching the agreement and the
implementation of the provisions of the truce agreement.
Mr Grundberg can rest assured that our country will
continue to provide him with the necessary support in
his difficult work.
We are confident that the parties’ compliance with
all the terms of the truce and their rejection of unilateral
provocations will allow the positive developments in the
Yemeni crisis to be consolidated and to progress towards
a full-fledged, comprehensive political settlement. A
long-term cessation of hostilities would help create a
favourable environment for launching serious political
negotiations on the future of the country.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for Special
Envoy Grunberg, his tireless efforts to promote dialogue
between the parties and his firm commitment to finding
a lasting political solution in Yemen, including the
establishment of a nationwide ceasefire.

However, things are not going as smoothly as we
would like. The negotiations under way between the
Presidential Leadership Council and the Houthis under
the auspices of the United Nations to reopen the roads
around Taiz have not produced the results we had
hoped for. We hope the parties’ balanced and realistic
approach to discussing this sensitive issue will help
them find a common denominator.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Hans Grundberg, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting

We would like to reiterate our firm position
that there can be no alternative to inter-Yemeni
negotiations that take into account the interests and

22-381679/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

concerns of all the parties involved in the conflict.
That is a prerequisite for stabilizing the situation and
restoring peace. It is vital that the representatives of
the Presidential Leadership Council continue their
direct dialogue with Ansar Allah. We will continue
to use the diplomatic resources we have to cooperate
actively with both the Presidential Leadership Council
and the Houthi leadership, encouraging them to adopt
a constructive approach and show their willingness to
find a compromise solution aimed at normalizing the
overall situation in the region.
We are concerned about the serious socioeconomic
situation in Yemen, which the United Nations has called
the biggest humanitarian disaster in the world. It will
be crucial to lift the restrictions on the delivery of food,
medicine and other essential goods to all areas of Yemen
without discrimination, regardless of who controls the
territory. In that regard, we note the mediation efforts of
the stakeholders in the region who are helping Yemenis
on the financial and humanitarian fronts.
In conclusion, we would once again like to remind
the Council of resolution 598 (1987) and other initiatives
aimed at the stabilization of the subregion, including
Russia’s updated collective security concept.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like
to thank our three briefers for their informative
presentations and to welcome the delegation of Yemen
to this meeting.
I also want to reiterate Brazil’s support to the
Special Envoy in his engagement with all parties
in pursuit of a Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political
settlement that meets the aspirations of the Yemeni
people. The renewal of the truce on 2 June should be
seen as the renewal of an opportunity. We are hopeful
that the parties will seize that opportunity and move
towards a comprehensive and inclusive peace process
with all possible speed. In the meantime, we urge all
the parties to cooperate with the United Nations and
other humanitarian partners in order to provide full
and safe access to convoys delivering humanitarian aid
throughout Yemen. We call on Ansar Allah to make
serious efforts to ensure that the roads into the city of
Taiz are reopened as soon as possible. The resumption
of talks in Amman on 5 June between Ansar Allah and
the Government of Yemen on that issue was a necessary
first step, but more and quicker steps are needed.
The ports of Al-Hudaydah are also a critical
lifeline for the Yemeni population. We therefore
10/20

14/06/2022

welcome the continued commitment of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
to the efforts to achieve peace and stability in that area.
We believe the Mission should intensify its efforts to
proactively engage the parties and bring them back to
the joint mechanisms.
As the restrictions on the freedom of movement of
Yemeni women, men and children are gradually being
lifted, we are hearing reports of an uptick in casualties
caused by landmines, including explosive remnants of
war. Children are especially at risk. We therefore stress
the importance of mine action in Yemen and urge all
parties to ensure that effective demining operations and
mine-awareness activities are carried out throughout
the country.
Brazil welcomes the efforts to end and prevent
grave violations against children in Yemen, as well
as their translation into an action plan signed by all
parties to the conflict. We should closely monitor
the commitment that Ansar Allah made with the
United Nations in April to ending its recruitment and
use of children and to releasing, rehabilitating and
reintegrating them into Yemeni society. We therefore
call on all the parties to provide United Nations
officials with unfettered access in order to verify their
compliance with their commitments.
Yemen has been at the forefront of a global foodinsecurity crisis. The unilateral economic measures
that a number of countries have instituted in response
to conflicts elsewhere are helping to exacerbate the
situation in Yemen, hampering trade flows of agricultural
products and inputs, reducing the availability of
foodstuffs and pushing up prices. They are having a
significant impact worldwide, especially on developing
countries, and they are depressing the already limited
capacity of countries in conflict to provide food to their
populations. We therefore acknowledge the importance
of the work of United Nations agencies to alleviate the
suffering of vulnerable communities affected by food
insecurity in Yemen and encourage donors to fully
fund the United Nations humanitarian response plan.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): My delegation is grateful to
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Ms. Ghada Mudawi
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for their briefings to the Council, and we
welcome their continuing engagement with all sides
to address the security, political, economic and
humanitarian dimensions of the Yemeni conflict.
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The steady progress being made towards finding
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict in
Yemen is grounds for some optimism. We would like to
express our gratitude to the Special Envoy, the United
Nations team and all stakeholders for their untiring
efforts, which have resulted in the extension of the truce
for another two months with effect from 2 June. We
call on the parties to fully commit to the terms of the
truce and to refrain from actions that could undermine
the marginal progress being made in the process of
restoring peace and security in Yemen.
Despite this hopeful news, the grim statistics of
the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification that
have been released for Yemen are deeply concerning.
According to the data, an estimated 19 million people
are likely to face acute food insecurity in the second
half of this year, with about 161,000 projected to
experience famine-like situations. At the same time,
about 2.2 million children under the age of five are
acutely malnourished, with more than half a million of
that vulnerable group living at a severe level, as the
humanitarian crisis in the country shows no signs of
abating. This crisis is a risk to the fledgling peace in
Yemen and must be urgently addressed.
Similarly, the high risk of catastrophic oil spillage
from the FSO SAFER in the Red Sea and the likelihood
of a major humanitarian and ecological disaster
resulting from such a spill remains a matter of great
concern to us. We therefore call on all stakeholders in
the United Nations coordinated plan to redouble their
efforts to address the threat as quickly as possible.
Notwithstanding the challenging humanitarian
context and the debilitating effects of the conflict in
Yemen, the renewal of the two-month nationwide truce is
a positive development that offers much-needed respite
from the devastating war. The truce has the potential
to ease the deplorable humanitarian conditions, as we
heard in today’s briefings, and to create a conducive
environment that will give the necessary impetus to
the political process for an amicable resolution of the
conflict. We urge global support for the ongoing efforts
to bridge the huge shortfall of almost 74 per cent of
the $4.28 billion that is badly needed to augment the
efforts of the United Nations and other aid agencies in
providing essential humanitarian assistance to the more
than 17 million Yemenis in dire need of it.
We reiterate our earlier call on the political
leaders and stakeholders to explore the possibility

S/PV.9063

of an indefinite extension of the truce, both as a
confidence-building measure and as evidence of the
commitment of the conflicting parties to the political
process, which seeks to bring lasting peace and security
to Yemen.
My delegation also welcomes the resumption
of discussions on 5 June to reach an agreement to
open the roads leading into and out of Taiz and other
governorates, in line with the truce. We call on the
parties to favourably consider the revised proposal
by the Special Envoy on the phased reopening of the
roads and the implementation mechanism and commit
to ensuring the safety of civilian travellers. We firmly
believe that the parties’ agreement to the proposals will
ultimately help to alleviate the suffering of ordinary
Yemenis and enhance the delivery of the needed
humanitarian aid to the vulnerable population in that
part of the country.
We are pleased to note that, since the resumption
of commercial flights out of Sana’a on 16 May for the
first time in six years, under the terms of the United
Nations-brokered truce, a total of 2,495 Yemenis have
so far been reported as having travelled between Sana’a
and Amman, as well as Cairo. We are encouraged that
more such marginal, but incremental, progress will
continue to be made with the renewal of the truce.
We are also pleased about the active engagement
of regional leaders with the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) as part
of the ongoing peacebuilding process in recent times,
and urge all the regional powers to deepen their resolve
towards finding a lasting solution to the conflict.
We believe that the UNMHA mandate, which is due
to expire on 15 July, is very crucial to the long-term
peace and security of Yemen. We therefore call on
the members of the Council to consider unanimously
supporting the renewal of that mandate.
In conclusion, we all must support efforts to help the
conflicting parties to deepen and sustain mutual trust,
which is required to work towards a comprehensive and
lasting peace in Yemen.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Grundberg,
Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting Director of the Operations
and Advocacy Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Azal
Al-Salafi for their briefings.

22-3816711/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

Mexico welcomes the extension of the truce for
two more months. We recognize the efforts made by
all parties, as well as the support of regional partners
such as Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan and Oman. We
also commend the mediation efforts of Mr. Grundberg
and reiterate our full support for his good offices in
that process.
We also take note of the talks to reach an agreement
on the opening of the roads around Taiz, and urge the
parties to continue to cooperate fully with the Special
Envoy. It is particularly important to make progress on
that issue because the opening of access to Taiz will
help to alleviate the humanitarian situation suffered by
the population since 2016.
The recent developments represent a crucial
opportunity to launch a political process leading to
a lasting peace in Yemen, and neither the parties
nor the international community can therefore miss
this opportunity to make progress in resolving the
conflict. We commend the Special Envoy’s ongoing
consultations with various sectors, including civil
society, women, academics and economic actors. We
also welcome his recent visit to Sana’a and urge the
parties, particularly Ansar Allah, to keep the channels
of communication open.
We are concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Hostilities and the collapse
of the economy have exacerbated vulnerabilities,
with nearly three quarters of the population requiring
humanitarian assistance and the number of people
in famine-like conditions now standing at 160,000.
Greater efforts are needed to ensure humanitarian
access to all those in need, including ensuring the
freedom of movement and the security of those who are
part of the humanitarian operation.
Persons with disabilities are disproportionately
affected by the conflict and the humanitarian crisis.
All the challenges faced by civilians in this conflict
are compounded by disability. In parallel, the traumatic
experience of seven years of armed conflict has led
to a mental health crisis affecting a significant part
of the population. Psychosocial support is virtually
non-existent. It is essential to allocate funds and
specific funding for such programmes, which are often
the first to be cut due to scarce resources, as well as
to mainstream mental health services in inter-agency
response mechanisms.
12/20

14/06/2022

Mexico condemns the use of landmines, which
have killed and maimed thousands of civilians over
the past seven years, causing lifelong disabilities and
severely affecting Yemeni children. In that regard,
we acknowledge the work of humanitarian and civil
society organizations in mine clearance, as well as their
efforts to raise awareness and care for victims. More
assistance and resources need to be provided to support
those efforts.
While we welcome progress on the FSO SAFER
tanker, we are concerned that the necessary resources
have not yet been marshalled. My country urges
regional partners to continue to contribute to raising
all the necessary funds. As time goes on, both the risk
of a spill and the operational costs will increase. We
urge the international community to redouble efforts to
prevent a humanitarian and environmental catastrophe.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking Special Envoy
Grundberg, Ms. Mudawi, Acting Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Al-Salafi, our civil society briefer, for their
briefings today. We are very grateful for all their
dedicated efforts.
Today there is reason for hope. Thanks to the
extension of the truce for another 60 days, this is the
best opportunity for peace that Yemen has had in
years. Over the past two months, we have witnessed
a dramatic reduction in civilian casualties, improved
freedom of movement and humanitarian access and
increased access to fuel and basic goods.
That is a cause for genuine optimism, but make
no mistake — there is difficult work ahead. I would
like to emphasize that building on that progress will be
a central focus of President Biden’s trip to the region
next month, which we just announced today. We can,
and must, capitalize on this unique moment to solidify
recent gains and lay the groundwork for a long-awaited
political resolution to the conflict.
The parties must implement their responsibilities
under the truce in good faith and work together to agree
to a permanent ceasefire. The Yemeni Government has
demonstrated important flexibility in facilitating the
flow of fuel to Al-Hudaydah and the resumption of
commercial flights from Sana’a to Cairo and Amman.
It is now incumbent on the Houthis to demonstrate
their own commitment by immediately opening roads
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to the city of Taiz, easing the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of Yemenis.
The next two months are critical to long-term peace
efforts, and we urge all parties to cooperate fully with
Special Envoy Grundberg as he builds on the truce to
launch a comprehensive and inclusive political process,
because a political settlement is the only way — I
repeat, the only way — to provide true and long-lasting
peace to the Yemeni people. That process must include
the voices of women, civil society and members from
other marginalized groups.
We also recognize the efforts of the Governments
of Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan and Egypt in helping
secure the truce. Continued international and regional
support for the United Nations-led process is essential.
But as we work towards a long-term peace, we
cannot lose sight of the immediate, dire humanitarian
needs of the Yemeni people. In that spirit, we support
the Presidential Leadership Council and its efforts to
improve basic services and economic stability. And
we welcome pledged international support for the
Presidential Leadership Council’s plan to tackle those
challenges and urge donors to quickly disburse funds to
address critical needs. But more help is needed.
And we should build on the progress of the truce
to avert a needless environmental and economic
catastrophe. Additional funds are currently needed
to address the mounting risks posed by the corroding
FSO SAFER oil tanker. The United States is pleased to
announce that we are working with Congress to provide
$10 million towards those efforts. Other donors,
including private sector actors, must now step up so that
work can start on the emergency project before weather
conditions further exacerbate the risks of disaster.
Finally, we were deeply saddened to learn of the
death in Houthi detention of retired United States
Embassy employee Abdulhameed Al-Ajami. The
United States extends its condolences to his family and
loved ones, whom the Houthis callously deprived of
any contact with Mr. Al-Ajami. We condemn the unjust
detention by the Houthis of Mr. Al-Ajami and 12 other
current and former United States and United Nations
staff, and we demand that the Houthis immediately and
unconditionally release them before any further harm
is done.
We remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and call on them to
respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of

S/PV.9063

all those in Yemen. The world is watching and hoping
that all parties in Yemen choose peace over continued
war, suffering and destruction. We must all seize
this pivotal hour and put in the hard work to secure a
lasting peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and Acting Director Ghada Mudawi for their briefings.
I also listened carefully to the statement made by the
civil society representative.
China welcomes the extension of the truce agreement
among the Yemeni parties on 2 June. The protracted
Yemeni conflict has lasted seven years, and the people
have suffered immensely. The implementation and
extension of the truce has brought some initial peace
dividends to the Yemeni people and given them a ray
of hope. Since the start of the truce, the number of
civilian casualties has been more than halved. Some
20 oil tankers have sailed, in clusters, into the port of
Al-Hudaydah, and the commercial flights from Sana’a
to Amman and Cairo have resumed. We appreciate the
efforts of the Yemeni parties, Special Envoy Grundberg
and the countries of the Gulf region to that end.
The main task at hand is to fully implement the
truce agreement, in particular to reopen the road to
Taiz and mitigate, as soon as possible, the humanitarian
situation in Taiz. The Yemeni Government has held two
rounds of consultations with the Houthi organization
in that regard, and Special Envoy Grundberg has made
concrete proposals that balance the concerns of all sides.
Going forward, it is hoped that the Yemeni parties will
build on the Special Envoy’s proposals, demonstrate
political will on the issue of reopening the road to Taiz
and make the necessary compromises in order to create
conditions conducive to launching peace talks.
The truce agreement should be the starting point
for broader efforts, which must be translated into a
permanent ceasefire and a sustainable political solution.
Under the auspices of the Special Envoy, the Yemeni
Government forces and the Houthis have held two
rounds of military coordination meetings and decided
to meet regularly in future, which China welcomes.
We support the Special Envoy’s continuing work to
promote communication among the stakeholders on the
Yemeni issue in a rational and pragmatic manner, as
well as to implement measures to rebuild mutual trust,
steadfastly maintain the current positive momentum
and encourage more progress in the peace process. The
Security Council should maintain its unity and create

22-3816713/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

14/06/2022

synergies with countries of the region that can bring
their influence to bear, so as to play a constructive role
in promoting the political solution to the Yemeni issue.

concerning. We must remain alert to those emerging
threats and undertake pre-emptive measures to prevent
their expansion.

China is also concerned about the economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen, which faces
multiple challenges and has a grim outlook due to
the compounded effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and political conflicts. Those challenges
warrant our full attention. The international community
should continue to focus on the situation in Yemen and
take effective measures to lend the country a helping
hand by prioritizing assistance to Yemen in stabilizing
its currency and prices, alleviating energy shortages
and meeting the basic needs of the population, such
as food. The relevant United Nations agencies should
act with a heightened sense of urgency, strengthen
their coordination, properly address the shortages of
resources and ward off greater crises. All parties in
Yemen should also cooperate fully with international
humanitarian operations and ensure safe and timely
humanitarian access.

As peace talks progress, we strongly recommend
that the peace framework and recovery process
incorporate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plus framework in a fashion that ensures
that reintegrated former fighters do not relapse to armed
conflict or fall into radicalization by terrorist groups.

China supports the Yemeni Presidential Leadership
Council in actively implementing the truce agreement,
restoring State institutions in an orderly manner,
regaining economic vitality and pushing forward
the political process. We hope that the Presidential
Leadership Council will unite all parties in Yemen,
attach equal importance to both peace and development
and promote the country’s early return to a normal
development track.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg, Acting Director Ghada Mudawi and
Ms. Azal Al-Salafi for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Yemen in
this meeting.
Kenya welcomes the extension of the 2 June
truce for a further two months as a positive step. We
acknowledge the concessions made by the Government
of Yemen to support the truce and hope that the Houthis
will similarly engage constructively to fulfil the
remaining commitments, in particular the opening of
roads in Taiz.
Kenya remains concerned about the security
situation in Yemen. The reports of a recent uptick
in suspected Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
activities in Aden and southern Yemen could further
fragment the fragile security situation, including in the
wider region. The group’s increased recruitment and
mobilization in neighbouring Abyan governorate is also
14/20

Peace efforts must also recognize that a generation
of Yemeni women, youth and persons with disabilities
has been denied access to education and social services
by virtue of the protracted conflict. The international
community should therefore deliberately invest in these
populations through capacity-building to equip them
with skills that would facilitate their making a decent
living and contribute to national development.
Kenya remains concerned over the dire economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We are alive to
the fact that global economies are being affected by the
disruption of the food and energy supply chain, which is
compounding food and energy insecurity, especially in
fragile contexts such as that prevailing in Yemen, and
driving millions deeper into poverty and humanitarian
crises. To address these challenges, we appeal for
enhanced support towards Yemen’s 2022 humanitarian
response plan, which remains underfunded; promoting
local agriculture and food production; and increasing
development assistance.
The reports of the detention, harassment and
obstruction of humanitarian workers are deeply
concerning. We call on the parties to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
allow for unfettered access for humanitarian personnel.
The FSO SAFER tanker is of key importance to our
region, and the threat it poses remains an immediate
concern. We appreciate all the contributions made thus
far and sincerely hope that the remaining amount can
be urgently raised to resolve this long-standing issue.
In conclusion, Kenya reaffirms its commitment to
supporting the ongoing United Nations efforts towards
finding a comprehensive and lasting solution for the
people of Yemen.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We welcome and
thank our briefers, especially Mr. Grundberg, whom
we thank both for his in-depth briefing but also for
his encouraging news today. We thank him for all
the work he and his team are doing. We also thank
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Mudawi and her team. I want to extend special
thanks to Ms. Al-Salafi, who is still with us on screen,
who gave us excellent insights, but also a sort of reality
check, with her take-way about what is happening and
what the challenges on the ground are. It is really very
important that we hear that.
As always, I welcome our Yemeni colleague to the
table. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
in the Chamber today of Major General Mike Beary,
the Head of the United Nations Mission to support
the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA), who is with us
in person today for the first time. We will hear from
him later, but I just wanted to recognize his being with
us today.
I want to start by commending the parties’
commitment earlier this month to extending the April
truce for a further two months. It is heartening good
news, and, as others have said, it gives us reason for
hope. As we have heard again today, the measures
already taken on freeing up movement of people and
goods across the country are now providing Yemenis
with long-overdue tangible relief. The vital efforts
of the Special Envoy and of States of the region in
facilitating these developments are deeply appreciated
and to be welcomed.
The establishment of a joint coordination room
and the agreement to monthly meetings by the Military
Coordination Committee are further positive signals
we see of the parties’ commitment to de-escalation
through communication and trust-building. The first
meetings of the parties to discuss re-opening roads
in Taiz is also a very welcome step. As Ms. Ola
Al-Aghbary told the Security Council in January (see
S/PV.8946), road closures mean journeys are longer and
more perilous, rendering Taiz a repulsive environment
for humanitarian and medical workers. We welcome
the flexibility shown by the Government of Yemen and
call on the Houthis to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy’s revised proposal.
We call on the parties to ensure the full
participation of local, diverse women and the inclusion
of youth peacebuilders in Taiz in ongoing negotiations.
We share Ms. Al-Salafi’s aspiration for a timely and
inclusive process, and for the participation of women
in all structures and committees. We also note the
contributions to the United Nations-coordinated
proposal to address the serious environmental and
humanitarian threat posed by the FSO SAFER tanker.

S/PV.9063

Despite these positive developments, we continue
to closely follow the fragile security situation and the
threat of violence across Yemen, especially in Ma’rib,
Al-Hudaydah, Aden and elsewhere in the south. We
are very concerned about the vulnerability of civilians,
especially children, to mines and other explosive
remnants of war, particularly as Yemenis begin to move
around more freely.
UNMHA is carrying out life-saving mine action in
Al-Hudaydah. We call on the parties to prioritize mine
clearance, allow full and safe access for mine-clearance
teams, and provide and facilitate mine-risk education.
As we have also heard today, addressing the
deteriorating economy is essential to improving
the everyday lives of Yemenis and removing one
of the largest drivers of conflict. We welcome the
participation by United Nations humanitarian agencies
and international financial institutions in the Special
Envoy’s meetings with Yemeni economic experts.
In spite of the gains made over the past months,
tens of thousands of Yemenis still risk starvation or
death. Just last week, the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations identified Yemen as one of the world’s five
hunger hotspots on the highest alert. We call on the
international community to address the funding gaps
in the United Nations humanitarian response plan.
It is also critical that humanitarian actors can
undertake their life-saving work freely and safely.
Attacks against international non-governmental
organizations and United Nations entities, including
those occurring online, are deeply troubling and
must end.
In conclusion, we hope that the space created by
the truce will ultimately lead to a durable ceasefire and
an inclusive, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political
settlement under the auspices of the United Nations.
We strongly urge the parties to put women at the heart
of the peace process and to ensure that the design of
such a process includes their full, equal and meaningful
participation; women must be in the room and at the
table. We also cannot lose sight of the pursuit of justice
and accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law that have been perpetrated against Yemenis with
impunity. Let me be clear: without this, peace cannot
be sustained. Finally, we call once again on all parties
to seize the opportunity at hand for a lasting peace in
Yemen and an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people.

22-3816715/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I start by thanking
Special Envoy Grundberg, Acting Director Mudawi and
Ms. Al-Salafi for their important briefings and updates.
Let me extend our appreciation to the Special
Envoy and his whole team, as well as regional and
international actors, for their efforts over the past few
weeks to secure a two-month renewal of the truce in
Yemen. Indeed, because of the truce, the number of
civilian casualties has been reduced, fuel deliveries
have increased and commercial flights through
Sana’a airport have resumed. These are tangible
and most welcome developments that have been
achieved through de-escalation and dialogue. And we
commend the priority placed on alleviating civilian and
humanitarian hardships.
The work must continue. We welcome the United
Nations proposal on a phased re-opening of roads to
the city of Taiz. It is positive that it takes into account
feedback from Yemeni civil society and the protection
needs of civilians. We urge Ansar Allah to show
flexibility on opening the roads in and out of the city of
Taiz as a critical next step.
The Special Envoy’s continued consultations
towards a framework for a multitrack peace process
are crucial. It is important to seize the humanitarian
gains from the truce to facilitate progress towards a
comprehensive political settlement. The Special Envoy’s
recent second visit to Sana’a, his meetings in Aden and
the parties meeting in Amman have been important.
We commend the Special Envoy’s dialogue with the
parties and a diverse group of Yemeni people, leaders
and experts. It is vital to design a process that will
receive local credibility and legitimacy — that means
including diverse voices and interests, especially those
most impacted by the conflict, namely, women and
young people.
On security, we welcome the holding of the first
and second meetings of the Military Coordination
Committee and the establishment of a joint coordination
room for more regular communication. That is the
first time that the parties have met face to face under
the auspices of the United Nations and represents
a vital step towards building the trust required for a
political settlement.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is still acute.
We remain deeply concerned about the growing food
insecurity in the country and the dire risk of famine.
16/20

14/06/2022

As we heard from our briefers again today, mines
are increasingly a concern. Injuries and deaths from
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices now make up a large part of civilian
casualties. Children are particularly vulnerable. Much
more must be done to address that issue.
Finally, on the FSO SAFER tanker emergency, we
remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian and
ecological danger it represents. We urge even greater
support and the implementation of the United Nations
plan as soon as possible.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Ms. Ghada
Mudawi and Ms. Azal Al-Salafi for their presentations.
I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen.
France welcomes the renewal of the truce this
month, which constitutes a positive and encouraging
signal from the parties to the conflict. The pause
observed since April has led to a clear reduction of
civilian casualties in particular and must be used
to move towards lasting de-escalation. The work of
the military committee in Amman is also moving in
the right direction and must now be implemented on
the ground. We reiterate our call for a full ceasefire
throughout the country.
On the political front, I would like to recall that
important concessions were made by the Yemeni
Government in recent weeks, in particular with regard
to oil tanker access to Al-Hudaydah port and the
opening of Sana’a airport to commercial flights. France
welcomes the efforts of the Yemeni Government, which
have made it possible to improve the daily lives of
the population.
As mentioned by the Special Envoy, the main
sticking point today remains Taiz. France calls on the
Houthis to reopen the roads to that city. For years, its
inhabitants have been virtually cut off from the rest
of the world. The situation is clearly unacceptable and
must be brought to an end.
Although the truce has improved conditions
of movement and access in some areas, we remain
concerned about the humanitarian situation and
reiterate the importance of ensuring full humanitarian
access to all those in need. That is all the more
necessary as Yemen continues to be severely affected
by food insecurity, as was also recalled here today. We
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

also call for the immediate and unconditional release of
the United Nations and humanitarian personnel held by
the Houthis.
I would also like to mention the FSO SAFER oil
tanker situation. The funds that have been raised are
currently insufficient, as pointed out earlier, which has
prevented the rescue operation from getting under way.
We therefore take this opportunity to call on States and
the private sector to contribute financially to the appeal
launched by the United Nations. There is an urgent need
to act as soon as possible in order to avoid an ecological
and humanitarian catastrophe.
The renewal of the truce on 2 June brought renewed
hope to Yemenis. I would like to thank the Special
Envoy, who has France’s full support, for all his efforts
and his determination to make progress in extremely
difficult circumstances. I also welcome his commitment
to the participation of Yemeni women in the peace
process. We call on all parties to the conflict, including
the Houthis, to cooperate fully with the Special Envoy.
The prospect of peace has never been closer. Let us
not miss this opportunity.
Mr. Asokan (India): I join other colleagues in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and Ms. Ghada Mudawi
for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Azal Al-Salafi for
her insights.
We welcome the agreement between the parties to
the conflict to renew the truce for an additional two
months. The truce, as our colleagues mentioned, has
helped to reduce violence and civilian casualties in
Yemen. It has provided an opportunity to hold a direct
meeting between the parties — the first in recent
years — under the auspices of the United Nations.
It has also resulted in significant gains on the
humanitarian side. The opening of Sana’a airport in
particular has brought immense relief to many Yemenis,
especially those in need of urgent medical care. Since
the commencement of the truce, we note that more than
2,700 Yemenis have been able to travel from Sana’a
airport to Jordan and Egypt and back. We appreciate
the flexibility demonstrated by the Government of
Yemen in facilitating that travel.
Similarly, the increase in the number of fuel ships
entering Al-Hudaydah port is a welcome development.
At a time when the price in oil is rising globally, the
entry of those ships has alleviated the suffering of

S/PV.9063

millions of Yemenis. The ceasefire has also enabled
humanitarian agencies to scale up and deliver aid to
areas that were previously inaccessible due to the
fighting. We welcome those positive developments and
encourage the parties to build on them to convert the
truce into a durable and long-lasting ceasefire.
Despite those developments, the economic and
humanitarian situation in Yemen continues to face
significant challenges. The international community
must continue its support to the Government of Yemen
to help overcome them.
I would like to highlight three important issues
that are critical to sustain the continued cessation of
hostilities in Yemen.
First, the full and meaningful implementation of
all measures agreed as part of the truce agreement is
necessary. While there has been considerable progress
in the delivery of fuel to Al-Hudaydah port and the
opening of Sana’a airport, the opening of roads in Taiz
has not witnessed much progress. Immediate progress
in opening those roads is not only a humanitarian
imperative but also extremely important to ensure
that the implementation of the truce agreement is
not lopsided.
Secondly, the smooth functioning of the Military
Coordination Committee, coordinated by the Special
Envoy, is necessary to help prevent any further
escalation and ensure that the complete cessation of
military operations continues. We welcome the recent
meeting of the committee and the agreement to set
up a joint coordination room. We encourage regular
meetings of the committee, as outlined by the Special
Envoy, which are important to sustain the truce.
Thirdly, a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political
process, with the meaningful participation of women,
must commence in parallel with the goal of achieving
an inclusive and peacefully negotiated settlement to
the conflict. We urge all parties to work towards such
a settlement, and we appreciate the Special Envoy’s
continued consultations with all relevant stakeholders
in Yemen to achieve that end.
The condition of the FSO SAFER tanker continues
to pose an environmental, humanitarian and maritime
threat. We appreciate the pledges by Saudi Arabia and
the United States for the operational plan of the United
Nations to combat that threat. We also welcome the
United Nations crowdfunding campaign to bridge the

22-3816717/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

funding gap. We hope that long-pending issue will be
addressed quickly with additional funding.
As a long-standing friend of Yemen, India will
support a robust and inclusive political solution that fully
respects Yemen’s unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. Only such a solution can end the
conflict in Yemen and restore peace, stability, security
and prosperity in the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I would like to thank Special Envoy Grundberg
for his valuable insights and once again providing us
with uplifting and updated information. I also thank
Ms. Mudawi for the detailed yet sobering information
on the humanitarian situation on the ground, which
remains dire. I am most grateful to Ms. Al-Salafi for
her insights, her forward-looking message in relation
to the situation of women and girls in Yemen and her
concrete recommendations.
We salute this moment of renewed hope and
optimism for the political process and the future of
Yemen. We once again welcome and applaud the fact
that the guns have broadly remained silenced, that
reason has prevailed and that hope has taken deeper root
in Yemen. This is an opportunity to be firmly seized by
the parties to engage constructively in order to serve
the interests of the aggrieved Yemenis and hopefully
start a new chapter for the future.
For the truce to succeed, all those concerned
must fully abide by their commitments to uphold and
implement it. The resumption of flights between Sana’a
airport and Amman and Cairo, as well as the entry of
fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah port, have brought relief
to thousands of Yemenis as dividends of the truce. The
approach of the Government of Yemen has been crucial
to all those achievements and their positive effects. We
applaud the successful efforts of the Special Envoy and
his team and commend the important role and strong
support of regional partners, primarily Saudi Arabia
and Oman, but also Egypt and Jordan, in making those
achievements a reality.
The parties should continue their engagement
with a view to reopening roads in Taiz and other
governorates. We call on the Houthis to reciprocate
the flexibility shown by the Government of Yemen.
The full implementation of the truce should lead to a
nationwide, comprehensive and permanent ceasefire,
18/20

14/06/2022

which we have long called for. The parties should
feel encouraged by the notable drop in the numbers
of casualties, violent incidents and fatalities among
civilians and take the necessary steps forward to enable
the people of Yemen to start believing in a real chance
for a durable and lasting peace in their country. That
is why a comprehensive political process under the
auspices of the United Nations remains a must. We
reiterate our position that the political process should
be inclusive, and the meaningful participation of
women, young people and civil-society representatives
remains of paramount importance, as Ms. Al-Salafi
rightly highlighted.
Even as we value the benefits of the truce and the
need to build on them, we remain worried about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and, as
we heard from Ms. Mudawi, the security situation as
well. The absence of fighting cannot be replaced by
lawlessness. We encourage the Presidential Leadership
Council and the Government of Yemen to take the
measures necessary to ensure the delivery of services to
the Yemeni people. The fact that thousands of them are
exposed to famine and other intolerable humanitarian
challenges must be addressed as a matter of urgency,
especially where women and children are concerned.
Despite the improvements, children continue to suffer
the brunt of the war, even after the truce. We deplore
every violation of the rights of the child and every loss
of children’s lives. We call on the Houthis to release the
children whom they have recruited and work for the full
implementation of the action plan they signed in April.
No less troubling is the situation of women, which
we deeply deplore, along with the increased incitement
and other forms of attacks on them. That must end.
Accountability must be strengthened, and the fight
against impunity must be intensified. The situation of
women attests to the need to maintain evidence-based
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, as well as
independent, international and impartial capacities to
monitor the human rights situation in Yemen.
In conclusion, I would also like to reiterate our
condemnation of the continued incarceration of Yemenis
currently or formerly employed by the United States
and the United Nations. We deplore Mr. Abdulhameed
Al-Ajami’s death in detention and call for the immediate
and unconditional release of all detainees in conformity
with obligations under international humanitarian law.
Finally, we greatly appreciate the ongoing tireless
efforts to finding a durable solution to the problem of
22-38167

14/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the FSO SAFER oil tanker, and we hope that conditions
will be met so that the rescue operation can start soon.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would again like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to wish you every success. I also
thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of the United States, for her successful presidency of
the Council last month. I am grateful to Mr. Grundberg,
Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Al-Salafi for their briefings.
Mr. Grundberg, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and a number of Council members
mentioned the use of landmines in Yemen. I want to
draw the Council’s attention to the fact that it is the
Houthis who have been indiscriminately planting them.
Over the years of the conflict they have laid more
than 1 million mines, which have claimed the lives of
hundreds of civilians and have disabled many women
and children, and Yemenis will continue to suffer from
their tragic repercussions in the future.
The Presidential Leadership Council reiterates
its full commitment and continued efforts to achieve
a comprehensive and sustainable peace to end
the conflict. It has done its utmost to ensure that
Mr. Grundberg’s work succeeds and to maintain
the truce, which is a step towards a comprehensive
ceasefire and a resumption of negotiations that can
lead to a political settlement based on the agreed terms
of reference, that is, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). The decision of the Leadership
Council to agree to extend the truce for another two
months is based on its firm commitment and approach
to alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people and
its refusal to use humanitarian issues as bargaining
chips. At the same time, the Houthi militias continue

S/PV.9063

to renege on their commitments under the truce and
to obstruct United Nations and international efforts to
move forward on a path to peace, thereby exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis.
Notwithstanding the militias’ attempt to hinder
commercial flights from Sana’a airport, in contravention
of the provisions of the truce, the Presidential
Leadership Council has made many concessions and
demonstrated enormous flexibility in facilitating
flights to and from Sana’a airport and enabling the
regular entry of petroleum products through the port of
Al-Hudaydah so as to ease the humanitarian suffering
of the Yemeni people. The Government stresses that
the intransigence of the Houthi militias regarding Taiz,
their seizure of more than 90 billion Yemeni rials in
tax and customs revenues from petroleum products at
the port of Al-Hudaydah during the first two months
of the truce, along with their refusal to pay the salaries
of civil servants, demonstrates to Yemenis and the
international community that they do not care about
the people’s suffering. Rather, they are using their
suffering to make political gains, as they continue to
loot sources of revenue to finance their war and their
ongoing aggression against the Yemeni people for their
own personal enrichment, which is intolerable.
The Yemeni Government has exercised restraint
since the beginning of the truce, despite the Houthis’
daily violations, which include artillery fire, the
mobilization and deployment of troops and overflights
and bombing by drones, which claimed the lives of
72 martyrs and injured 267 national army troops
during the first two months of the truce. Yesterday
alone, the Houthi militias, with the support of Iran,
committed 80 violations of the United Nations truce
on various battle fronts. These continued violations of
the truce are testing the international community and
the Council, which must put pressure on the militias
to respond to peace efforts. Peace cannot be achieved
without a genuine partner. From the very beginning,
the Houthis’ continued violations and failure to respect
the humanitarian truce have demonstrated the approach
of the militias and their sponsors in undermining
efforts to achieve peace and a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis.
The daily human suffering of more than 4 million
civilians in Taiz, considered the largest governorate in
terms of population density, under the brutal siege that
the Houthi militias have imposed for more than seven
years, is a war crime, a crime against humanity and a

22-3816719/20

S/PV.9063

The situation in the Middle East

flagrant violation of international law and the relevant
conventions. The Yemeni Government calls once again
on the Security Council, the international community
and human rights organizations to compel the militias
to completely and unconditionally lift the siege on Taiz
in accordance with the terms of the truce, including by
opening main roads, removing checkpoints and barriers
and allowing freedom of movement for citizens and
the smooth flow of foodstuffs and basic commodities.
Pressure also must be put on them to release prisoners
and detainees, based on the principle of all for all.
The Yemeni Government appreciates the generous
support provided by sisterly and friendly countries,
whether directly or through the humanitarian response
plan, to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Despite that support, however, the humanitarian
operations remain unable to reach all those in need,
thanks either to a lack of funding, which risks halting
relief projects, or as a result of obstacles created by the
Houthi militias and the diversion of humanitarian aid
from its intended recipients.
We once again call on the international community
to keep Yemen at the top of its priority list, integrate
development needs in all humanitarian interventions,
contribute to early recovery and provide more support
to address the humanitarian crisis, especially in the light
of the current global circumstances and the significant
spike in food prices.
The Presidential Leadership Council and the
competency Government assign high priority to
economic stability and reforms, including the
establishment of a mechanism to make rapid use
of the generous grants provided by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in the
amount of $3.3 billion dollars, which will contribute
to stabilizing the currency and improving living and
economic conditions.
In that regard, we emphasize the importance of
supporting a transformation of the working methods of
United Nations agencies from rescue and humanitarian
action to support, development and peacebuilding
action, as well as ensuring the interrelated links between
those areas, in accordance with the requirements of the
new phase and the Government’s priorities. That would
contribute to creating jobs, promoting growth and
economic recovery projects, developing infrastructure,
providing basic services to citizens, preparing for the

20/20

14/06/2022

reconstruction phase and achieving the objectives of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Houthi militias continue to recruit tens of
thousands of children in so-called “summer camps”,
in flagrant violation of children’s rights, national
legislation and international instruments. Those militias
brainwash children with extremist ideas imported from
Iran — slogans of death, violence and hatred — with
the aim of forcing them into battle. Their actions
demonstrate that, even while the truce is still in place,
they are preparing for another round of escalation and
intend to use children as fuel for their futile war.
Unfortunately, the international community
remains silent in the face of the largest child-recruitment
campaign in history, while ignoring the dangers of that
crime for Yemen, the region and the world, along with
its disastrous implications for the thousands of Yemeni
children who have been deprived of their natural right
to life.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government reiterates
its full support for United Nations efforts to address
the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue and will provide all the
necessary arrangements to ensure the success of those
efforts in order to avoid an imminent environmental,
humanitarian and economic disaster. Its repercussions
would extend beyond Yemen, threatening maritime
navigation routes and endangering countries bordering
the Red Sea.
We would not have been confronted with that danger
were it not for the intransigence of Houthi militias over
the past few years. They have been using the tanker
issue as a political bargaining chip. We once again call
on the Security Council and the United Nations to act
swiftly and exercise maximum pressure to ensure that
the Houthis abide by the United Nations plan. We also
call upon the international community to continue to
fund and implement that plan in order to avoid such a
disaster, from which it would cost billions of dollars to
recover should it occur.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-38167
