S/2016/411

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 May 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 28 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), the mandate of which was established by the
Security Council in its resolution 1876 (2009) and most recently extended in
resolution 2267 (2016).
Following the usual consultations, I wish to inform you of my intention to
appoint Modibo Touré (Mali) as my Special Representative for Guinea -Bissau and
Head of UNIOGBIS, with effect from 1 May 2016. Mr. Touré will replace
Miguel Trovoada, who will complete his assignment on 30 April 2016.
In recent months, Guinea-Bissau has witnessed a deterioration in the internal
divisions within the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde, which led the President to dismiss the Prime Minister and his G overnment on
12 August 2015. A new Government, headed by the new Prime Minister, Carlos
Correia, was formed on 13 October 2015. However, persisting divisions and
tensions among the key State organs are having an impact on the functioning of
State institutions and paralysing the country. The continuing politico -judicial
impasse over the removal by the National Assembly of the parliamentary mandate
of 15 of its members is illustrative of the remaining challenges facing the country.
Given the continued political crisis, the need for good offices and high-level
political facilitation will remain critical in the coming months, demanding the full time engagement of the United Nations at a senior level.
My Special Representative and Head of UNIOGBIS, at the level of UnderSecretary-General, will have responsibility for the implementation of the mandate
and overall management of the Office. He will carry out the good offices, political
facilitation and mediation roles and promote the integration of the political, s ecurity
and development aspects of the engagement of the United Nations system in
Guinea-Bissau. He will also chair the Strategic Policy Group responsible for the
overall political and policy guidance and the implementation of the United Nations
integrated approach and vision in Guinea-Bissau.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-07231 (E)

040516

*1607231*
