102

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Decides that, wilh cfkct from 1 January 1973,
regulation I. 10 of the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"The oath or declaration shall be made orally by
the Secretary-General at a public meeting of the
General Assembly. All other members of the Secretariat shall make the oath or declaration before the
Sccretary-Gcncrnl or his authorized representative."
2. Takes note of the changes made by the Secretary-General in the Staff Rules of the United Nations
in the year ending on 31 .~ ugtht I 972, as set forth in
his report. :rn
2 I 13th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3042 (XXVII). United Nations salary system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2743 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, by which it establi,hed the Special Committee for the Review of the United Nations Salary
System,
Recalling further its resolution 13 ( l) of 13 February 1946, on the basis of which the International Civil
Service Advisory Board was established in 1948, and
recalling that the terms of reference of the Board were
subsequently extended by resolution 1981 ( XVIII) of
17 December 1963,
Noting the report of the Special Committee for the
Review of the United Nations Salary System,40 the
comments thereon by the [ntcrnational Civil Service
Advisory Board, 11 the Sccretary-Gencral 42 and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,-1:i and the statement of the Federation of
International Civil Servants' Associations, 44
Noting that, in its report, the Special Committee
for the Review of the United Nations Salary System
recommended the establishment of a new organ for the
regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service
of the United Nations common system,
Noting that the International Civil Service Advisory
Board and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions recommend the establishment
of an international civil service commission composed
of experts who should be independent of executive
heads, staff associations and Governments, but accountable as a body to the General Assembly,
Noting further that the executive heads of the specialized agencies, as well as representatives of the staff,
believe that such a commission is necessary,
I . Decides to establish in principle, as of 1 January
1974, an International Civil Snvicc Commission consisting of not more than thirteen independent experts
having the requisite qualifications and experience who
would be appointed in their individual capacities by,
and answerable as a body to, the General Assembly;
2. Invites the governing organs of the specialized
agencies in the United Nations common system to offer

such observations as they may have on the proposed
International Civil Service Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination and after such consultations as he or they
may deem necessary, to submit, through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session detailed proposals for an International Civil
Service Commission. together with a draft statute covering its terms of reference and procedures, including
conditions and periods of service for the commissioners, methods of selection of the supporting staff of
the Commission, methods of consultation with representatives of the administrations and staff, and other
necessary administrative, budgetary and financial provisions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination to initiate appropriate consultations with a
view to the compilation of a roster of candidates for
appointment to the International Civil Service Commi,sion, selected on the basis of their personal qualifications and experience and of broad geographical
representation, and to consult with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in
time for consideration and decision by the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
5. Decides to transmit to the International Civil
Service Commission, after it has been constituted, the
report of the Special Committee for the Review of
the United Nations Salary System, the comments of
the International Civil Service Advisory Board and
other related documentation for its consideration and
the submission of recommendations for action at the
earliest possible date;
6. Decides to continue to keep the International
Civil Service Advisory Board in being until such time
as the International Civil Service Commission is constituted and becomes operational.
21 I 6th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3043 (XXVII). Form of presentation of the
United Nations budget and duration of the
budget eycle

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the form of presentation of the United
Nations budget and the duration of the budget cycle 40
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 46
Taking into account the view expressed by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twelfth
se,sion 47 and by the Economic and Social Council at
it~ fifty-third session1R that the new form of presentation constitutes a useful basis for proceeding towards
the introduction of a system of programme budgeting
in the United Nations,

39 A/C.5/1435.
40 Official Records of the General Assembl_,., Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 2R ( A/8728 and Corr. I).
41 lbid., Supplement No. 2RA (A/8728/ Add. I).
4 ~ A/8839 and Corr. I :md Add. I.
43 A/8914.
44 See A/C.5/1466.

4;; A/C.5/1429 and Corr.I and 2.
JG A/87390
17 See Official Records of the Economic

and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session. Supplement Noo JO (E/5 I 86/Revo 1).
1 ~ See O[ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8703).
