86

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

able to contribute to the control of narcotic drugs as
effectively as they earnestly desire,
Recognizing that in order to do so they would be
required to make an extensive effort to improve especially the ,economic and social conditions of some
of their often isolated and impoverished regions where
traditionally the revenue derived from the cultivation
of opium poppy or other narcotic drugs is in some
cases the principal means of livelihood for the populations concerned,
Recognizing further that in those regions of the
above-mentioned developing countries the replacement
of a traditionally drug-oriented economy by other agricultural and economic activities should be undertaken
in such a way as to minimize hardship for the populations concerned and to assist in establishing new, adequate sources of revenue and means of ,livelihood for
them,
Fully aware that to embark on such comprehensive
programmes these countries need substantial technical
and financial assistance from the international community,
Conscious that the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control, in order to be able to participate financially in these programmes and to continue to support
training, research and other scientific activities and
rehabilitation efforts rin the interest of all States, whatever their individual stage of development, requires
funding on a continuous basis,
1. Considers that the Ullited Nations system,
through the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, can make a major contribution in this respect;
I
2. Welcomes the fact that some of the developing
countries in Asia and Latin America, in co-operation
with the Fund, have initiated or are about to initiate
programmes aimed at the effective elimination of illicit traffic, illicit production and abuse of narcotic
drugs;
3. Commends the Governments which have already
contributed to the Fund and urges them to continue
and, if possible, to increase their contribution;
4. Urges all States, according to their capacities,
to make substantial and sustained contributions to
the Fund and also to provide technical and financial
assistance to the developing countries directly concerned which request such assistance for bringing narcotic drugs under effective control;
5. Appeals to international financial institutions to
assist these developing countries in carrying out their
respective narcotics control programmes.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3146 (XXVIII). Support for and voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that, according to the Report
of the International Narcotics Control Board for 1972,81
drug abuse is still increasing in volume, geographical
extent and number of people affected,
61 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.XI.5.

Encouraged by the assessment of the International
Narcotics Control Board that there has at the same
time been a deepening realization at all ,levels of society
that this grave and complex phenomenon can be met
successfully only by a sustained, united effort on the
part of the world community by Governments acting
in concert with one another,
1. Commends the action already taken by Governments to reduce the illicit production, traffic and consumption of drugs;
2. Expresses the hope that such action will continue and that even greater concerted efforts will be
made;
3. Recognizes that a number of countries wil,l need
assistance to enable them to carry out their drug abuse
control programmes;
4. Reaffirms its declaration in resolution 3012
(XXVII) of 18 December 1972 that the fulfillment
by the developing countries of their obligations under
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 62 calls
for technical and financial assistance from the international community;
5. Urgently appeals to Governments for sustained
support and increased voluntary contributions to the
United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in any
form and accordjng to their capacities.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3147 (XXVIII). Accession to drug control treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3013 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 calling for adherence to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 63 the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances64 and the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961,65
Gratified that since the adoption of that resolution
a number of States have acceded to one or more of
these instruments,
1. Stresses the importance to international drug
control of universal accession to all three treaties and
to the earliest poss,ible entry into force of the 1971
Conv~ntion on Psychotropic Substances and the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961 ;
2. Urges Governments of countries directly related
to the manufacturing and production of psychotropic
substances to ratify or accede to the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the
present resolution to the attention of all Governments;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly ,at its twenty-ninth session on
the progress made towards universal acceptance of all
three treaties.
2201 st plenary meetin~
14 December 1973
6 2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p.
63 Ibid.
84 E/CONF.58/6 and Corr.l and 2.

65 E/CONF.63/8.

151.
