VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities and
thus to provide assistance to women in integrating fully
into their societies;
6. Decides to consider the question of the role of
women in society at its forty-first session under an item
entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advanc.ement
of women to the year 2000".
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/102. Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation
The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain peac.e and security in the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling that the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, held at
Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, in adopting the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women, 51 underlined the importanc.e of the participation
of women in promoting international peac.e and co-operation,
Convinced that the International Year of Peace, proclaimed for the year 1986 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 40/3 of 24 October 1985, could give new
impulses for safeguarding international peac.e and security,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 Dec.ember 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 124 of 14 Dec.ember 1984, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of
Women to consider what measures might be necessary in
order to implement the Declaration,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace and security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
I. Pledges its determination to encourage the full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international peac.e and co-operation;
2. Appeals to all Governments to take the necessary
measures for putting into practice the principles and provisions of the Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting International Peace and Co-operation;
3. Invites all Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization
and other appropriate bodies within the United Nations
9S PJl983/7 and Corr. I and 2.
96 Report of the World Conference to Rev,ew and Appraise the Achievements o(the United Nations Decadefor Women: Equa/ir_v. Development and

221

system to consider adequate measures to implement the
Declaration;
6. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider measures which may be necessary to implement the Declaration in the context of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women
for the period up to the year 2000;
7. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-first session, as a sub-item of an
item entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/103. Prevention of prostitution
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the subject of the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others, prepared in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20 of 4 May 1982, 95
Recalling its resolution 38/ 107 of 16 December 1983
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/30 of
26 May 1983, as well as the report of the World Conferenc.e to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, 96
Considering that the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others require
a three-fold concerted effort, involving prevention, punishment of all forms of procuring and solidarity in order to
facilitate the social rehabilitation of the victims,
l. Congratulates the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World
Tourism Organization for the action they have begun to
take in implementation of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1983/30;
2. Invites once again the Economic and Social Council
to consider the whole question of the suppression of the
traffic in persons and of the exploitation of the prostitution
of others at its first regular session of 1986 in connection
with the agenda item on human rights, together with the
reports requested by the Council in its resolution 1983/30;
3. Invites the Working Group on Slavery of the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to transmit its report to the Commission
on the Status of Women at its next session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the issuanc.e as a United Nations document of the report on the
suppression of the traffic in persons and of the exploitation
of the prostitution of others prepared in pursuanc.e of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/104.

United Nations Development Fund for
Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 25 of 14 December 1984, in
which it decided, inter alia, that the activities of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
Peac1•, Nairobi. 15-26 Julv 19/i.< (IJnited Nations publication, Sales No.
E.85.IY 10)
