S/2021/662

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2021
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is the fifth report of the Secretary -General on
children and armed conflict in Afghanistan. It contains information on the six grave
violations against children and, more broadly, on the situation of children affected by
armed conflict during the period from 1 January 2019 to 31 December 2020.
The report provides an overview of the trends of the six grave violations
committed against children in Afghanistan and the context in which they took place,
and identifies perpetrators, when possible. It also highlights progress made in ending
and preventing these violations, including through the implem entation of the action
plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use signed by the Government in 2011
and the road map towards compliance of 2014.
Lastly, the report provides a series of recommendations to strengthen action for
the protection of children affected by armed conflict in Afghanistan.

21-09950 (E)

300721

*2109950*

S/2021/662

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, prepared pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, covers the period from 1 January 2019 to
31 December 2020 and provides trends and patterns of grave violations committed
against children by parties to the conflict in Afghanistan, as well as progress made
and challenges with regard to dialogue with parties since the previous report
(S/2019/727) and the conclusions adopted by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict in June 2020 (S/AC.51/2020/2).
2.
The country task force on monitoring and reporting, co-chaired by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented and verified the information contained in
the present report. When possible, the parties to the conflict responsible for grave
violations against children are identified, and the report highlights areas of action to
strengthen the protection of children and prevent further violations, including through
recommendations to the parties. Owing to monitoring and verification constraints, the
information presented herein does not represent the full extent of grave violations
committed against children in Afghanistan.

II. Political and security developments
3.
The security situation continued to deteriorate across the country since the
period covered by the previous report (S/2019/727). The number of security incidents 1
recorded by the United Nations continued to rise, including by 10 per cent from 2019
(22,832) to 2020 (25,179), although neither the Government nor the Taliban made
significant territorial gains that affected conflict dynamics. The reporting period was
dominated by two major political events: the presidential election on 28 September
2019 and the signing of the peace agreement in February 2020.
4.
The presidential election in September 2019 was marred by insecurity, with the
Taliban Military Commission announcing that the group would target the associated
“offices and centres” (see A/74/582–S/2019/935, para. 6). The Department of Safety
and Security recorded 643 security incidents on election day, including 77 attacks
against polling centres, of which 35 were schools, the highest recorded on an election
day since 2004. A total of 2,780 security incidents were recorded for the month of
September 2019, the highest monthly average in 2019. Partl y because of insecurity,
voter turnout was lower than in previous elections, amid controversies over electoral
fraud and uncertainty surrounding the peace process. Election results in favour of the
President, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, were announced on 18 Feb ruary 2020 and
contested by the then Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah. On 17 May 2020, the
President and Dr. Abdullah concluded an agreement, ending a three -month political
impasse and paving the way for the formation of the Government and the peace
process structures.
5.
Following nearly two years of direct talks, the United States of America and the
Taliban concluded an agreement on 29 February 2020 that outlined progressive
reductions in the number of United States forces, with a drawdown of all intern ational
forces by 29 April 2021, conditional upon adherence by the Taliban to counterterrorism commitments and a pledge to negotiate with the Government of
Afghanistan. The start of the negotiations was delayed, but they eventually began on
12 September 2020.
__________________
1

2/17

Security incidents include but are not limited to armed clashes, the use of improvised explosive
devices and suicide attacks.
21-09950

S/2021/662

6.
There were occasional drops in violence in 2020, however, levels of violence
quickly rose again after each decline. Airstrikes declined by 43 per cent from 2018
(1,663) to 2020 (938), but other categories of security incidents did not subside. The
month of October 2020, which followed the launch of the Afghanistan peace
negotiations, saw the highest level of armed clashes since the United Nations started
to keep record in 2007. Assassinations and the use of improvised explosive devices
also rose, amid increasing concerns over the targeted, and often unclaimed, killings
of government officials, civil society activists, media workers, judicial personnel and
human rights defenders.
7.
While the Taliban did not announce a spring offensive and refrained from
launching attacks on urban areas for most of 2020, they continued to conduct
operations against government positions and to launch offensives against the
provincial capitals of Kandahar and Helmand in the second half of the year. They also
gradually moved closer to surrounding several provincial capitals. In 2020, Kabul
remained vulnerable to high-profile attacks, with 10 suicide attacks and 185
detonations of improvised explosive devices, all claimed by the Taliban.
8.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) remained
active throughout the reporting period, claiming asymmetric and usually high -profile
attacks against civilian and politically symbolic targets. ISIL-KP claimed attacks
targeting the shuttle buses of several State entities and a television station in August
2019. In 2020, it claimed responsibility for suicide and complex attacks against an
education centre, a Sikh temple (March) and Kabul University (November), as well
as several rocket attacks on Kabul, including one on the day of the presidential
inauguration.

III. Update on parties to the conflict
A.

Government and pro-government forces
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
9.
The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces is an umbrella term
describing all government security forces, including the Afghan National Army (and
its subsidiaries, such as the Afghan Air Force, the Afghan National Army Territorial
Force, also referred to as the Afghan Territorial Army, the Afghan Border Force and
the Afghan National Civil Order Force), the Afghan Special Forces, the National
Directorate for Security and the Afghan National Police.
10. Under the responsibility of the Ministry of Interior Affairs, the Afghan National
Police is the primary law enforcement agency, despite also taking part in hostilities.
The Afghan Local Police, which was created in 2010 to provide a community -based
policing capability as part of counter-insurgency efforts and de facto considered part
of the armed forces owing to its combat-related functions, saw its international
funding end in September 2020, leading to its formal abolishment at the end of 2020.
At its dissolution, two thirds of its members were designate d to transfer to the Afghan
National Army, the Territorial Force or the Afghan National Police, while the
remainder were to retire. The United Nations was unable to verify if these transfers
occurred at the time of writing the present report.
11. The action plan signed in 2011 by the Government of Afghanistan to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children by its national security forces (namely the
Afghan National Police, including the Afghan Local Police), as well as the road map
towards compliance of 2014, continued to be implemented.

21-09950

3/17

S/2021/662

International forces
12. The Resolute Support Mission led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) continued its non-combat mission to train, assist and advise the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. In addition to supporting the Resolute Support
Mission, the United States continued its Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, which is
focused on counter-terrorism operations. The commander of the Resolute Support
Mission also serves as the commander of the United States forces in Afghanistan,
although the chains of command are separate.
13. The United States and the Taliban signed an agreement on 29 February 2020,
which included conditional plans for troop withdrawals within 14 months and the star t
of intra-Afghan peace negotiations. Following the start of the Afghanistan peace
negotiations in September 2020, NATO announced that it would adjust its presence
to support the peace process, while remaining committed to training and funding the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. As at November 2020, the Resolute
Support Mission consisted of approximately 10,500 troops from 36 NATO countries
and partners. As at November 2020, approximately 4,500 United States troops were
supporting the Resolute Support Mission and Operation Freedom’s Sentinel. On
18 November 2020, the United States announced that it would further reduce its
troops in Afghanistan to 2,500 by mid-January 2021.
Pro-government militias
14. Pro-government militias, organized non-State militias distinct from government
forces, continued to operate against armed groups. They lack legal basis under Afghan
laws and operate outside of the regular military command and control and are not
included in the official tashkil. 2 They include the National Uprising Movements, a
community-based defence initiative set up across Afghan provinces, and the Khost
Protection Force, which has carried out specialized operations in the south -east of
Afghanistan since at least 2007.

B.

Armed opposition groups
15. The Taliban continued to increase its territorial control and to conduct large scale assaults, primarily targeting Afghan security force positions, key transportation
routes and district administrative centres across the country. By the end of 2020,
approximately 55,000 to 85,000 Taliban fighters were reportedly active, although
estimates vary considerably. The Taliban de facto administrative structures exist in
all provinces, their functionality being subject to the level of influence in the area.
16. The Haqqani Network continued to play an influential role in the Taliban’s
military operations. While the Haqqani Network is part of the Taliban, it has
maintained a degree of independence and is believed to be responsible for several
attacks on government and international positions in heavily populated areas of
Kabul. Since 2017, attacks reportedly committed by the Haqqani Network have been
attributed to the Taliban, as the distinction could no longer be reliably established.
17. Al-Qaida continued to be active and is believed to maintain a limited presence
in 12 provinces, with an estimated 400 to 600 armed operatives.

__________________
2

4/17

Dari word meaning “structure” that refers to the official staffing table and equipment allocations
authorized by the Government of Afghanistan for a particul ar government entity, including
security forces and the civilian branch (United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict – Annual Report 2020 (February 2021)).
21-09950

S/2021/662

18. Since 2019, ISIL-KP has remained active but has morphed into an urban
network predominantly using asymmetric tactics, notably suicide and complex
attacks, improvised explosive devices and rockets, which have caused civilian
casualties. Its membership is estimated to amount to 2,500 elements.
19. Several other non-State armed groups continued to operate in Afghanistan,
including militia elements linked to political parties and to leaders of former
mujahidin factions, at times in opposition to, or in support of, the Afghan security
forces.

IV. Grave violations against children
20. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 6,473 grave
violations against 6,131 children (4,358 boys, 1,757 girls and 16 of sex unknown)
aged from a few months to 17 years. Of these, 3,412 violations occurred in 2019 and
3,061 violations occurred in 2020. Killing and maiming remained the most prevalent
violation, with a total of 5,770 children killed (1,635) and maimed (4,135) during the
reporting period. Of concern, the country task force noted that child casualties
resulting from complex and suicide attacks (586) increased by 22 per cent compared
with the previous two years. Notwithstanding monitoring and verification constraints
owing to sensitivities around such cases, a concerning increase in recruitment and
use, to 260 children, was verified, which may have been exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Also of concern, the country task force
verified elevated numbers of attacks on schools (132), hospitals (165) and protected
persons in relation to schools and/or hospitals, 3 which, with a total of 297 attacks,
was among the three categories of grave violations with the most verified violations.
21. Armed groups were the main perpetrators of grave violations, predominantly
the Taliban (2,730). The numbers of grave violations attributed to government and
pro-government forces were concerning, especially those attributed to the Afghan
National Army (1,227), which have been on the increase.
22. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic during the reporting period
exacerbated children’s vulnerabilities and contributed to further strain on health care,
while increasing poverty, unemployment and food insecurity, all potential drivers for
increased child recruitment and use, abduction and sexual violence against children.
23. Owing to monitoring and verification challenges, the data contained in the
present report are believed to underrepresent the actual numbers of grave violations.

A.

Recruitment and use
24. The country task force verified the recruitment and use of 260 boys, mainly in
the northern region (161), the north-eastern region (56) and the central highlands
region (13). There was a sharp increase from 2019 (64) to 2020 (196).
25. The Taliban were responsible for the recruitment and use of 230 children (88 per
cent), all used in combat roles, for instance, to plant improvised explosive devices, to
carry out suicide attacks and to participate in hostilities against government forces,
as a result of which some were killed or maimed.

__________________
3

21-09950

For the purposes of the present report, the phrase “protected persons in relation to schools and/or
hospitals”, used in Security Council resolutions 1998 (2011), 2143 (2014) and 2427 (2018) and
in the statements by the President of the Security Council of 17 June 2013 ( S/PRST/2013/8) and
31 October 2017 (S/PRST/2017/21), refers to teachers, doctors, other educational personnel,
students and patients.
5/17

S/2021/662

26. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were respon sible for the
recruitment and use of 22 boys, attributed to the Afghan National Police (8), Afghan
National Army Territorial Force (4), the Afghan Local Police (1), and the Afghan
Local Police and pro-government militias jointly (9). 4 In addition, the recruitment and
use of eight boys was attributed to pro-government militias. Children aged from 13
to 17 years were used in combat and support roles, as well as for sexual purposes,
such as bacha bazi, a practice whereby boys are exploited by wealthy or power ful
men for entertainment, in particular for dancing and sexual activities.
27. The country task force documented the recruitment and use of 413 children
(412 boys and 1 girl), mainly by armed groups, that it could not verify by the time of
writing owing to sensitivities and concerns for the safety of the victims, families and
sources, as well as access limitations.
28. Boys were more likely to be recruited and used than girls, owing partly to
cultural norms and religious beliefs. Poverty was also a significant push and pull
factor, and boys were more likely to bear the responsibility for meeting the
household’s economic needs. Girls were often subjected to early marriages and
engaged in domestic labour or other household work and activities. Those tr ends were
exacerbated in 2020 owing to the socioeconomic impact of the measures taken in
response to COVID-19, including lockdowns.
Detention of children for alleged association with armed groups and/or on the
basis of charges related to national security
29. The Ministry of Justice reported that 311 children (310 boys and 1 girl) were
detained in the juvenile rehabilitation centre in Kabul on charges related to national
security, including association with armed groups (146 boys in 2019; 164 boys and
1 girl in 2020), for periods ranging from 6 months to 3.5 years.
30. These children included those who had surrendered or had been cap tured in
combat and were being held for their alleged association with armed groups. Despite
the endorsement of the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups (Paris Principles) by the Government of Afghanistan,
children continued to be detained for alleged or actual association with armed groups.
Once arrested in the provinces, they were transferred to the juvenile rehabilitation
centre in Kabul or to national security facilities, where investigations, evidence
collection and judicial process were delayed. In accordance with the action plan and
the road map signed by the Government, children arrested for alleged or actual
association with armed groups and detained on charges related to national security
should be considered primarily as victims, and benefit from international juvenile
justice standards in line with the principle of the “best interests of the child” enshrined
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
31. Also of concern, 318 children, who were predominantly of non-Afghan
nationality, were in prisons and other detention facilities with their mothers who were
detained for alleged or actual association with the Taliban or ISIL -KP.
32. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, a presidential decree was issued in March
2020 to release some prisoners, including children, as a measure to reduce congestion
of the facilities and prevent the spread of COVID-19. A total of 374 children were
released following the decree, which, however, excluded children arrested for actu al
or alleged association with armed groups or detained on charges related to national
__________________
4

6/17

The country task force attributed the recruitment and use of these nine boys jointly to
pro-government militias and the Afghan Local Police as it was unable to gather sufficient
information to disaggregate the number of boys recruited by party owing to sensitivities or
concerns for the protection of victims and witnesses.
21-09950

S/2021/662

security. The country task force continued to advocate with the Government for
children to have access to social, educational, vocational, psychological and health
services during detention, as well as for referral pathways or handover protocols to
give them the opportunity to reintegrate into society in line with international juvenile
justice standards.

B.

Killing and maiming
33. The country task force verified the killing (1,635) and maiming (4,135) of 5,770
children (4,016 boys, 1,738 girls and 16 of sex unknown) aged from a few months to
17 years, occurring in 2019 (3,151) and 2020 (2,619). Child casualties constituted
almost one third of all civilian casualties during the reporting period. 5 Despite a
decrease in child casualties compared with the previous two years (6,241), which
resulted partly from temporary ceasefires, the United States-Taliban peace agreement,
the ongoing intra-Afghan peace negotiations and a reduction of military operations
by some of the parties, one concerning trend was that child casualties from complex
and suicide attacks increased during the reporting period.
34. Armed groups were responsible for 46 per cent of child casualties, namely the
killing (602) and maiming (2,031) of 2,633 children (1,946 boys, 684 girls and 3 of sex
unknown), with the vast majority attributed to the Taliban (2,178), followed by ISIL -KP
(285), unidentified armed groups (166) and jointly to the Taliban and ISIL -KP (4).
35. Government and pro-government forces were responsible for 35 per cent of child
casualties, namely the killing (745) and maiming (1,250) of 1,995 children (1,191
boys, 791 girls and 13 of sex unknown). Of these, the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces were responsible for 1,352 child casualties, attributed to the Afghan
National Army (1,200), the Afghan National Police (52), the National Directorate for
Security (52), the Afghan Border Force (19), the Afghan Local Police (16) and the
Afghan National Civil Order Force (13). Other child casualties were attributed to
international forces (294) and pro-government militias (68), while child casualties
were also attributed jointly to armed groups and government and pro -government
forces (808), jointly to government and pro-government forces (226) and to crossborder shelling from Pakistan (86). The remaining 248 child casualties could not be
attributed to a specific party to the conflict.
36. Ground engagements between government and pro-government forces and
armed groups remained the leading cause of child casualties, with 2,410 children
killed (575) and maimed (1,835) (42 per cent), followed by non -suicide attacks by
armed groups involving the use of improvised explosive device, which accounted for
1,092 children killed (297) and maimed (795) (19 per cent). Of concern, the country
task force verified an increase in child casualties (1,092) resulting from non -suicide
improvised explosive devices 6 compared with the previous two years (1,062).
37. Explosive remnants of war were the third leading cause of child casualties, with
717 children killed (197) and maimed (520) (12 per cent). In many cases, children
were killed or maimed because they touched an explosive remnant of war that they
found or they played with the devices or even carried them home. For instance, on
8 July 2020, in Qandaro area, Dara-e-Pech district, Kunar Province, children found
an explosive remnant of war while collecting firewood in the mountains and took it

__________________

UNAMA and OHCHR, Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict – Annual Report
2020; and UNAMA and OHCHR, Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict – 2019
(February 2020).
6
Improvised explosive devices with non-suicide trigger types.
5

21-09950

7/17

S/2021/662

to their village. The children played with the device, which caused it to explode,
killing a boy on the spot and maiming four others.
38. Children continued to be affected by airstrikes, which caused the killing (357)
and maiming (283) of 640 children and were attributed to the Afghan National Army
(329), international forces (279) and unidentified pro-government forces (32). 7 Child
casualties from airstrikes decreased by 16 per cent compared with the previous two
years (758), after the United States-Taliban agreement of 29 February 2020, which
was followed by a reduction in airstrikes by international forces, although air
operations conducted by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces increased. 8
39. Suicide and complex attacks by armed groups accounted for 10 per cent of child
casualties, with 586 children killed (79) and maimed (507), marking a 22 per cent
increase compared with the previous two years (482). For example, on 1 July 2019,
the Taliban conducted a complex attack on the logistics and engi neering hub of the
Ministry of Defence in the Puli Mahmood Khan area, Kabul Province. Suicide
attackers detonated a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device near a fuel station,
allowing two armed attackers with National Directorate for Security uniforms to enter
the compound and open fire. Approximately 300 students were in their classrooms in
their school located in the building, from which the attackers also took up firing
positions during the attack. Seven civilians, including 1 boy, were killed and 14 4
civilians, including 21 boys and 7 girls, were maimed, and six schools were damaged.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
40. Targeted and deliberate killings accounted for 4 per cent of child casualties, with
209 children killed (78) and maimed (131), representing a 5 per cent decrease
compared with the previous two years (220). Children continued to be victims of such
tactics by parties to the conflict. The remaining 2 per cent of child casualties (116)
were caused by other means, including search operations, abductions, threats,
intimidation and harassment, as well as escalation of force or force protection.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
41. The country task force verified incidents of sexual violence affecting 31 childre n
(22 boys and 9 girls) in 2019 (17) and 2020 (14), with the highest numbers in the north eastern region (17) and the central highland region (7). Violations were attributed to the
Taliban (17), the Afghan National Police (9), the Afghan Local Police (1), the Afghan
National Army (1), the Afghan National Army Territorial Force (1), a pro -government
militia (1) and jointly to the Afghan Local Police and pro-government militias (1).
These incidents included rapes and bacha bazi (2).
42. For instance, on 15 March 2019, a 13-year-old boy was arrested while carrying
a pistol in the north-eastern region. Following his arrest, the boy was held in the
Afghan National Police lock-up for one night and interrogated. Evidence gathered by
the police indicated that the boy had been abducted by the Afghan Local Police and
pro-government militia commanders in 2015 and had been used since then for bacha
bazi. On 6 June 2019, the juvenile primary court acquitted the boy, recognizing that

__________________

During the reporting period, only the Afghan National Army (through its Air Force) and
international forces conducted airstrikes in Afghanistan. Casualties from airstrikes attributed to
unidentified pro-government forces refer to incidents where specific attribution to either of these
two parties was not possible.
8
The Train, Advise and Assist Command-Air stated that the Afghan Air Force had increased its flight
hours, including because of greater operational need owing to reduced support from international
forces. More information is available in the forty-ninth quarterly report to the United States
Congress of the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (30 October 2020),
available at www.sigar.mil/pdf/quarterlyreports/2020-10-30qr-section3-security.pdf.
7

8/17

21-09950

S/2021/662

he had been abducted and referred him to a juvenile rehabilitation centre. 9 The court
issued an arrest warrant for the perpetrators involved in the case. One of the
perpetrators was killed in a Taliban attack, while the whereabouts of the second
remained unknown.
43. Sexual violence against children by parties to the conflict remains an
underreported and often unaddressed problem, making it hard to establish the
prevalence and the entire spectrum of cases. The information available consistently
indicates that, despite the criminalization of bacha bazi in the revised Penal Code,
which came into effect in February 2018, accountability remains a central challenge,
that response mechanisms to provide support and protection to survivors are lacking
and that children who are victims are often treated as offenders and placed in juvenile
rehabilitation centres.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
44. A total of 297 attacks on schools and hospitals, including related protected
persons, were verified.
Attacks on schools and related protected persons
45. The country task force verified 132 attacks on schools and education personnel,
including schools being attacked (29) and damaged (36), the killing, injury and
abduction of education personnel (25), threats against education facilities and
personnel (14) and attacks that may have been indiscriminate or disproportionate (28).
These attacks occurred in 2019 (70) and 2020 (62), with the majority in the eastern
(80), central (52) and north-eastern regions (44). This constituted a decrease of about
50 per cent compared with the previous two years (265), as there had been a
significant increase in 2018 in attacks on schools used as voter registration and polling
centres for the parliamentary elections.
46. Armed groups were responsible for 93 attacks on schools and education
personnel (70 per cent), which were attributed to the Taliban (78), ISIL -KP (8) and
unidentified armed groups (7). The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
were responsible for 26 attacks, attributed to the Afghan National Army (17), the
National Directorate for Security (3) and unidentified components of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces (6). These attacks included damage to
education facilities and property, intimidation of education personnel, raids and
looting of education materials. The remaining attacks were attributed jointly to armed
groups and the Afghan National Army (6), to international forces (4), to undetermined
government forces (1), to cross-border shelling from Pakistan (1) and to unidentified
perpetrators (1).
47. Several attacks occurred in the context of election-related violence. For
example, attacks by armed groups, primarily the Taliban, on polling day for the
presidential election on 28 September 2019, caused damage to 21 schools serving as
polling centres. During these incidents, 105 children were killed or maimed. On that
date in Kunduz Province, for instance, the Taliban launched six mortars towards the
polling station at the Ali Abad high school for boys.
48. In addition, the Taliban continued to threaten and attack schools for girls and
intimidate their personnel. In five attacks, they planted improvised explosive devices
that damaged facilities, disrupted classes and impeded children’s access to education.

__________________
9

21-09950

Owing to the absence of child protection support centres and insufficient resources to ensure an
adequate response in many provinces, children who are victims of violence are often referred to
juvenile rehabilitation centres.
9/17

S/2021/662

The United Nations continued to document intentional attacks and threats against
schools for girls. 10 For example, on 4 February 2019, in Keen village, Shib Koh
district, Farah Province, the Taliban entered the village primary school for girl s and
set two classes, a tent and some equipment, including the chairs and desks, on fire.
The fire damaged the doors and windows. The school, which was attended by nearly
460 girls from first to ninth grade, was closed owing to the damage and the threat o f
further incidents. In another example, on 26 January 2020, in Qarghai district of
Laghman Province, a group of Taliban entered the Mashakhil high school for girls,
locked the guards in a room and set the classrooms on fire. The fire resulted in damage
to the facility, which over 700 girls attended as students.
Military use of schools
49. Despite the signing of the Safe Schools Declaration by the Government in 2015,
the country task force verified the military use of 17 schools in 2019 (7) and 2020 (10 )
by components of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces (13), the Afghan
National Army and international forces jointly (1), the Taliban (1), pro-government
militias (1) and unidentified armed groups (1).
Other education-related concerns
50. The country task force verified the closure of 722 schools in 2019 and 258 in
2020 owing to general insecurity and military operations. More than half of these
closures occurred in the north-eastern region (506), followed by the southern (155),
western (95), northern (84), central (80), eastern (31) and south -eastern regions (29).
While school closures resulted from ongoing conflict, Takhar and Kunduz in the
north-eastern region, Helmand in the southern region, Logar in the central region and
Badghis in the western region were the most affected provinces, owing mainly to
Taliban offensives.
51. As a result of advocacy by the country task force and the support of community
elders and local authorities, 1,323 schools reopened in 2019 (924) and in 2020 (399).
Some of the schools that reopened had been closed since 2010. As at 31 December
2020, 796 schools remained closed countrywide, depriving 349,920 children (245,169
boys and 104,751 girls) of access to education during the reporting period.
Attacks on hospitals and related protected persons
52. The country task force verified 165 attacks on hospitals and related protected
persons in 2019 (75) and 2020 (90), a 24 per cent increase compared with the previous
two years (126). Attacks included threats against health personnel and facilities (54),
attacks that may have been indiscriminate or disproportionate that caused damage to
medical facilities, closures of hospitals and harm to personnel (51), abduction of
health personnel (24), the destruction of medical facilities (18) and attacks on health
personnel (18).
53. Armed groups were responsible for 130 attacks (79 per cent), with the vast
majority attributed to the Taliban (124), followed by ISIL-KP (3) and unidentified
armed groups (3). The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were responsible
for 21 attacks, attributed to the Afghan National Army (9), the National Directorate
for Security (5), Afghan National Defence and Security Forces joint operations (3),
the Afghan National Police (1), the Afghan Local Police (1), the Afghan Border Force
(1) and unidentified components of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
(1). These attacks involved search operations in medical facilities that resulted in
damage to or the closure of clinics and the harassment of health personnel. The
__________________
10

10/17

UNAMA and OHCHR, Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict – 2019.
21-09950

S/2021/662

remaining attacks were attributed to international forces (3), pro -government militias
(2), armed groups and the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces jointly (8)
and unidentified perpetrators (1). The majority of the incidents occurred in the eastern
(46), central (25) and northern regions (24). For example, on 19 May 2020, in Kunduz
Province, an Afghan National Army aeroplane targeted and bombed a clinic that was
allegedly treating wounded Taliban elements, damaging the clinic and an ambulance
and causing minor injuries to two health personnel.
54. Attacks on hospitals and health personnel are particularly egregious considering
the fragile state of the country’s health-care system and the burden that it has been
carrying during the COVID-19 pandemic. 11 In this context, armed groups reportedly
continued to deliberately target medical facilities and personnel. For instance, on
12 May 2020, in Kabul city, three attackers disguised as Afghan Border Force officers
and armed with AK-47s, hand grenades and tactical vests stormed the 100-bed
maternity ward in the Dasht-i-Barchi hospital, systematically moving from room to
room and firing on patients and health-care workers, including new mothers and
infants. In total, 23 civilians were killed and 23 were maimed, including six children
killed (3) and maimed (3) and one health-care worker killed. The responsible party
remains unknown. Threats against health personnel and facilities by armed groups,
mostly by the Taliban, led to the closure of around 239 health-care facilities during
the reporting period.
55. Election-related violence also had an impact on three medical facilities on
polling day during the presidential election, damaging a hospital and two clinics and
destroying medical equipment, including two ambulances, which affected service
delivery.
Military use of hospitals
56. The country task force verified the military use of four medical facilities in 2019
(2) and 2020 (2), attributed to the Afghan National Army (2), to the Afghan National
Army and international forces jointly (1) and to pro -government militias (1).

E.

Abduction
57. The country task force verified the abduction of 69 children (60 boys and
9 girls), as young as 1 year old, in 2019 (14) and 202 0 (55), with the higher numbers
in the eastern region (24) and the northern region (21).
58. Most abductions were attributed to the Taliban (66), followed by pro-government
militias (2) and the Afghan National Police (1). For instance, in April 2020, in Balkh
Province, a group of Taliban went to the Qalaqan area where civilians were digging a
water reservoir on their farmland, intending to extort them, under the pretext of zakat
and ushr. The Taliban abducted members of the community, including two boys
aged 10 and 15, took them to a village and shot and killed them on the same day.
59. Seven children were killed during their abduction in 2019 (1) and 2020 (6). The
country task force was also able to verify that 12 children had been released from
abduction in 2019 (1) and 2020 (11).

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
60. The country task force verified 46 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to
children in 2019 (20) and 2020 (26), attributed mostly to armed groups (43) (93 per

__________________
11

21-09950

See UNAMA, “Special report: attacks on healthcare during the COVID-19 pandemic” (June 2020).
11/17

S/2021/662

cent), namely, the Taliban (37), ISIL-KP (4) and unidentified armed groups (2). The
remaining incidents were attributed to the Afghan National Police (1), international
forces (1) and jointly to the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police (1).
61. Armed groups continued to abduct, kill, injure, intimidate and threaten
humanitarian personnel throughout the reporting period. The country task force
verified the abduction of 64 humanitarian personnel by the Taliban and the killing and
injuring of 24 humanitarian personnel by parties to the conflict.
62. Armed groups were also responsible for entering humanitarian facilities without
permission and taking away equipment. For instance, on 4 May 2020, in Shirin Tagab
district, Faryab Province, the Taliban stopped five trucks carrying roughly 25 tons of
humanitarian aid donated by the Government of Turkmenistan through the port of
Aqineh and did not allow them to reach Maymana city. After three days, the Taliban
offloaded the trucks, distributed the aid among their own forces and let the drivers
return to Maymana city with their empty trucks.
63. Of concern, the Taliban continued to impede polio vaccination campaigns in the
areas under their control. A total of 85 polio cases affecting children were documented
in 2019 (29) and 2020 (56). The cases were documented in five regions, including in
the southern (58), western (12), south-eastern (8), eastern (4) and northern (3) regions.
The spread of the polio cases in these regions can be attributed to many factors,
including the Taliban’s ban on house-to-house campaigns in 2018, which has
continued in many Taliban-controlled areas, and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, which led to the cancellation of the vaccination campaign scheduled for
July 2020. As a result of these bans, approximately 2.5 million children missed being
vaccinated on National Immunization Day in 2019, a number that increased to
approximately 3.3 million children in 2020 in the affected regions. For example, on
20 January 2020, a polio vaccinator from the non-governmental organization Hewad
was killed in Paktiya Province after the Taliban threatened Hewad if it did not stop
its polio vaccination programme.

V. Progress and challenges in ending and preventing grave
violations against children
A.

Government of Afghanistan
64. The country task force and the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
for Children and Armed Conflict continued to engage with the Af ghan authorities to
advocate the implementation of the action plan of 2011 and the road map towards
compliance of 2014, as well as additional concrete measures to prevent grave
violations against children.
65. The Government and its security forces, in close collaboration with the country
task force, took progressive measures to meet its commitments under the action plan
and the road map towards compliance to prevent child recruitment and use, including
through the development of laws and policies to better protect children.
66. The Law on the Protection of Child Rights, one priority of the road map towards
compliance, was enacted by the President through legislative decree No. 362 on
5 March 2019. The country task force supported the Government in drafting the Law,
and ensuring the inclusion of provisions on the recruitment and use of children and
sexual violence against children, including bacha bazi, which were also reflected in
the revised Penal Code that came into force in 2018. The Law is currently pen ding
approval by Parliament as some members do not accept the definition of a child as
any person below the age of 18, although this definition is included in the Juvenile

12/17

21-09950

S/2021/662

Code and the revised Penal Code. Once approved, the implementation of the Law
should lead to ending and sustainably prevent further cases of child recruitment and
use, as well as sexual violence against children, by the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces.
67. As required under the Law on the Protection of Child Rights, on 16 Jun e 2019,
the Government established a National Commission on the Protection of Child Rights,
chaired by the Second Vice-President, mandated to observe and protect children’s
rights, oversee and evaluate the implementation of the Law, and ensure coordination
among ministries and relevant governmental and non-governmental organizations. On
22 October 2019, a National Technical Committee on the Protection of Child Rights
was established under the Commission, chaired by the Minister for Labour and Social
Affairs. The Committee is tasked with developing a national plan for the
implementation of the Law and establishing a monitoring mechanism to oversee it.
68. The Government developed, with the support of the country task force, a
national child protection policy, 12 which is aligned with the Law on the Protection of
Child Rights and applies to all Ministries, as an overarching legal framework to
protect all children in Afghanistan in both the development and the humanitarian
contexts.
69. On 24 November 2020, the Ministry of Interior Affairs officially launched its
internal child protection policy applicable to Afghan National Police personnel, as
part of its efforts to implement the road map towards compliance. The policy was
drafted with the support of the country task force. It includes provisions on the
protection of children from recruitment and use and sexual violence, including bacha
bazi, and is notably aimed at increasing the number of Afghan National Police officers
who are specialized in child protection.
70. The country task force noted further progress by the Ministry of Interior Affairs
on the prevention of recruitment and use of children through the 34 child protection
units in Afghan National Police recruitment centres across the cou ntry. A total of
626 underage applicants (all boys) were prevented from enlisting through the child
protection units in 2019 (439) and 2020 (187). The decrease in 2020 could be partially
attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown measures, which affected the
regularity of the rotations of the child protection unit personnel. The country task
force completed a national assessment on interventions to prevent child recruitment
in 2019, evaluating the effectiveness of the child protection units and examining their
challenges and successes. The key findings included the continuing need to provide
police officers with training on age assessment guidelines, strengthen community
capacity to protect children and enhance monitoring of police check posts at the
district level and in remote areas. Ensuring appropriate financial support and
dedicated trained human resources remain challenging.
71. The country task force continued sensitizing and training key national
stakeholders on the protection of children in armed conflict, including on the
prevention of sexual violence, such as bacha bazi. This included one training session
for 30 teachers in Logar Province, two training sessions for 83 judges, prosecutors
and members of the Afghan National Defence and Security For ces in Kandahar
Province in 2019, and one training session for 30 human rights officers of the National
Directorate for Security in 2020. The country task force also supported the training
of 2,183 persons, including staff of non-governmental organizations, on monitoring
and reporting methodologies and age assessment guidelines in 2019. The country task
force reached over 90,000 men and women through awareness-raising programmes
__________________
12

21-09950

The policy was signed and launched in June 2021.
13/17

S/2021/662

on child protection and risk education, including through publications, billboa rds and
television and radio spots throughout the reporting period.
72. The country task force continued to advocate the implementation of laws and
policies to promote accountability for grave violations against children. As a result of
advocacy regarding allegations of sexual violence against boys in Logar Province, a
special committee was established by the Attorney General’s Office at the request of
the President to investigate, arrest and prosecute alleged perpetrators for sexual
violence against boys – allegations of which were first published in the media in
November 2019. The country task force supported the committee, including by
briefing them on child-friendly investigation methods, considering the principle of
the best interests of the child and the “do no harm” principle. The committee
continued to investigate the allegations; however, the COVID-19 pandemic and
related restrictions slowed the work of the investigation committee. On 14 July 2020,
the Attorney General’s Office informed the country task force that it had identified
21 suspects and arrested some perpetrators who had been sentenced to between 5 and
22 years of imprisonment. 13 The country task force advocated for the committee to
request that its mandate be broadened for it to become a permanent body to address
similar cases when they cannot be handled adequately at the provincial or local level.
73. In October 2020, following the launch of the Afghanistan peace negotiations,
the country task force developed a paper on the integration an d prioritization of child
protection issues in the peace process in Afghanistan based on the Practical Guidance
for Mediators to Protect Children in Situations of Armed Conflict published by the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and Armed C onflict. The paper was
shared with the Government and the Taliban, to promote child protection issues as
entry points and confidence-building measures in the peace negotiations. It was also
shared with other child protection actors to identify opportunitie s for those working
with either or both sides to assist in ensuring that these issues are raised at the
appropriate stages in the peace negotiations.
74. Positive developments led by the National Security Council were documented
with regard to the government system for documenting credible allegations of civilian
casualties, including child casualties, in order to harmonize information between
different parts of the security forces and other actors collecting such data and to
develop lessons learned. A working group was established and tasked with creating a
new mechanism across the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, responsible
for information-sharing, harmonization and response to incidents involving civilian
casualties. The working group, headed by the National Security Council and including
representatives from the security sector, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Center for Civilians
in Conflict and UNAMA, held its first meeting in December 2020.
75. Despite these developments, gaps remained in the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. A persistent concern was the absence of an effective
investigation and disciplinary mechanism for commanding and recruitment offic ers
found responsible for child recruitment and use, and for the falsification of national
identification cards (tazkera), which may lead to identity manipulation of underage
recruits, despite the criminalization of these acts in the revised Penal Code.
Widespread impunity continued, which, combined with the absence of systematic
referral pathways for the reintegration of children, as well as of handover protocols
for children formerly associated with armed forces and armed groups, for children
screened out through the child protection units and for children released from
detention facilities, contributes to exacerbating their vulnerabilities. Indeed, as a
__________________
13

14/17

At the time of writing the present report, the country task force had not yet independently
verified the arrests.
21-09950

S/2021/662

result, they are exposed to new grave violations, particularly recruitment and use. The
release of children and inadequate programmatic response by the Government for
their reintegration posed significant challenges to their protection and well -being in
the absence of a comprehensive reintegration framework and handover protocol. The
country task force initiated advocacy efforts with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
calling for the development of a national reintegration framework and handover
protocol. The Ministry’s response was positive; the approval of the Government’s
High Commission on Child Rights on the adoption of a handover protocol is required.
76. In addition, the country task force initiated discussions with the Government to
assess and support children and women in the juvenile rehabilitation centres and the
Kabul female detention centre as an initial step to assess the situation of individual
cases and facilitate the possible reintegration or repatriation of foreign nationals.
Furthermore, children arrested for alleged or actual association with armed groups
and detained on charges related to national security do not benefit from protection
afforded by international juvenile justice standards and political commitments made
by the Government, including the Paris Principles. A policy to treat these children in
line with international juvenile justice standards is needed, as foreseen in the action
plan and the road map towards compliance.
77. Moreover, children arrested for their alleged or actual association with armed
groups and detained on charges related to national security have been excluded f rom
presidential pardons, such as the special decree of the President granting pardons that
was issued in March 2020, which led to the release of detainees in order to decongest
detention facilities in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.

B.

International Forces
78. The Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict had planned an
official visit to Afghanistan in March 2020, notably to engage with government forces
and international forces on the protection of children in armed conflict, including on
the measures that they have taken to mitigate child casualties during military
operations. Owing to developments following the elections and the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic, the mission was postponed. In the light of the ongoin g
pandemic, in lieu of a visit, the Special Representative continued her engagement
remotely and held, in May 2020, a videoconference with senior representatives of the
NATO Resolute Support Mission and of the forces of the United States in Afghanistan
on measures taken by the international forces to mitigate child casualties during
military operations. Prior to that engagement, she also met with relevant counterparts
from the United States authorities in Washington, D.C., in December 2019 to, inter
alia, advocate stronger protection of children during military operations. In addition,
she strengthened her office’s partnership with NATO, including by cooperating
closely with the Senior Adviser on Children and Armed Conflict and seconding to
NATO headquarters technical expertise to further strengthen NATO activities on
children and armed conflict globally and in Afghanistan.
79. According to information received by the Special Representative, the
international forces continued to implement internal processes to minimize civilian
casualties during their operations, notably through the examination of all reports of
civilian casualties within 72 hours of receipt, and assess whether extraordinary
measures should be taken to continuously improve harm mitigation.

21-09950

15/17

S/2021/662

C.

Armed groups
80. Children continued to be recruited and used by armed groups, mostly by the
Taliban. Ending the recruitment and use of children by the Taliban has been a key
component of the ongoing human rights dialogue between UNAMA and the Taliban,
during which UNAMA discussed the continuing high number of child recruits within
the Taliban, as well as the possible adaptation and application within their ranks of
the national age assessment guidelines of the Government. UNAMA also shared the
above-mentioned paper on the inclusion of child protection issues in the peace process
with the Taliban negotiation team and will follow up with the Taliban at the
appropriate stages of the negotiations.

D.

Other advocacy initiatives
81. The Special Representative participated, along with the Co-Chairs of the
country task force, in a joint virtual briefing gathering the Groups of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict based in New York and Kabul, respectively, and the
Group of Friends of Afghanistan based in New York in October 20 20.

VI. Observations and recommendations
82. I am appalled by the continuing disturbing scale, severity and recurrence of
grave violations against children in Afghanistan, who continue to bear the brunt of
the armed conflict. I condemn these grave violations against children committed by
all parties to the conflict and urge all parties to abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
83. I continue to be extremely concerned by the sustained high lev el of child
casualties and urge all relevant parties to strengthen measures and systems in place to
mitigate these casualties, to refrain from using indirect fire systems in civilian populated areas and to cease the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
I further urge all relevant parties to immediately cease the targeting of civilians,
including children, and civilian objects, including attacks and threats of attacks on
medical and educational facilities and protected persons, and to also take the measures
necessary to cease indiscriminate attacks against them and ensure that they are not
used for military purposes. I call upon the relevant parties to ensure that children’s
access to health care and education is not impeded by military operat ions.
84. The vast majority of grave violations against children was committed by the
Taliban. I condemn the armed group’s practices and call upon the Taliban to swiftly
take all measures to halt the increased recruitment and use of children and abide by
national directives prohibiting the recruitment and use of children. I urge the Taliban
to actively prevent child casualties, to ensure that its directives and orders comply
with international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and to take
the steps necessary to ensure that those who commit grave violations against children
are held accountable.
85. I note and commend the efforts of the Government and its security forces to
reinforce the protection of children affected by armed conflict, sh owing their
commitment to abide by national and international law and to end and prevent grave
violations against children. I nevertheless call upon the Government to increase
efforts and the allocation of necessary resources, especially for the developmen t and
adoption of an action plan to halt and prevent the killing and maiming of children,
and to take further steps to implement the national policy on civilian casualty
prevention and mitigation; strengthen measures to investigate all incidents of conflic t16/17

21-09950

S/2021/662

related harm to civilians, including children; to ensure accountability; and to further
strengthen the efforts of the National Security Council and the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, especially the Afghan National Army, to systematically
investigate harm to civilians in conflict-related incidents.
86. I urge the international forces, as they withdraw, to remain in close collaboration
with the United Nations to ensure the continuity and sustainability of measures in
support of the commitment of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces,
including the Afghan National Army, to implement policies and measures to protect
civilians and minimize harm, especially to children, including by providing resources
and continuing to advise and train Afghan forces.
87. I welcome the sustained decrease in the numbers for recruitment and use by the
Afghan National Police and commend the Government for the progress made so far.
I encourage the Government to consolidate the gains made and to address the
remaining gaps, as well as to implement and abide by the directives prohibiting child
recruitment and use, and ensure the accountability of those commanders who abduct,
recruit, use and sexually exploit children. I urge the Parliament to adopt the Law on
the Protection of Child Rights, enacted in March 2019, to ensure its systematic
implementation and to establish effective investigation and disciplinary mechanisms
for those found responsible for child recruitment and use. I also call upon the
Government to develop an operational plan to implement the child protection policy
of the Ministry of Interior Affairs, which emphasizes the prohibition of use of children
in police stations, the establishment of an investigation department to enforce
accountability for alleged abuses of children, including bacha bazi, and the
establishment of social work positions in police units. Lastly, I call upon the
Government to adopt a standardized referral system for the reintegration of children
who have been separated from parties to the conflict, released from detention and/or
rejected from recruitment centres through the child protection units of the Afghan
National Police.
88. I urge the Government to release from detention the children held for their
alleged association with armed groups, in line with the Paris Principles, which it has
endorsed. In addition, children detained on charges related to national security should
be transferred to juvenile rehabilitation centres and have access to all services, in line
with international juvenile justice standards. I further call upon the Government to
include all children in the special decrees of the President releasing detainees in the
context of COVID-19.
89. I urge the parties and all stakeholders to ensure that appropriate child -specific
provisions and adequate resources are included in the Afghan peace talks and
encourage the use of the Practical Guidance for Mediators to Protect Children in
Situations of Armed Conflict.
90. I call upon donors to continue assisting the Governmen t in building on the
progress made in the implementation of the action plan and the road map towards
compliance to prevent child recruitment and use and in preparing and implementing
a long-term and comprehensive rehabilitation and reintegration strategy, including
funding support for related programmes.

21-09950

17/17
