VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Tbird Committee

151

tative, in particular by not allowing the Special Representative to visit the country,

40/142.

Taking into account the specific and detailed allegations
ofgrave and extensive violations ofhuman rights to which
the Special Representative refers in his interim report on
the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran 188 and to which the Govemment of that country has
not responded,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature and ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Mindfu/ of the fact that the year 1986 marks the thirtyfifth anniversary of the entry into force ofthe Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that genocide is a crime under
intemational law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the
United Nations,
Expressing its conviction that implementation of the
provisions ofthe Convention by ali States is necessary for
the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
Bearing in mind that the fortieth anniversary of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War is
being commemorated in 1985,
1. Once again strongly condemns the crime of genocide;
2. Reaffirms the necessity ofintemational co-operation
in order to liberate mankind from such an odious scourge;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the fact that many
States have ratified the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide or have acceded
thereto;
4. Urges those States that have not yet become parties
to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without
further delay;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the status of the Convention;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider at its forty-second session the question of promoting
the full implementation of the Convention and to submit
its observations and proposals thereon, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

Endorsing the conclusion of the Special Representative
that continued monitoring ofthe human rights situation in
the Islamic Republic of Iran is called for,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe interim report of
the Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic oflran and ofthe general observations contained
therein; 189

2. Expresses its deep concern over the specific and
detailed allegations of violations of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran to which the Special Representative refers in his interim report, and, in particular, those
related to the right to life, such as summary and arbitrary
executions, the right to freedom from torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the right
to liberty and security ofperson and to freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention, the right to a fair tria!, the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion and to freedom of expression, and the right of religious minorities to
profess and practise their own religion;
3. Endorses the conclusion of the Special Representative that, on the basis of the information available to him,
specific and detailed allegations concerning grave violations of human rights cannot be dismissed, and urgently
appeals to the Govemment ofthe Islamic Republic oflran
to respond satisfactorily to these allegations;
4. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
lran, as a State party to the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 7 to respect and to ensure to ali
individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in that Covenant;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study carefully the final report of the Special Representative, as well as other information pertaining to the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and
to consider further steps for securing effective respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali in that
country;

6. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to extend its full co-operation to the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights, and, in
particular, to permit him to visit that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary
assistance to the Special Representative;
8. Decides to continue its examination of the situation
of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is,
during its forty-first session in order to examine this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985
188 A/40/874

Status of tbe Convention on tbe Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

40/143. Summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assemb/y,_
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 6 which states that every human being has
the right to life, liberty and security of person,
Having regard to the provisions of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7 which states that
every human being has the inherent right to life, that this
right shall be protected by law and that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling a/so its resolution 34/175 of 17 December
1979, in which it reaffirmed that mass and flagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the Commission on Human Rights to
take timely and effective action in existing and future cases
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 36/22 of 9 November
1981, in which it condemned the practice of summary or
arbitrary executions, and its resolutions 37 /182 of 17
December 1982, 38/96 of 16 December 1983 and 39/ I I O
of 14 December 1984,
18 9 lh1d .. sect. 11.
