United Nations

A/RES/64/211

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 55 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2009
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/64/422/Add.3)]

64/211. Creation of a global culture of cybersecurity and taking
stock of national efforts to protect critical information
infrastructures
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/63 of 4 December 2000 and 56/121 of
19 December 2001 on combating the criminal misuse of information technologies,
57/239 of 20 December 2002 on the creation of a global culture of cybersecurity and
58/199 of 23 December 2003 on the creation of a global culture of cybersecurity and
the protection of critical information infrastructures,
Recalling also its resolutions 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December
1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000, 56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of
22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004, 60/45
of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007 and
63/37 of 2 December 2008 on developments with respect to information technologies
in the context of international security,
Recalling further the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003 (first phase) and in Tunis
from 16 to 18 November 2005 (second phase), 1
0F

Recognizing that confidence and security in the use of information and
communications technologies are among the main pillars of the information society
and that a robust global culture of cybersecurity needs to be encouraged, promoted,
developed and vigorously implemented,
Recognizing also the increasing contribution made by networked information
technologies to many of the essential functions of daily life, commerce and the
provision of goods and services, research, innovation and entrepreneurship, and to
the free flow of information among individuals and organizations, Governments,
business and civil society,

_______________
1

09-47449

See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

*0947449*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/211

Recognizing further that, in a manner appropriate to their roles, Governments,
business, organizations and individual owners and users of information technologies
must assume responsibility for and take steps to enhance the security of these
information technologies,
Recognizing the importance of the mandate of the Internet Governance Forum
as a multi-stakeholder dialogue to discuss various matters, including public policy
issues related to key elements of Internet governance in order to foster
sustainability, robustness, security, stability and development of the Internet, and
reiterating that all Governments should have an equal role and responsibility for
international Internet governance and for ensuring the stability, security and
continuity of the Internet,
Reaffirming the continuing need to enhance cooperation, to enable
Governments, on an equal footing, to carry out their roles and responsibilities in
international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet, but not the day-to-day
technical and operational matters that do not impact on international public policy
issues,
Recognizing that each country will determine its own critical information
infrastructures,
Reaffirming the need to harness the potential of information and
communications technologies to promote the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
recognizing that gaps in access to and use of information technologies by States can
diminish their economic prosperity, and reaffirming also the effectiveness of
cooperation in combating the criminal misuse of information technology and in
creating a global culture of cybersecurity,
Stressing the need for enhanced efforts to close the digital divide in order to
achieve universal access to information and communications technologies and to
protect critical information infrastructures by facilitating the transfer of information
technology and capacity-building to developing countries, especially the least
developed countries, in the areas of cybersecurity best practices and training,
Expressing concern that threats to the reliable functioning of critical
information infrastructures and to the integrity of the information carried over those
networks are growing in both sophistication and gravity, affecting domestic,
national and international welfare,
Affirming that the security of critical information infrastructures is a
responsibility Governments must address systematically and an area in which they
must lead nationally, in coordination with relevant stakeholders, who in turn must
be aware of relevant risks, preventive measures and effective responses in a manner
appropriate to their respective roles,
Recognizing that national efforts should be supported by international
information-sharing and collaboration, so as to effectively confront the increasingly
transnational nature of such threats,
Noting the work of relevant regional and international organizations on
enhancing cybersecurity, and reiterating their role in encouraging national efforts
and fostering international cooperation,
Noting also the 2009 report of the International Telecommunication Union on
securing information and communication networks and best practices for developing
a culture of cybersecurity, which focused on a comprehensive national approach to
2

A/RES/64/211

cybersecurity consistent with free speech, the free flow of information and due
process of law,
Recognizing that national efforts to protect critical information infrastructures
benefit from a periodic assessment of their progress,
1.
Invites Member States to use, if and when they deem appropriate, the
annexed voluntary self-assessment tool for national efforts to protect critical
information infrastructures in order to assist in assessing their efforts in this regard
to strengthen their cybersecurity, so as to highlight areas for further action, with the
goal of increasing the global culture of cybersecurity;
Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international
2.
organizations that have developed strategies to deal with cybersecurity and the
protection of critical information infrastructures to share their best practices and
measures that could assist other Member States in their efforts to facilitate the
achievement of cybersecurity by providing such information to the SecretaryGeneral for compilation and dissemination to Member States.
66th plenary meeting
21 December 2009

Annex
Voluntary self-assessment tool for national efforts to protect critical
information infrastructures 2
1F

Taking stock of cybersecurity needs and strategies
1.
Assess the role of information and communications technologies in your
national economy, national security, critical infrastructures (such as transportation,
water and food supplies, public health, energy, finance, emergency services) and
civil society.
2.
Determine the cybersecurity and critical information infrastructure protection
risks to your economy, national security, critical infrastructures and civil society that
must be managed.
3.
Understand the vulnerabilities of the networks in use, the relative levels of
threat faced by each sector at present and the current management plan; note how
changes in the economic environment, national security priorities and civil society
needs affect these calculations.
4.
Determine the goals of the national cybersecurity and critical information
infrastructure protection strategy; describe its goals, the current level of
implementation, measures that exist to gauge its progress, its relation to other
national policy objectives and how such a strategy fits within regional and
international initiatives.

_______________
2
This is a voluntary tool that may be used by Member States, in part or in its entirety, if and when they
deem appropriate, in order to assist in their efforts to protect their critical information infrastructures and
strengthen their cybersecurity.

3

A/RES/64/211

Stakeholder roles and responsibilities
5.
Determine key stakeholders with a role in cybersecurity and critical
information infrastructure protection and describe the role of each in the
development of relevant policies and operations, including:
•

National Government ministries or agencies, noting primary points of contact
and responsibilities of each;

•

Other government (local and regional) participants;

•

Non-governmental actors, including industry, civil society and academia;

•

Individual citizens, noting whether average users of the Internet have access to
basic training in avoiding threats online and whether there is a national
awareness-raising campaign regarding cybersecurity.

Policy processes and participation
6.
Identify formal and informal venues that currently exist for Governmentindustry collaboration in the development of cybersecurity and critical information
infrastructure protection policy and operations; determine participants, role(s) and
objectives, methods for obtaining and addressing input, and adequacy in achieving
relevant cybersecurity and critical information infrastructure protection goals.
7.
Identify other forums or structures that may be needed to integrate the
government and non-government perspectives and knowledge necessary to realize
national cybersecurity and critical information infrastructure protection goals.
Public-private cooperation
8.
Collect all actions taken and plans to develop collaboration between
government and the private sector, including any arrangements for informationsharing and incident management.
9.
Collect all current and planned initiatives to promote shared interests and
address common challenges among both critical infrastructure participants and
private-sector actors mutually dependent on the same interconnected critical
infrastructure.
Incident management and recovery
10. Identify the Government agency that serves as the coordinator for incident
management, including capability for watch, warning, response and recovery
functions; the cooperating Government agencies; non-governmental cooperating
participants, including industry and other partners; and any arrangements in place
for cooperation and trusted information-sharing.
11. Separately, identify national-level computer incident response capacity,
including any computer incident response team with national responsibilities and its
roles and responsibilities, including existing tools and procedures for the protection
of Government computer networks, and existing tools and procedures for the
dissemination of incident-management information.
12. Identify networks and processes of international cooperation that may enhance
incident response and contingency planning, identifying partners and arrangements
for bilateral and multilateral cooperation, where appropriate.

4

A/RES/64/211

Legal frameworks
13. Review and update legal authorities (including those related to cybercrime,
privacy, data protection, commercial law, digital signatures and encryption) that
may be outdated or obsolete as a result of the rapid uptake of and dependence upon
new information and communications technologies, and use regional and
international conventions, arrangements and precedents in these reviews. Ascertain
whether your country has developed necessary legislation for the investigation and
prosecution of cybercrime, noting existing frameworks, for example, General
Assembly resolutions 55/63 and 56/121 on combating the criminal misuse of
information technologies, and regional initiatives, including the Council of Europe
Convention on Cybercrime.
14. Determine the current status of national cybercrime authorities and procedures,
including legal authorities and national cybercrime units, and the level of
understanding among prosecutors, judges and legislators of cybercrime issues.
15. Assess the adequacy of current legal codes and authorities in addressing the
current and future challenges of cybercrime, and of cyberspace more generally.
16. Examine national participation in international efforts to combat cybercrime,
such as the round-the-clock Cybercrime Point of Contact Network.
17. Determine the requirements for national law enforcement agencies to
cooperate with international counterparts to investigate transnational cybercrime in
those instances in which infrastructure is situated or perpetrators reside in national
territory, but victims reside elsewhere.
Developing a global culture of cybersecurity
18. Summarize actions taken and plans to develop a national culture of
cybersecurity referred to in General Assembly resolutions 57/239 and 58/199,
including implementation of a cybersecurity plan for Government-operated systems,
national awareness-raising programmes, outreach programmes to, among others,
children and individual users, and national cybersecurity and critical information
infrastructure protection training requirements.

5
