A/74/753–S/2020/210

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2489 (2019), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report dated 10 December 2019 (A/74/582S/2019/935) and until the end of February 2020.

II. Relevant developments
3.
Uncertainties surrounding the electoral process and the resumption of talks
between the United States of America and the Taliban were at the forefront of political
developments in Afghanistan during the reporting period. On 18 February, the
Independent Election Commission announced that Ashraf Ghani had won a second
term as President, with 50.64 per cent of the votes. The results were rejected as
“illegal” by the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, who announced plans for the
formation of an alternative, “inclusive” government. Meanwhile, talks between the
United States and the Taliban resumed on 6 December. After a reduction in violence
beginning on 22 February, the two parties signed an agreement in Doha on
29 February on a timeline for the withdrawal of foreign troops and counter-terrorism
guarantees. In parallel, Afghanistan and the United States signed a joint declaration
in Kabul, reaffirming commitments to continue supporting Afghanistan. These
developments should help to pave the way for intra-Afghan negotiations. The security
situation remained volatile, with a high number of security incidents, in particular in
the southern, northern and eastern regions, before a period of reduction in violence.
For 2019, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)

20-03718 (E)

230320

*2003718*

A/74/753
S/2020/210

documented 10,392 civilian casualties, a 5 per cent decrease compared with 2018.
The humanitarian situation remained dire.

A.

Political developments
4.
On 22 December, the Independent Election Commission announced the
preliminary results of the presidential election held on 28 September 2019, reporting
that Mr. Ghani had won 50.64 per cent of the votes, while Mr. Abdullah had secured
39.52 per cent. This followed a prolonged blockage by some presidential candidates
of the audit and recounting process and marked the start of a three-day period for
candidates to submit their complaints to the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission. The Commission registered a total of 16,545 complaints, primarily from
the teams of Mr. Abdullah (5,564), Gulbuddin Hekmatyar (3,711) and Mr. Ghani
(3,302).
5.
On 14 January, the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission announced
that its provincial offices had concluded the adjudication of complaints in all 34
provinces, rejecting 9,866 complaints (60 per cent) owing to a lack of evidence and
invalidating 109 polling stations. This marked the start of another three-day period
for the submission of appeals against the decisions taken.
6.
On 4 February, the Election Support Group, chaired by UNAMA and comprising
key electoral donors, issued a statement urging the electoral institutions to ensure
impartiality, transparency and compliance with electoral legislation. The Group called
upon the stakeholders to respect the independence of electoral institutions.
7.
On 5 February, the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission announced
seven decisions on the adjudication of 6,292 appeals, which were grouped into
categories. The decisions primarily related to complaints about 137,630 suspicious
votes, 102,012 votes allegedly cast outside polling hours, 2,423 polling stations where
voters’ biometrics were not captured and cases in which the number of voters in the
biometric devices differed from that on the paper results sheets. In accordance with
the Commission’s decisions, a special audit was ordered for 311 polling stations with
suspicious votes and 1,086 polling stations with out-of-hours votes, as well as a
recount at 298 polling stations where votes had not been biometrically verified. The
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission’s decisions directed the Independent
Election Commission to conduct the special audits and formally announce the results.
8.
Following these decisions, national observer organizations and candidate
observers expressed concerns regarding the clarity and the legal basis for the
decisions. The teams of Mr. Abdullah, Mr. Hekmatyar and Mr. Nabil rejected the
rulings of the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission, stating that decisions
were made under political pressure. Dissent among several commissioners of the
Commission over the methodology became public, which further eroded public
confidence in the process. Several presidential tickets, including that of Mr. Abdullah,
refused to participate in the special audit and recount of disputed votes and questioned
the procedures.
9.
After the finalization of the special audit and recount on 16 and 17 February, the
Independent Election Commission announced on 18 February that Mr. Ghani had won
a second term as President with 50.64 per cent of the total votes. The runner-up,
Mr. Abdullah, received 39.52 per cent of the total votes. The Commission confirmed
1.8 million valid votes, of which 31.5 per cent had been cast by women. The
announcement followed a long process that lasted more than four months after the
presidential elections held on 28 September 2019.

2/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

10. Following the announcement, Mr. Ghani stated his readiness to form a strong
Government and work for unity, declaring that the participation of women would be
vital. Mr. Abdullah rejected the results as “illegal”, proclaimed his Stability and
Convergence ticket as the winner based on “clean votes” and announced his intention
to form an alternative, “inclusive” government. Subsequently, his ticket began
announcing the appointment of some provincial governors. International partners,
including the United Nations, called upon stakeholders to exercise restraint and
address grievances through dialogue and respect for the constitutional order.
11. Momentum towards a political settlement to end the conflict accelerated during
the reporting period, bolstered by national and international efforts. Official talks
between the United States and the Taliban resumed on 6 December in Doha. On
12 December, the United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, announced a “brief pause” in the talks, underlining
that the “Taliban must show they are willing and able to respond to Afghan desire for
peace”. Talks resumed in mid-January following reported internal consultation among
the Taliban leadership around the details for a propo sed reduction in violence.
12. Mr. Khalilzad continued his engagement with Afghan and regional stakeholders.
During his visits to Kabul on 17 and 18 December, 1 and 2 February and from 18 to
27 February, he gave briefings to Mr. Ghani, Mr. Abdullah and oth er Afghan political
actors on the negotiations in Doha and the efforts to reduce violence and pave the way
for intra-Afghan negotiations. He emphasized that Afghans should continue to focus
on bringing together an inclusive negotiating team in preparation for intra-Afghan
negotiations. Mr. Khalilzad also visited Pakistan on 13 December, 31 January and
17 and 18 February, where he met the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Shah Mahmood
Qureshi, the Chief of Army Staff, Qamar Javed Bajwa, and other officials to di scuss
mutual efforts to support a reduction in violence and a comprehensive ceasefire in
pursuit of intra-Afghan negotiations.
13. The prospect of a reduction in violence compared with a ceasefire prompted a
range of reactions. Mr. Ghani’s spokesperson stated that a ceasefire was a
precondition for the commencement of intra-Afghan negotiations, while Mr. Abdullah
stated that a reduction in violence would be acceptable, provided that a ceasefire
could be addressed in the negotiations. On 11 February, Mr. Ghani welcomed the
developments in the talks between the United States and the Taliban and noted that
Afghanistan would “manage the next steps in a manner that positively supports the
overall peace process”. Mr. Abdullah also welcomed developments in the talks on the
reduction of violence and expressed hope that the Taliban would make use of that
opportunity. On 18 February, the Government publicly committed itself to a reduction
in violence and expressed the need for a ceasefire during intra -Afghan negotiations.
Discussions to form an inclusive negotiating team continued with the Government
and other political actors, with parties promoting their plans for intra -Afghan
negotiations.
14. International partners continued to reaffirm their commitment to peace in
Afghanistan. On 28 January, the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), Jens Stoltenberg, reiterated the organization ’s commitment to
continuing to support the creation of conditions for peace in Afghanistan. Meeting in
Brussels on 30 January, European Union and NATO member States reiterated their
support for the peace process and inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations. On
13 February, NATO allies and partner nations meeting in Brussels discussed the
Resolute Support Mission and expressed their “firm commitment to Afghanistan’s
long-term security and stability”. Mr. Stoltenberg stressed that the focus would
remain on the provision of training and financial support to the Afghan security
forces. At the Munich Security Conference held on 15 February, Mr. Stoltenberg
acknowledged the possibility of adjusting NATO force levels to help to pave the way
20-03718

3/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

for intra-Afghan negotiations, if the Taliban demonstrated the will and ability to
reduce violence and made compromises for peace.
15. On 21 February, the Secretary of State of the United States, Mike Pompeo,
announced that United States negotiators had come to an understanding with the
Taliban on a “significant and nationwide reduction of violence across Afghanistan ”.
He stated that, upon completion of the period of reduction in violence, the signing of
an agreement between the United States and the Taliban was expected. The Taliban
issued a statement confirming the agreement and providing instructions to its fighters,
also noting that the parties would “structure a path for intra-Afghan negotiations”. On
21 February, Mr. Ghani welcomed the reduction in violence and assured the Afghan
people that the country’s security forces would abide by the agreement, adding that
the Taliban’s acceptance of a reduction in violence was “an important step towards
reaching a ceasefire and restoring sustainable peace”. On 22 February, the period of
reduced violence started.
16. On 29 February in Doha, the United States and the Taliban signed the Agreement
for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, which outlined a reduction in the number of
United States forces to 8,600 troops and a proportional reduction in the number of
coalition forces in 135 days, followed by a drawdown of all international forces within
another nine and a half months, conditional upon the Taliban’s adherence to the
various counter-terrorism commitments. On the same day, in Kabul, a Joint
Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of
America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan was released, in which agreement was
noted between Afghanistan, the United States and coalition partners that, subject to
the Taliban’s fulfilment of its commitments under the agreement between the United
States and the Taliban, the current levels of international military forces were no
longer necessary to achieve security objectives. The signatories to the joint
declaration also reaffirmed the commitment of the United States to supporting the
Afghan security forces and other government institutions. In both documents the
efforts of the United States to facilitate dialogue with Afghanistan and the Taliban on
confidence-building measures were noted, including the possible release of prisoners
and detainees, ahead of intra-Afghan negotiations, as well as the intention for
diplomatic efforts to be undertaken with regard to pote ntially lifting Security Council
sanctions on Taliban members. The date and modalities of a permanent ceasefire are
expected to be discussed in intra-Afghan negotiations.
17. Local movements continued their advocacy for peace. Throughout the reporting
period, community representatives, activists and grass-roots movements facilitated
consultations with local communities and organized events to rally support for an
inclusive peace process. On 24 December, 27 members of the People’s Peace
Movement were abducted in Farah Province while engaging in a series of local
consultations and were released after two days. On 16 February, in Ghazni Province,
members of the People’s Peace Movement convened a rally in support of peace, which
was attended by 400 people from Pashtun, Hazara and Tajik communities. The
participants called for durable peace, a ceasefire and an end to violence.
18. UNAMA continued its engagement with national, regional and international
stakeholders to advocate a reduction of violence and to build momentum for
intra-Afghan negotiations. On 28 December, my Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Tadamichi Yamamoto, met in Doha with representatives of the Taliban
to discuss the peace process, protection of civilians and humanitarian access. On
17 January, he convened a group of special envoys and representatives on Afghanistan
in Doha to take stock of international support for the peace process and next steps.
On visits to the Islamic Republic of Iran from 26 to 28 January and Pakistan from
16 to 19 February, he held discussions on the peace process with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mohammad Javad Zarif, and the
4/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, as well as other
officials.
19. During the reporting period, UNAMA sustained its support for subnational
authorities and communities on conflict resolution through eight local peace
initiatives. In Helmand Province, UNAMA provided a platform for dialogue between
religious scholars and women to promote local efforts to reduce violence and enhance
the role of women, young people and minorities in support of peace. In Herat,
Badghis, Ghor and Farah Provinces, UNAMA worked with more than 1,000 women
over a five-month period to help to formulate their vision for peace. On 9 January,
100 participants released a 13-point declaration, highlighting the need to preserve the
gains of the past 18 years, address past atrocities, ensure a victim-centred peace
process and establish a monitoring mechanism for any eventual peace agreement.
From 15 to 17 December, UNAMA co-hosted a workshop in Kabul with Afghan
women on strategic engagement in a peace process. On 12 February, it facilitated
dialogue with the National Masculinity Alliance, a network of civil society
representatives, religious leaders, government officials and the private sector.
Participants agreed to mobilize a network of male champions, including religious
leaders, to promote gender equality and strengthen the effective participation of
women in the peace process. On 20 February, UNAMA facilitated consultations with
government and civil society leaders, including women activists, to support
leadership roles for women in the Government and future intra -Afghan negotiations.
20. A series of new government appointments was made. On 14 January, Mr. Ghani
appointed a new acting Deputy Minister of the Interior, Chief of Staff of the Ministry
of Defence and Head of the Education Department of the Ministry of the Interior. On
21 January, he appointed a new acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mohamm ad
Haroon Chakhansuri. An acting Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation, Mohammad
Yama Shams, and an acting Minister of Energy and Water, Khan Mohammad Takal,
were announced as well. On 30 December, the parliament approved the State Ministry
of Peace as an independent government entity. On 8 January, Mr. Ghani signed a
decree instructing the Ministry to coordinate peace-related issues across all relevant
ministries. On 22 January, the parliament approved the national budget for the 2020
fiscal year, which included funding for the Ministry. The parliament also established
a peace committee to support peace efforts, which held its first meeting on 14 January.

B.

Security
21. The security situation remained volatile. Between 8 November and 6 February,
UNAMA recorded 4,907 security-related incidents, a similar number as during the
same period in the previous year. The highest number of incidents occurred in the
southern region, followed by the northern and eastern regions, which together
accounted for 68 per cent of all incidents. The most active areas of conflict were
Kandahar, Helmand, Nangarhar and Balkh Provinces. Fighting decreased at the end
of 2019 and in early 2020, in line with seasonal trends during the winter months. A
nationwide reduction in violence commenced on 22 February, as a result of talks
between the United States and the Taliban, and in consultation with the Government
of Afghanistan.
22. Established trends remain unchanged, with 2,811 armed clashes accounting for
57 per cent of all incidents, representing a 4 per cent decrease compared with the
same period in 2019. The use of improvised explosive devices remained the second
highest type of incident, with a 21 per cent increase compared with the same period
in 2019, while suicide attacks decreased by 25 per cent. The 330 air strikes by Afghan
and international military air forces during the reporting period represented an 18 per

20-03718

5/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

cent decrease compared with the same period in 2019. Helmand, Kandahar and Farah
Provinces accounted for 44 per cent of air strikes.
23. On 31 December, the Taliban reportedly took control of Darzab district in
Jawzjan Province following the withdrawal of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. The Taliban also temporarily captured Arghandab district in Zabul
Province, while the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces recaptured
Guzargahi Nur district in Baghlan Province, which had been under Taliban control
since September 2019.
24. High-profile attacks by anti-government elements continued, with 8 suicide
attacks recorded during the reporting period, compared with 31 in the previous period
and 12 in the same period in 2019. Of those, the majority targeted the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and international military forces. On 11 December, the
Taliban launched a complex attack against the Bagram military air base by detonating
a large suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device. This attack coincided with
resumed talks between the United States and the Taliban. The Taliban also deployed
suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices against Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces installations in Kandahar, Helmand and Balkh Provinces. On
8 February, in Nangarhar Province, an individual wearing an Afghan National Army
uniform opened fire on international military forces, killing two United States soldiers
and one Afghan National Army soldier. A suicide attack targeting a military academy
in Kabul on 11 February, the first major attack in the city in months, killed at least 6
people and wounded more than 10. There were no claims of responsibility for either
attack.
25. Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-KP) came under sustained
pressure in its strongholds in eastern Afghanistan. Reportedly, over 1,400 ISIL-KP
fighters and affiliates have surrendered since October, among them women and
children. While ISIL-KP was largely expelled from Nangarhar Province in November
2019, it reportedly continues to have a presence in pockets of western Kunar Province.
During the reporting period, 49 incidents were attributed to ISIL-KP compared with
194 incidents in the previous period and 68 in the same period in 2019. While there
were no high-profile attacks attributed to, or claimed by, ISIL-KP, its potential for
conducting future attacks, including in major cities, remains a threat.
26. On 24 November, a United Nations staff member was killed and two others were
injured when an improvised explosive attached to their vehicle detonated in Kabul.
There were 12 other incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including one involving an improvised explosive device, four
incidents of intimidation and six criminal-related incidents. On 4 December, the head
of a Japanese non-governmental organization, along with five Afghans, was shot and
killed in Jalalabad. On 27 December, in the city of Herat, two armed men assassinated
two guards from a private security company contracted to provide unar med security
services at the United Nations compound.

C.

Regional cooperation
27. Afghanistan continued its engagement with the region through multilateral
forums. On 9 December, the Government of Turkey hosted the eighth Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference, at which Mr. Ghani presented a series of steps for the
advancement of intra-Afghan talks. In the subsequent Istanbul Declaration, the
participating States and partners reiterated their commitment to revitalizing the peace
process. They adopted the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process working guidelines and
implementation plans for confidence-building measures, endorsed the establishment
of a new confidence-building measure on agriculture development and expanded the

6/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

confidence-building measure on disaster management to include environmental
protection. A proposal to establish a confidence-building measure on the
empowerment of women was also supported. Tajikistan agreed to be the Co -Chair,
with Afghanistan, of the 2020 ministerial conference and to host it.
28. On the margins of the conference, Afghanistan, the United States and
Uzbekistan inaugurated a trilateral format to discuss issues of common interest and
cooperation. Inaugural discussions were focused on establishing a strategic
partnership between Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, bilateral cooperation on trade,
transit and investment, and United States support for regional connectivity and trade.
29. On 14 January, the port of Gwadar in Pakistan officially started taking cargo
under the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement, with an initial consignment
unloaded and transported to Afghanistan through the Chaman border crossing in
Balochistan Province. This followed the official opening of the port for commercial
shipping in October 2019, as a component of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.
On 4 February, the Government of India allocated $13.9 million for the further
development of the port of Chabahar in the Islamic Republic of Iran, with some cargo
from India already having been delivered to Afghanistan through the port.
30. Afghanistan continued to expand its engagement with Central Asian States. On
28 January, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan attended a meeting
in Berlin hosted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germ any, Heiko Maas, along
with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan and the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for the launch of the Green Central Asia
initiative. As part of a strategy on Central Asia adopted by the European Council in
2019, the initiative supports regional dialogue on climate change and associated risks,
thus fostering further regional integration between the six countries involved.
31. On 1 February, Mr. Ghani met the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan,
Rashid Meredov, in Kabul to discuss bilateral relations, peace efforts and connectivity
projects between the two countries, including the Turkmenistan -AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project and the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan
electricity transmission project. After the inauguration of the gas pipeline in
Afghanistan in February 2018, challenges continued to be faced in its construction
owing to political instability and security challenges.
32. On 2 February, the Special Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran to Afghanistan,
Ebrahim Taherian, met Mr. Ghani, Mr. Abdullah, the former President, Hamid Karzai,
and the National Security Adviser, Hamdullah Mohib, in Kabul. Discussions were
focused on bilateral relations, including economic cooperation, counter-terrorism and
the fight against extremism and drug trafficking. The Office of the President
communicated that both sides had agreed to an expansion of bilateral ties.
33. On 6 February, Mr. Ghani laid the foundation stone for the Central Asia-South
Asia power project in Surobi district, Kabul Province. The ambassadors of Pakistan,
Tajikistan and Turkmenistan attended, since the project links Central and South Asia.
The project, which is estimated to be completed in 2022, is aimed at transmitting
1,300 MW of electricity from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, through Afghanistan, to
Pakistan. Construction is ongoing in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, with support from
the World Bank.
34. On 11 and 12 February, a joint Afghanistan-Turkmenistan workshop on ensuring
the security of regional infrastructure projects was held in Turkmenistan. The
workshop was part of the confidence-building measure on regional infrastructure of
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and was supported by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. Discussions were focused on the advancement of regional
20-03718

7/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

infrastructure, including the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
project and the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan electricity transmission project.
35. On 12 February, in a joint statement, members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization expressed concern about the military and political situation in
Afghanistan, including the presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
terrorist groups. They underlined the link between the terrorist threat and drug
production and trafficking and welcomed the efforts of the international community
to secure peace.

III. Human rights
36. UNAMA released its 2019 annual report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict on 22 February. Since systematic documentation began in 2009, UNAMA has
documented more than 100,000 civilian casualties, with more than 35,000 killed and
65,000 injured. The Mission documented 10,392 civilian casualties in 2019 (3,403
killed and 6,989 injured), the sixth year in a row with more than 10,000 documented
civilian casualties. This represents a 5 per cent decrease in comparison with 2018.
The reduction was driven by a decrease in civilian casualties attributed to ISIL-KP.
Civilian casualties attributed to the other parties, in particular to the Taliban and
international military forces, increased. Women and children represented 42 per cent
of the civilian casualties. In January, UNAMA documented a significant decrease in
civilian casualties in comparison with the same period in 2019.
37. Most civilian casualties (62 per cent) continued to be caused by anti-government
elements, 47 per cent attributed to the Taliban, 12 per cent to ISIL-KP and the
remainder to undetermined and other anti-government elements. Pro-government
forces caused 28 per cent of civilian casualties (including 8 per cent by international
military forces). UNAMA documented an 18 per cent increase in civilian casualties
attributed to international military forces. Civilian casualties caused by the Afghan
National Security and Defence Forces increased by 3 per cent. The remaining civilian
casualties resulted from incidents that could not be attributed to either
anti-government elements or pro-government forces, including civilian casualties
caused by crossfire between the parties to the conflict.
38. Suicide and non-suicide improvised explosive devices remained the leading
cause of civilian casualties, representing 42 per cent of the total, followed by ground
engagements (29 per cent) and aerial operations (10 per cent). In 2019, UNAMA
documented a 24 per cent increase in civilian casualties from non-suicide improvised
explosive devices by anti-government elements in comparison with 2018. Civilian
casualties from pro-government aerial and search operations reached record high
levels, with a 3 and a 2 per cent increase, respectively, in comparison with 2018.
UNAMA also documented the continued deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
objects by anti-government elements, including electoral officials and election related facilities, judges, prosecutors, health-care workers and aid workers, as well as
continued attacks against the Shi’a Muslim population.
39. Between 1 October and 31 December, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 687 grave
violations affecting 653 children (186 girls and 467 boys), mainly attributed to the
Taliban, the Afghan National Army and ISIL-KP. Some 237 incidents resulted in the
killing of 214 children and the maiming of 405 children (185 girls and 434 boys). The
task force attributed 324 child casualties to armed opposition groups and 183 to
pro-government forces. In addition, the task force attributed 81 child casualties to
armed opposition groups and pro-government forces. Some 7 children were injured

8/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

after cross-border shelling from Pakistan, and 24 child casualties could not be
attributed to a specific party to the conflict.
40. The task force verified six instances of the recruitment and use of children by
the Taliban, involving 19 boys aged between 10 and 17 years, of whom 18 performed
a combat role and one a support role. The task force verified two incidents of sexual
violence against children, involving 10 boys (attributed to the Taliban) and 1 girl
(attributed to the Afghan National Police).
41. Some 18 attacks affected schools and related personnel, a slight decrease
compared with the 25 incidents in the previous quarter. Of the 18 incidents, 9 were
attributed to the Taliban, 2 to ISIL-KP, 2 to undetermined anti-government elements,
2 to the National Directorate for Security, 1 to the Afghan National Army, 1 to
international military forces and 1 to cross-border shelling from Pakistan.
42. The task force verified 10 attacks against hospitals and protected personnel, a
decrease compared with the previous reporting period (26 attacks). Attacks were
attributed to the Taliban (eight) and ISIL-KP and the Afghan National Army (one
each) and included the intentional killing or injury of health -care personnel, threats,
intimidation, abduction, damage, looting, pillaging and deliberate targeting. The task
force also verified the military use of a clinic by the Afghan National Army.
43. In December, UNAMA organized activities as part of the global 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-Based Violence campaign throughout the country, including
radio broadcasts in Kandahar and Helmand Provinces, an event with Ulema and civil
society in Bamyan Province, and training in cooperation with the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission in Kunar Province. The United Nations
Children’s Fund also supported activities in Herat Province aimed at engaging
religious leaders in mainstreaming messages against gender-based-violence in
mosques.
44. In January, the Office of the Attorney General reported that during the previous
fiscal year some 2,975 cases of violence against women and girls had been registered,
a slight increase from the 2,701 cases registered in the fiscal year before that. Fewer
than half of these cases resulted in convictions, while 814 were withdrawn by
survivors, 17 were closed owing to a lack of evidence and 733 are in process.
45. At the inaugural meeting of the support committee of the Sexual Harassment
Complaints Commission of the Ministry of the Interior, held on 21 December, the
Ministry reported no sexual harassment complaints since 21 March, compared with
four cases from 21 March 2018 to 20 March 2019. On 12 February, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission released a report on the harassment of
women in the security and defence sector. Of the 2,272 female staff of the Afghan
National Army, Afghan National Police and National Directorate for Security
surveyed, 84.5 per cent reported feeling safe at work, while 6.6 per cent reported
experiencing harassment and 6.2 per cent reported leaving their jobs owing to
harassment by colleagues.
46. On 15 January, the President issued a decree aimed at reforming the penitentiary
system. According to the decree, the General Directorate of Priso ns and Detention
Centres will be detached from the Ministry of the Interior and become an independent
civilian department. All lock-ups, detention facilities and prisons currently under the
auspices of the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of
Justice and the National Directorate for Security will be placed under the Directorate,
which has the mandate to define the responsibilities of places of detention.
47. Media workers and human rights defenders continue to be affected by
intimidation and violence. During the reporting period, three journalists (including
one woman) received threats from anti-government elements, while another was
20-03718

9/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

injured in an explosion in Helmand Province. In 2019, the Government and Media
Joint Committee reported 116 cases of violence against journalists and media
workers, including 10 killed and 21 injured, indicating a 41 per cent decrease
compared with 2018. The Committee’s regulation for the protection of journalists and
media workers was endorsed on 10 February by the Cabinet. Still to be published in
the official gazette, the regulation was welcomed by advocacy groups.
48. On 18 February, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
released a report confirming credible evidence of sexual abuse in schools and other
locations in Logar Province. Five human rights defenders involved in researching the
practice of bacha bazi in the province left Afghanistan because of serious threats
received from both government and non-government actors. Investigations by the
Office of the Attorney General into the allegations of bacha bazi reportedly led to the
arrest of 8 of the 18 suspects and a request to the International Criminal Police
Organization for the arrest of three other suspects who had fled the country. Seven
other suspects remain at large.
49. UNAMA organized nine events in eight provinces on 10 December to mark
International Human Rights Day. The events brought together the media, human
rights defenders and government counterparts to promote the universality of human
rights. They were attended by 576 participants, of which 199 were women. In January,
UNAMA facilitated a three-day workshop for commissioners of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, with a view to discussing opportunities for
their engagement on issues related to peace, human rights and transitional justice,
including victims’ perspectives on the current public discourse.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
50. UNAMA continued to coordinate with the Government and donors, including
potential hosts, in preparation for the 2020 ministerial pledging conference on
Afghanistan. The conference is to determine donor funding for the final four years of
the Transformation Decade (2015–2024), aimed at establishing Afghan self-reliance.
At the most recent pledging conference, held in Brussels in 2016, donors committed
$15.2 billion. On 17 December, the third quarterly report on the Geneva Mutual
Accountability Framework was published following extensive consultations with
donors. On 7 January, the Ministry of Finance agreed to work on an annual Geneva
Mutual Accountability Framework report that encapsulates progress on all 24
indicators covering, inter alia, political, development and anti-corruption thematic
areas.
51. The World Bank, in its report on development in Afghanistan issued on
22 January, noted that the country’s economy grew by an estimated 2.9 per cent in
2019, driven mainly by strong agricultural growth following recovery from drought
and the impact of political uncertainty dampening private confidence and investment.
It noted the need for the Government to accelerate improvements in b usiness
environment and anti-corruption reforms to boost investor confidence. As growth is
expected to be modest in 2020, Afghanistan will remain heavily dependent on aid.
52. The Government continued to implement governance reforms. On 19 January,
the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission launched its
strategic plan for 2020–2025 for an efficient and impartial civil service that advances
economic development goals. As at 11 February, the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance has given briefings to local authorities in 28 of the 34 provinces on the
law on local councils, in which future council elections are defined and local council
oversight of subnational administrations is facilitated.

10/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

53. The output of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre remained low, consistent with
the previous reporting period. From 1 December to 16 February, the Centre’s primary
court adjudicated three cases and its appeal court adjudicated seven cases. This
brought the total number of cases adjudicated by the Centre since its inception in 2016
to 68, with 260 defendants at the primary court resulting in 208 convictions and 50
acquittals. Since its establishment, the appeal court has adjudicated 59 cases with 193
defendants, convicting 174 and acquitting 19 others. On 15 January, the appeal court
affirmed the convictions of seven former commissioners of the Independent Election
Commission and three former commissioners of the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission, who had been found guilty of altering vote counts during
the 2018 parliamentary elections. The commissioners had appealed the conviction by
arguing that it had been politically motivated.
54. Limited progress was made in improving the cooperation of law enforcement
authorities in corruption-related prosecutions. The reform of the Major Crimes Task
Force was not finished, leaving the Anti-Corruption and Justice Centre without a
functioning police component. On 24 December, the Office of the Attorney General
and the Ministry of the Interior established the Arrest Warrants Joint Committee to
improve the execution of outstanding arrest warrants. Of the 255 outstanding arrest
warrants and summonses related to serious corruption cases, only 94 have been
processed to date.
55. The 2017 National Anti-Corruption Strategy expired on 31 December 2019
without a successor document, leaving Afghanistan without a framework document
for addressing corruption. While the High Council on Governance, Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption increased the frequency of meetings and was convened three times
during the reporting period, with Mr. Ghani in the chair, it did not prepare grounds
for a new strategy. After presentation in October 2019, the 2020 interim draft
anti-corruption reform acceleration plan was shelved by the High Council without
adoption. In January 2020, Mr. Ghani tasked a technical committee composed of
representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the Office of the Attorney General, the
Office of the Ombudsperson and a civil society representative, Integrity Watch
Afghanistan, with assessing the impact of the expired strategy.
56. On 16 and 17 December, the Supreme Court organized the first subnational
follow-up conference on the 2018 Penal Code. Participants gathered lessons learned
from the implementation of the Code. From 14 to 31 December, UNAMA provided
mentoring to strengthen the capacity of the Office of the Attorney General ’s
international crimes department to investigate cases of serious conflict-related human
rights violations. The department is investigating some 20 cases, none of which have
resulted in an indictment at present.

V. Humanitarian assistance
57. Some 9.4 million people are estimated to need humanitarian and protection
assistance in 2020, up from 6.3 million in 2019. This increase is due to ongoing
conflict and an expansion of the scope of needs analysis to include acute humanitarian
needs driven by protracted crises and the lack of recovery, beyond immediate shocks.
Between 11 November and 18 February, more than 42,000 persons were newly
displaced by conflict, increasing the total number who had fled their homes since the
start of 2019 to more than 463,000. More than half of those (58 per cent) were
children. An estimated 4 million persons have been displaced since 2012, living with
limited access to basic services, often in informal settlements, and with little desire
or opportunity to return to their homes.

20-03718

11/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

58. The conflict continued to generate high levels of demand for trauma services.
From 11 November to 18 February, more than 18,500 people were treated for conflictrelated traumatic injuries, a 16 per cent increase compared with the same period in
the previous year. One in three trauma cases involved a woman or a child. Nearly
390,000 pregnant or lactating women and children benefited from essential health
services and health education in 2019. From 11 November to 18 February, health
partners provided medical assistance to over 52,000 persons, 62 per cent of whom
were women and girls. Over 129,000 women and girls had access to reproductive
health services, around 6,400 of whom received sanitary items to meet their basic
dignity needs. In addition, 6,367 survivors of gender-based violence had access to
gender-based violence prevention and response services in 26 of the 34 provinces.
59. Across Afghanistan, 25 provinces are above the emergency threshold for acute
malnutrition, with over 3 million women and children projected to be acutely
malnourished in 2020. Millions are still struggling to recover after the drought i n
2018 and 2019. Until the end of March 2020, 14.3 million people are projected to
experience crisis and emergency levels of food insecurity. During 2019, nutrition
cluster partners treated more than 230,000 children with severe acute malnutrition. In
formerly drought-affected areas, 16,500 persons were provided with food between
1 November and 31 January, while one member of each family participated in asset
creation activities, and 28,000 displaced persons in Qala-e Naw, Badghis Province,
received cash transfers.
60. A debt crisis has emerged among those affected by the drought in the west in
2018 and 2019, with figures showing that it will now take an average of 16 years for
internally displaced persons returning to Badghis Province, one of the provinces hit
hardest by the drought, to repay what they had borrowed during the time when they
were displaced. Between December 2019 and March 2020, the United Nations
expects to reach 718,851 persons (102,693 households) in 16 provinces with wheat
production packages (seeds, fertilizer and training) in time for the wheat -planting
season. An additional 10,500 persons (1,500 households) are being provided with
home gardening packages. Moreover, the United Nations is also planning cash-forwork activities between January and March 2020 for 14,000 persons (2,000
households) in Daykundi, Farah and Kunar Provinces.
61. Despite security and access challenges, in the final quarter of 2019 humanitarian
organizations were able to reach 395 of the 401 districts (98 per cent) with assistance.
To help the most vulnerable families to get through the winter, the United Nations
and partners distributed 41,000 tonnes of food and $3.3 million in cash to 1.89 million
persons during the reporting period. Of the 95,000 households requiring specialized
winterization assistance (mostly assistance with heating), partners had reached 43,898
persons by 31 January. Negotiating humanitarian access has been especially arduous,
with the increased levy demands from anti-government elements.
62. A total of 116,525 undocumented persons and refugee returnees arrived in
Afghanistan between 16 November and 18 February. That included 2,258
undocumented returnees from Pakistan and 104,476 from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and 8,904 assisted and deported returnees from other countries. During the same
period, 519 refugee returnees came from Pakistan, 333 from the Islamic Republic of
Iran and 35 from other countries. In 2019, there was a decrease in the number of
undocumented returnees and registered refugees from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Pakistan compared with 2018, while there was an increase in those returning from
Turkey (6,720 during the reporting period, with a total of 25,000 during 2019). During
my visit to Pakistan from 16 to 19 February, I attended an event on the theme
“International conference on 40 years of hosting Afghanistan refugees in Pakistan: a
new partnership for solidarity”, held in Islamabad, which was organized jointly by

12/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

the Government of Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
63. On 24 February, the Ministry of Public Health of Afghanistan confirmed the
country’s first patient with the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Herat
Province, where the local government declared a state of emergency. Additional
suspected cases were reported in several provinces in the western region. On
26 February, Mr. Ghani ordered the Ministry of Finance to allocate $15 million to the
Ministry of Public Health to fund COVID-19 prevention efforts, as well as an
additional $10 million as a reserve. The Ministry is working closely with the World
Health Organization and other stakeholders to expand in-country preparedness and
containment capacity and to strengthen detection and surveillance capacities at points
of entry into Afghanistan to prevent the spread of the outbreak.
64. A total of 29 confirmed cases of polio had been reported in 2019, namely 9 in
Uruzgan, 5 in Helmand, 6 in Kandahar, 1 in Paktika, 1 in Burmal, 1 in Kunar, 1 in
Nangarhar, 1 in Herat, 2 in Farah, 1 in Badghis and 1 in Baghlan. Of these, 25 cases
originated in inaccessible areas where house-to-house immunization campaigns have
been banned by the Taliban since May 2019.
65. Explosive remnants of war and anti-personnel mines caused 134 child casualties
from November to January, killing 49 children and injuring 85. Bamyan was the only
province to be declared free of landmine contamination following the work of the
only mixed-gender demining team in Afghanistan. During the same period, the United
Nations and partners cleared 7.43 km 2 of land contaminated by high-impact
explosives, benefiting 366,830 people. Approximately 127,714 people returning from
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran received mine risk education provided by
the United Nations and its partners.
66. Widespread insecurity, mine contamination and difficult terrain continued to
present challenges for humanitarian access and the safety and security of aid workers.
From 16 November to 18 February, 12 aid workers were killed, 17 injured and 8
abducted. In total for 2019, aid workers reported 439 access-related incidents, the
highest number recorded by the United Nations. Of these, over 136 access-related
incidents undermined the delivery of health services by targeting health personnel,
assets and facilities.
67. A total of $465.3 million in humanitarian funding, or 76 per cent of the total
funding required, was received in 2019. This made possible a humanitarian response
that reached 6 million persons with life-saving assistance across the country. A total
of $733 million is sought for the 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan to reach
7.1 million persons with multisectoral life-saving assistance. According to the
Financial Tracking Service, it was 1 per cent funded as at 19 February.

VI. Counter-narcotics
68. From 1 December to 31 January, law enforcement authorities conducted a total
of 556 counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 404 kg of heroin, 2,656 kg
of opium, 336,736 kg of hashish and cannabis, 144 kg of methamphetamine, 1,100
methamphetamine tablets, 24 kg of ephedrine/pseudoephedrine and 1,031 litres of
acetic anhydride. The seizures led to the arrest of 882 suspects and the confiscation
of 117 vehicles and 37 weapons. One officer of the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Police
was killed during the operations.
69. According to preliminary analysis, the volume of methamphetamine seizures
increased from 182 kg in 2018 to 1,251 kg in 2019, highlighting an emerging threat.
During the reporting period, the Drug Demand Reduction Department of the Ministry
20-03718

13/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

of Public Health opened five drug treatment centres with support from the United
Nations. The centres provide services for the prevention and treatment of drug use
disorders for children and their families.
70. On 13 February, the Office of the Attorney General reported that the Chief and
the Director of Investigation of the Kabul Counter-Narcotics Police were sentenced
to over 17 years and 7 and half years of prison, respectively, for collusion with drug
smugglers. Two other counter-narcotics officials received sentences of one and a half
year on similar charges.

VII. Mission support
71. As at 31 December, vacancy rates at UNAMA were 7 per cent for international
staff, 4 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for national staff,
compared with the approved rates of 7 per cent, 5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
The proportion of female staff remained low, at 35 per cent for international staff,
42 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 11 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 8 per cent for national staff. Between 1 October and 30 December,
UNAMA conducted 99 road and 18 air missions, as well as 983 reverse outreach
missions during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
72. There have been major developments during the reporting period aimed at
achieving a lasting political settlement in Afghanistan. Against the background of
40 years of conflict, poverty and forced displacement, the present historic opportunity
for peace must be seized, in accordance with the demands and expectations of the
Afghan people for a better future. All Afghan leaders and members of the international
community have to do everything possible so that prospects for peace are realized.
73. After a prolonged and contested electoral process, the democratic transfer of
power has provided an opportunity for advancing the nation ’s interests. I salute the
courage and determination of the Afghan women and men who participated in the
polling as voters, candidates, campaign and electoral workers, and observers. I trust
that the new Government will embody the expectations of the population and
demonstrate the strength of Afghanistan in its diversity. The country faces serious
security, economic and development challenges, which will require urgent attention
in order to ensure progress.
74. In the past 11 years alone, civilian casualties have surpassed 100,000. This
calculation fails, however, to capture the human suffering and the loss of
opportunities that have affected generations of Afghan men and women. I am
particularly concerned by the high levels of civilian casualties caused by deliberate
attacks on civilians through the use of improvised explosive devices, as well as the
effects of aerial and search operations. The United Nations continues to engage with
all parties, including with respect to ensuring that humanitarian and human rights
obligations are understood and met, in order to help to alleviate the impact of the
armed conflict on civilians.
75. Scenes of Afghans finding respite in the more secure environment resulting from
the reduction in violence are highly encouraging. Afghans from diverse religious,
tribal and civil society groups strongly desire peace. It is my hope that the nationwide
reduction in violence will be sustained, for the benefit of all Afghans. I encourage
continued efforts by all parties to create an enabling environment for a comprehensi ve
peace process.
14/16

20-03718

A/74/753
S/2020/210

76. Ultimately, peace in Afghanistan has to be made by and between Afghans. It is
my hope that the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan and the Joint
Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of
America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, both signed on 29 February, will build
momentum towards intra-Afghan negotiations at the earliest possible date. Direct
talks are essential in order to pave the way towards a lasting political settlement and
a permanent ceasefire and to advance sustainable development across the country.
77. To be durable, any settlement has to uphold the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all citizens and safeguard the gains made with regard to the human rights
of women. Peace has to be based on broad consensus, and the political and social
diversity of Afghanistan has to be represented in the peace process to lay the
groundwork for community acceptance of an eventual settlement. I encourage the
formation of an inclusive negotiating team.
78. I reiterate the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led peace process with the
meaningful participation of women, young people and minorities. The United Nations
stands ready to support such an inclusive peace process.
79. The constructive role of countries in the region will be vital in ensuring the
success of any intra-Afghan negotiations, as well as the stability and economic
development of Afghanistan and the broader neighbourhood. Regional trade,
assistance from non-traditional donors and greater connectivity are in the mutual
interest and will be critical to the increased self-sufficiency of Afghanistan. The
country’s relationship with Pakistan, in particular, will be central. I welcome signs
that the administrations in Islamabad and Kabul are utilizing opportunities and
exploring the means to reshape engagement. I am further encouraged by the continued
forward momentum of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, with the Istanbul
Declaration reflecting unanimous support by regional stakeh olders for an Afghanowned and Afghan-led reconciliation process.
80. I am encouraged by measures taken by the Government to protect and promote
women’s rights. It is critical to create the space for women to actively participate in
all levels of decision-making to solidify gains made and enhance women’s rights.
Legislative protections have to be fully implemented, especially in rural and remote
areas. The continued prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence and
discriminatory practices is of concern. I call upon the Government of Afghanistan to
strengthen prevention and protection mechanisms, to provide victims with adequate
support and to bring perpetrators to justice.
81. Space for freedom of expression remains restricted, as media workers and
human rights defenders continue to be the targets of intimidation and violence.
Perpetrators of such unacceptable attacks have to be brought to justice. I welcome the
endorsement of the regulation for the protection of journalists and media workers and
call upon the Government of Afghanistan to establish an effective protection
mechanism for human rights defenders and to implement measures to ensure their
safety.
82. The economic situation in Afghanistan remains of grave concern. I welcome
progress made in the implementation of the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, adopted in 2018. This has to be upheld. Even with continued progress in
reforms, including enhanced revenue performance, it is predicted that the
Government will continue to run significant budget deficits for the foreseeable future.
The impact of revenue shortfalls risks limiting investment in programmes for long term development and poverty reduction. Sustained donor commitment will be
required to allow the Government’s reform proposals to become firmly embedded and
thereby restore higher levels of economic growth and increase self-sustainability. The
pledging conference to be held later in 2020 is crucial in assisting the Government of
20-03718

15/16

A/74/753
S/2020/210

Afghanistan in realising its objectives of economic and social self -reliance in the final
four years of the Transformation Decade.
83. Years of conflict and recurrent natural disasters have left an acutely vulnerable
population with few economic resources, an eroded capacity to cope with the
unfolding crisis and little hope of recovery if the current conditions persist. Hunger
and malnutrition remain at dangerously high levels despite the passing of the drought,
with 14.28 million persons expected to be in crisis or emergency food insecurity in
early 2020. I am grateful to international donors for their generous response to
alleviate the suffering of Afghan people to date and urge them to continue to provide
adequate resources to allow humanitarian organizations to mobilize a response that
matches the scale of the needs in the country.
84. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedicatio n under
challenging conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the Government
and people of Afghanistan.

16/16

20-03718
