S/PV.6980

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6980th meeting

Monday, 17 June 2013, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245)

13-36540 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336540*

S/PV.6980

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.

developments from January to December 2012 and
relevant updates. Although the reporting period saw
marked progress, especially in relation to dialogue with
parties to conflict and action plans, disturbing new
trends and concerns for children have also arisen.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Canada, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Colombia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, India, Iraq, Myanmar, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Thailand to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Luxembourg.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund; and Mr. Gregory
Ramm, Associate Vice-President of Save the Children,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/245, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui: I would like to begin by thanking
the United Kingdom presidency of the Council and the
Luxembourg chairmanship of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for holding this important
debate on children and armed conflict.
Council members have before them the twelfth
annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245). The report reflects

2

As new conflicts emerged or deepened in the course
of the past 18 months, children continued to pay a heavy
toll — perhaps the heaviest. The evolving nature and
tactics of armed conflict have created unprecedented
threats for children. The absence of clear front lines
and identifiable opponents, and the increasing use of
terror tactics have made children more vulnerable. I
would also like to highlight the fact that, as in previous
years, non-State armed groups constitute the vast
majority of listed parties. They account for 46 of the
55 perpetrators listed in the annexes. In addition, I
would like to highlight that half of the parties listed
are so-called persistent perpetrators, meaning that they
have been on the list for five years or more. I welcome
the efforts of the Working Group to devise innovative
ways to address this issue, and I look forward to the
outcome of these discussions.
In Mali, which has been included in the report
for the first time, children were recruited by all
armed groups active in the north. We also received
information that boys and girls were associated with
pro-Government militias in performing various tasks,
including participation in combat. As the country is
transitioning towards stabilization, it is crucial to ensure
that no children are integrated into the regular armed
forces or forgotten in the reintegration process, and
that measures to prevent the recruitment of children be
put in place. On the other hand, we continue to receive
worrisome information on children being detained
by the Malian security forces for alleged association
with armed groups, as well as children hiding in their
communities in fear of being arrested for association
with armed groups. I call upon the Malian authorities
to treat such children in line with international norms
and standards.
In addition, accountability for all other violations
committed in Mali, such as attacks on schools and
hospitals, the killing and maiming of children and
sexual violence, needs to be sought as a matter of
priority. The international community has an important
role to play to assist the Malian authorities in that crucial
endeavour. I also wish to call upon all stakeholders to
ensure that in the context of the ongoing peace talks in

13-36540

S/PV.6980

Ouagadougou, the needs and best interests of children
are adequately taken into account.

concerned to carefully consider the recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General in that regard.

The conflict in the Central African Republic has
also had a disproportionate impact on children. In a
country where children have been deprived of a normal
life for so many years, it is particularly alarming to see
that two thirds of the children separated from armed
groups in 2012 were re-recruited by the Séléka coalition
at the beginning of 2013.

The report also highlights the progress that has been
made in the past 18 months with regard to the protection
of children in conflict. Though we have made progress
with a number of non-State armed groups, this year
has brought remarkable success with the Governments
concerned. I very much doubt that this would have
been possible without the support of the Council. Those
Governments have accepted the framework that has
been put in place by the resolutions of the Council and
have engaged with the United Nations on measures to
enhance child protection in conflict. One indicator is
the growing number of inter-ministerial committees
established by the Governments concerned to work with
the United Nations on children affected by conflicts.

Many children were killed and injured during the
clashes in Bangui in April 2013. Children continue to
be affected by the ongoing insecurity and the lack of
humanitarian access. More than 2 million children in
the Central African Republic lack basic services, and
hundreds of thousands lack access to education. Those
children have suffered from repeated violations for
too long, and it is now time to consider what further
action, including targeted measures, should be taken
against perpetrators to enhance protection and justice
for children. I also call upon all relevant stakeholders to
ensure that child protection remains central to ongoing
discussions around the implementation of the Libreville
Agreement in the Central African Republic.
It has been two years since the beginning of the
conflict in Syria, yet we are no closer to saving the
lives of children. As the conflict rages on, it affects me
deeply that grave violations against children continue
to be committed on such a massive scale.
Since my last briefing to the Council on children
in Syria (see S/PV.6838), scores of them have been
killed, injured, maimed, detained, tortured, recruited
and forced to witness or to commit atrocities. If not for
those children, then for whom will the Council act?
It is my intention to visit Syria and the region in the
coming days to assess first-hand the consequences of
the conflict on children. I will also reiterate my call on
all parties to the conflict to take all possible measures
to ensure that children are protected in the course of
military operations, and to abide by international law.
I look forward to briefing Council members on my
findings upon my return.
As I mentioned earlier, new areas of concern for
children have emerged and need to be addressed as
a priority, including the military use of schools, the
detention of children for alleged association with
armed groups, and the impact of drones on children.
I encourage Council members and all Governments

Another indicator is the development of legislation
that criminalizes violations against children, as well as
regulations and guidelines. In that regard, I welcome
the efforts of the Governments of Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Philippines, which have
made notable progress during the reporting period.
In the same vein, I would like to commend those
Governments that have ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict since the
most recent report of the Secretary-General, in April
2012 (S/2012/261). Those are most welcome steps
towards universal ratification, as intended by the Zero
Under 18 Campaign.
Additionally, there has been progress with regard to
the engagement of regional organizations on the issue
of children and armed conflict during the reporting
period. NATO has adopted child-protection guidelines,
including training materials prepared with the United
Nations for constituent troops and partners.
Cooperation with the African Union is ongoing;
my Office recently obtained a preliminary agreement
to secure child-protection expertise within the Peace
and Security Department. I also look forward to further
strengthening our cooperation in mainstreaming child
protection within the African Union and its regional
peacekeeping activities, such as in Somalia or in the
context of actions against the Lord’s Resistance Army.
In 2004, the Council unanimously requested
all parties listed in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General to enter into dialogue with the United
Nations to prepare and implement action plans as a

13-365403

S/PV.6980

unique tool to put an end to violations against children.
In 2012 alone, four action plans to end the recruitment
and use of children were signed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia and South
Sudan. In addition, in line with resolution 1882 (2009),
an action plan on the killing and maiming of children
was also signed with the Government of Somalia, and
provisions on sexual violence against children were
included in the action plan signed with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to inform the Council that the Government of Chad
has redoubled its efforts towards full compliance with
the action plan signed in 2011.
It is worth noting that all of those action plans were
signed with Governments to put an end to violations
committed by their armed forces. That allows the
United Nations to support those Governments not only
in identifying, releasing and reintegrating children
present in their ranks, but also in building their
capacities, enacting more adequate legislation and
preventing further violations.
Thanks to the Council’s efforts, we have reached
a seminal moment in the history of that mandate. I am
happy to announce today that all armed forces listed in
the annexes for recruitment and use of children have
entered into an action plan process. Six have already
signed an action plan, and the remaining two are in the
final stages of negotiation.
One of the key objectives of that mandate — the
end of the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces — is finally within reach. In that regard, with
the support of the Secretary-General, my Office will be
launching a campaign aimed at ending the association
of children with State armed forces in armed conflict by
2016. The campaign’s objective will be to galvanize the
efforts of concerned Governments, interested Member
States and the United Nations system to turn the page
on the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in armed conflict in the next three years.
That is an unprecedented and ambitious initiative that
therefore needs our full attention. UNICEF and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
have already agreed to join the campaign. In the
coming weeks, I will reach out to other United Nations
partners. I count on Council members to support those
efforts as well.
Before concluding, I would also like to stress that
my Office has continued to receive enormous support

4

from its partners since the creation of the mandate. I
would like to commend the invaluable contribution
of our trusted operational partners, including those
here today. From the very beginning, the Council
requested that child-protection expertise be included
in peacekeeping missions in order to mainstream the
issue of children and armed conflict. Since then, more
than 100 child protection advisers have been deployed
to carry out that agenda in peacekeeping contexts. In
the light of the immense protection concerns affecting
children in conflict, the deployment of child-protection
advisers must not only continue but also grow. In
that regard, I call on Council members to ensure that
provisions for the timely and adequate deployment of
child-protection advisers be included in all the relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions.
The role of UNICEF cannot be overemphasized. Its
efforts continue to make this agenda a reality in the field.
Its work in ensuring that children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups are reintegrated and
rehabilitated is also critical. I will continue to advocate
for ensuring that UNICEF and other partners have the
support necessary to carry out those tasks.
I began my statement today by stressing that notable
progress had been achieved. However, we must not
be complacent. The time has come to reflect on what
works. Dialogue with non-State parties, engagement
with concerned Governments, a focus on capacitybuilding, and the Security Council’s strong commitment
have yielded significant results for children. I would
like to conclude with an appeal. The child-protection
agenda has made progress because eight years ago the
Council took a firm stand with resolution 1612 (2005)
and expressed its willingness to take all the necessary
measures to ensure that children will be protected, in
all contexts, from the consequences of war. Children
in armed conflict need to know that the Council is
listening and that all victims will receive the necessary
protection. Perpetrators must also receive the strongest
possible signal from the Council that their crimes will
not go unpunished and that impunity will end. I call on
the Council to continue to unite in that endeavour.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief the

13-36540

S/PV.6980

Security Council on how peacekeeping operations have
been implementing the Council’s mandates on ensuring
the protection of children in conflict situations. The
report before us (S/2013/245) is a stark reminder that
the situation of children in conflict remains dire and
that our sustained engagement is vital at both the
political and the operational levels. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) is committed
to ensuring that child protection, like all protection
mandates, is fully addressed in our missions’ overall
political strategies and operational plans, and at all
stages of our engagement. In order to achieve that goal,
deploying dedicated and specialized child-protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations is crucial.
First, those advisers ensure that child-protection
concerns are reflected at all levels of a mission’s
strategic planning and operational activities. We are
aware of how important it is to give purposeful attention
to child protection at the earliest stages of operational
planning. DPKO has therefore made the deployment
of a child-protection adviser to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) a first-phase priority. The adviser
will help the Mission to identify key child-protection
issues, as well as the approaches and resources needed
to address them. Where they are deployed, those
advisers ensure that our missions implement the key
priorities of Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict, one of the most important of which
is monitoring and reporting serious violations. Our
peacekeeping missions are fully engaged, through
country-level task forces, in monitoring and reporting
serious violations in South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire.
A second priority is negotiating action plans
aimed at ending the recruitment and use of children,
sexual violence against children, and the killing and
maiming of children. Under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, peacekeeping missions
have been contributing both to the negotiation and to
the implementation of such plans. Action plans recently
signed in the Democratic Republic of Congo and South
Sudan have yielded concrete results. In 2012, screening
for children by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo resulted in more
than 1,300 children being released from those forces.

Another 630 children, including 109 girls, were released
by other armed forces and groups in the first quarter of
this year.
In South Sudan, a revised action plan gave the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and UNICEF
access to 71 barracks, from which hundreds of children
were released. Protection is first and foremost a national
responsibility. It is therefore particularly encouraging
that child protection has been institutionalized in South
Sudan through the creation of a child-protection unit
in the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and
the inclusion of child protection in the SPLA training
curriculum. In addition, approximately 22,000 Sudan
People’s Liberation Army soldiers from throughout the
ranks have been sensitized on child protection issues.
(spoke in English)
Lastly, child protection advisers advise all mission
components on specific aspects of child protection
relevant to their work. To achieve that, they deliver
in-mission training on child protection issues for
peacekeepers on the ground. Last year alone, 7,878
peacekeepers received training on child protection
in our field operations. That training provides
peacekeepers with key information on the situation of
children in the specific mission context, and therefore
prepares them to respond appropriately to any childprotection concerns that they encounter in the field.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
committed to ensuring that child protection receives
attention throughout the peace consolidation process.
The political engagement of peacekeeping operations
has helped lay the groundwork for institution-building
while highlighting child protection in national agendas.
Important work is taking place in that regard in Haiti
and Côte d’Ivoire. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti continues to provide training to the
Haitian National Police brigade for the protection of
minors and supports legislative reform on important
child-protection issues.
Our efforts in child protection constitute an
excellent example of the kind of action in peacekeeping
that requires a high degree of integrated action by
civilian and uniformed components alike. Embedded
in the heart of the mission, child protection advisers
ensure that a mission’s material and political assets
and advantages — from access to authorities to
other capabilities, including uniformed and civilian

13-365405

S/PV.6980

expertise — are applied effectively to fulfil the mandate
for child protection.
Given the magnitude of the challenges facing
children affected by conflict, our achievements are no
doubt modest. We are mindful that much more needs
to be done. With that in mind, at the Headquarters
level, we have invested in providing guidance and in
developing training standards on child protection for
peacekeepers.
The United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual
issued by the Office of Military Affairs last year includes
guidelines on child protection, notably a provision
prohibiting the use of schools by peacekeepers for
operational purposes. DPKO also worked with Member
States to finalize predeployment training materials
on child protection for all peacekeeping personnel.
The materials will be piloted at courses in partnership
with the Governments of Malaysia and Uruguay in
September and October.
Awareness of the professional obligations
of peacekeepers to protect children and their
accountability to meet those obligations, in Mali and
in other theatres where United Nations peacekeepers
operate, is critical. As part of the transition from the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, all AFISMA
troops will be subject to predeployment training and
vetting procedures, including in accordance with
the requirements of the United Nations human rights
screening policy, so as to ensure that they meet
force requirements and have the necessary skills to
implement the mandate. In addition, DPKO will deploy
a mobile training team to Mali, which will deliver childprotection training for AFISMA personnel deployed
there. Similar training is being undertaken for troops
being deployed to the Force Intervention Brigade in
MONUSCO.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to UNICEF,
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Save the Children
Sweden and Member States that have partnered with
us in the training initiative. Their support attests to the
strong global partnership that has been built around
child protection. For its part, I believe the Security
Council can be credited with playing a critical role in
creating and sustaining this partnership for the benefit
of children in the most difficult circumstances.

6

The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brandt.
Ms. Brandt (UNICEF): UNICEF welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/245) and this
opportunity to brief the Council. Allow me, first, to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui for her tireless efforts and those of
her Office to protect children in armed conflict. I also
thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
for our fruitful collaboration on child protection. Our
thanks also go to Luxembourg for chairing the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict since January. We welcome the presence of the
representative of Save the Children, one of our main
partners in child protection.
Sadly, in 2012, armed conflicts intensified in both
reach and brutality. Civilians, especially children, were
targeted, traumatized, maimed and killed. Childhoods
were lost, families shattered and lives changed
irreparably. Some conflicts experienced a lull, and we
dared to hope for peace, only to watch them reignite.
Other conflicts, such as in Syria, had an impact across
borders and regions. With each outbreak of war,
children suffer grave violations of their rights. Allow
me to highlight two alarming trends.
The first trend relates to the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. Armed conflicts frequently
occur in urban settings. When explosive weapons such
as artillery, mortars, rockets, improvised explosive
devices and aircraft bombs are used in those areas, they
kill or injure large numbers of children. Those attacks
not only have a long-term emotional and psychological
impact on children, but also destroy vital social
infrastructure such as roads and power supplies. They
deprive children of access to essential basic services,
such as schools and hospitals, and, in the absence of
immediate medical care, injuries can turn into life-long
disabilities. We therefore urge all parties to conflict
to adopt different tactics and rules of engagement.
We urge that they neither position their troops among
civilians nor target each other in the middle of villages,
towns and cities. We urge that they adopt rules to guide
how and where explosive weapons can be used.
The second trend has to do with the use of schools in
military operations. UNICEF is deeply concerned about
that. It poses grave risks to children and educators. It
robs children of the opportunity to learn and it violates
their right to education. We are encouraged by the

13-36540

S/PV.6980

leadership of countries such as the Philippines, which
have restricted the use of schools by their armed forces
and continue to strengthen their laws and guidelines.
We hope that others will follow those examples. We
must preserve schools as places of learning and safe
havens for children.
Those two trends highlight the critical role of the
children-and-armed conflict agenda. Encouraging
parties to conflict to comply with international
child-rights norms and standards is crucial if we are
to safeguard the lives and futures of children. That
must also remain our focus as we address the issue of
persistent perpetrators on the list. We do that through
action plans and country task forces. Action plans are
critical to commit parties to conflict to halting the
violation of children’s rights. My call today is that those
plans be fully implemented, as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui just pointed out,
because commitments do not save children’s lives,
concrete actions do. Such actions include releasing
children from armed groups, raising awareness in
communities to report violations and tracing children
and reuniting them with their families.
This year, country task forces developed ways to
accelerate the implementation of action plans by setting
benchmarks, holding regular dialogues between the
United Nations and parties and addressing bottlenecks
to progress. But there is still much work to be done. As
we monitor grave violations against children in armed
conflict, we must especially focus on prevention. That
means making sure that children are, first and foremost,
safe in their families and secure in their communities.
We have failed many children, but the story of one
15-year-old boy, a former child soldier in the Central
African Republic, should inspire us. Upon learning
that his family had held a funeral for him after he was
abducted, he was determined to tell his parents he was
alive. He joined a centre for child soldiers and prepared
to return to his village and reclaim his life. “Better
late than never,” he said. It would be better still if he
had not been robbed of his childhood in the first place.
Let his courage and example inspire us to reach more
children like him. With the Council’s help, we can all
work towards that noble goal.
The President: I thank Ms. Brandt for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramm.

Mr. Ramm: I am honoured to speak alongside
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and colleagues from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and UNICEF. We are committed to working together
to ensure greater protection for children and greater
accountability for the grave violations perpetrated
against them.
Save the Children works in dozens of countries
affected by conflict, delivering life-saving assistance
to millions of children and families in need. We see
at first-hand the devastating impact and suffering
of children in conflicts around the world. There are
three areas that I would like to highlight today: sexual
violence against children, the use of explosive weapons
and attacks on schools. I also want to emphasize the
importance of prevention as well as response.
Sexual violence affects millions of children in
conflicts. Our research and programming indicate
that the majority of the survivors of sexual violence in
conflict-affected countries are children — mostly girls
but also boys. Sexual violence has significant physical,
psychological and social impacts on children, but
their needs for specific protection and child-sensitive
responses are frequently neglected. In the eastern
Democratic Republic of Congo, our assessments in
and around Goma have revealed significant numbers of
children affected by sexual violence. Save the Children
is working in the camps to identify victims so as to
assist them with appropriate health and psychosocial
services. More action is needed to end sexual violence,
including legal reforms and adequate funding to
support child-sensitive and appropriate responses. We
call on Member States to place children at the centre of
international action on sexual violence in conflict; to
ensure the necessary resources, expertise and political
backing for prevention and response; and to hold
perpetrators accountable.
The use of explosive weapons in conflict has
devastating consequences for children, who are
killed and maimed in greater numbers as a result of
such weapons. They are left with deep physical and
psychological scars and are denied access to education
and health care, owing to damaged infrastructure, and
they end up displaced from their homes as families flee
insecurity. In Syria, we witness those effects at firsthand. As one little girl told us:

13-365407

S/PV.6980

“At the beginning ... there was no shelling at
my school, but after some time the shelling started.
1 stopped going to school ... It was not safe. I feel
sad that my school was burned.”
Save the Children calls on States to refrain from
the use of explosive weapons with wide area effects
by revising and strengthening military policies and
procedures; supporting the collection and sharing of
data with the United Nations on the impact of such
weapons on children; and holding to account those who
use such weapons.
Save the Children is responding to the Syrian crisis
and, to date, we have assisted over 300,000 children and
their families inside Syria and in Lebanon, Jordan and
Iraq. We are providing impartial, life-saving support,
including food, clothing and essential items to improve
health and hygiene. We run child-friendly spaces
offering psychosocial support, education activities
and a safe place to play. As the Secretary-General
himself says, the toll of the conflict on children is
“unacceptable and unbearable” (S/2013/245, para. 208).
Security Council members must unite to work towards
a negotiated settlement in Syria and, in the meantime,
ensure that humanitarian assistance is funded and
reaches populations most in need.
Schools are increasingly targets of attack, with
children frequently killed or injured. Greater action
is needed in order to protect children, teachers and
schools from targeted violence and to stop the use of
schools for military purposes. In 2011, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) to strengthen
the monitoring and reporting mechanism so as to
include attacks on schools and hospitals as a trigger for
action. Save the Children calls on the Council to ensure
that attacks on schools are acted upon in accordance
with that resolution, so that victims receive support and
future attacks are prevented. Schools must be respected
by all parties as conflict-free zones, and measures must
be taken to restrict their military use.
Humanitarian agencies like ours do all we
can to assist victims of conflict, but we need the
help of Governments and the Security Council to
prevent children from becoming victims in the
first place. In Mali, Save the Children is reuniting
children separated from their families during the
recent conflict, providing psychosocial support and
strengthening community-based responses. Since
1998, we have trained thousands of military personnel,

8

police force members and peacekeepers throughout
Africa in child rights and protection. Currently, we
are cooperating with UNICEF and DPKO to develop
mandatory training on the protection of children for
all United Nations peacekeepers worldwide, as noted
earlier. When authorizing peacekeeping missions, the
Security Council must require personnel to receive
pre-deployment training in child protection, as in Mali,
including the capacity to prevent and monitor grave
violations against children.
Parties to conflict must abide by their international
legal obligations and take measures to ensure that
children are protected at all times. Member States must
support efforts to ensure not only that grave violations
are documented but also that perpetrators are held to
account.
We applaud the Security Council’s efforts to ensure
the protection of children from the grave violations
committed against them. We encourage the Security
Council to ensure that the children and armed conflict
agenda remains strong with future open debates.
Children throughout the world need us to act to spare
them from suffering before more violations occur.
The President: I thank Mr. Ramm for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to warmly thank the President for organizing
this debate on children and armed conflict. As you
know, my country attaches great importance to the
issue and has done so for many years.
I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms Leila Zerrougui, and thank
her for the vital work she has accomplished. I would
also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr Hervé Ladsous, for his
briefing and the indispensable contributions made by
peacekeeping missions’ personnel to protect children
affected by armed conflict. I would also like to thank
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Ms. Yoka Brandt
for the exemplary work done by her teams in the field.
I would finally like to welcome the fact that civil
society has had the opportunity to address the Council.
Civil society has indeed an important role to play,
both in terms of raising our awareness and in terms of
monitoring commitments.

13-36540

S/PV.6980

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.

constantly monitoring its decisions and ensuring that
they are implemented.

We have gathered in the Chamber today to discuss
the question of children and armed conflict, as described
by the latest annual report by the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245) and against the backdrop of the conflicts
in Syria, in the Central African Republic, in Mali and
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
name but a few.

An increasing number of Member States concerned
are making commitments to end violations against
children affected by armed conflict. Tens of thousands
of children have already been freed thanks to the
implementation of action plans by Governments in
cooperation with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and other relevant United Nations entities. I
welcome the fact that, to date, almost all concerned
Member States have signed action plans. I commend in
particular the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict’s campaign,
supported by the Secretary-General, which is trying to
end to the recruitment of children into regular armed
forces and their use in armed conflict by 2016.

Allow me to consider for a moment the situation
in Syria.
In Syria, close to three million children have been
affected by the conflict so far. Thousands have lost
their lives, and many others have been subjected to
atrocious torture or sexual violence. Even those who
have escaped the worst are unable to live a normal life.
More than half of the country’s hospitals have been
damaged or rendered inoperable. Nearly 2,500 schools
have been partially or completely destroyed. While the
numbers may appear abstract, how much suffering is
obscured by them and how many shattered lives hide
behind them?
The situation cannot continue. We must do
everything to end those massacres, of which children
are most cruelly and unjustly the first victims. We
must put an end the conflict in Syria. We need to find
a political solution, a solution that brings a political
transition to Syria and that responds to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We need to find it
quickly. The Geneva II conference on Syria appears
more and more like a last-chance opportunity. The
international community, and chiefly this Council,
must finally shoulder its responsibilities in the area.
A dozen years ago, the Security Council had decided
to resolutely tackle the issue of children and armed
conflict and to give it the full attention it merits. Since
then, nine resolutions and 11 presidential statements
have been adopted on the topic and considerable
progress has been made. In particular, I welcome
the adoption, later today, of a new draft presidential
statement on the occasion of today’s debate, in which
the Council unanimously and unambiguously reiterates
its commitment — even if that took some time — to
end violations and abuses committed against children
in armed conflict. However, for all its importance,
that normative framework is not enough. It must also
implemented. For the Security Council that means

However, there again commitments are insufficient.
They must be fully implemented. Since the previous
annual report (S/2012/261) two countries were removed
from the so-called “list of shame” thanks to the effective
implementation of their commitments. I am speaking
of Nepal and Sri Lanka. Those examples demonstrate
that the matter of children in armed conflict requires an
approach that combines incentives as well as coercive
measures. Action plans create a space for cooperation
that gives Governments an opportunity to work with
the United Nations to put an end to grave violations
perpetrated against children. In that context, technical
and financial support for the implementation of action
plans must not be neglected.
However, we must not limit our action to governance
alone. The great majority of persistent perpetrators are
non-State armed groups. It is necessary to continue
engaging with them and to bring pressure to bear upon
them so that they stop their abuses against children. The
issue of children in armed conflict cannot be solved
definitively unless all parties to a conflict respect their
obligations.
In situations where dialogue with the parties to
the conflict fails, other measures become necessary.
As it has been stressed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary -General, most of the parties listed in
the annexes have been present there for many years.
The international community must act to put an end to
such practices. In that regard, I welcome the ongoing
discussions in the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on the best means

13-365409

S/PV.6980

to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators. In that
regard, the Security Council must lead the way and send
a strong signal, when necessary, by applying sanctions
against persistent violators of children’s rights.
Justice cannot be served so long as the perpetrators
of the worst atrocities against children are not held
accountable for their actions. That is the very reason
that the International Criminal Court’s conviction of
Thomas Lubanga for the recruitment of children is such
a landmark case. It is a strong powerful message to all
of those who commit crimes against children. They
shall no longer go unpunished.
The growing importance that regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements, notably
the African Union and European Union, are attaching
to the problem of children in armed conflict is also a
reason for satisfaction and one of hope. It is evident that
commitment at the regional level can be beneficial only
if it supports complements the efforts of the United
Nations. The same applies to NATO efforts undertaken
to integrate the normative framework developed by
the Security Council on children in armed conflict
into its policies and operations. NATO and the United
Nations joint development of a special training module
is particularly welcome in that regard.
In 2003, Secretary-General Kofi Annan advocated
for an era of implementing the Security Council’s
resolutions on children in armed conflict. Ten years
on, significant progress has been made. However, much
remains to be done to ensure that children may one day
be spared from the horrors of war.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for hosting
today’s debate on children on armed conflict. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt and
Save the Children Associate Vice-President Gregory
Ramm for their remarks. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Lucas for her leadership as Chair of
the Security Council Working Group on Chilren and
Armed Conflict. We also deeply appreciate the devoted
work of Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and
her team in advancing this agenda. I thank her for her
briefing this morning as well.
The United States remains determined to combat
horrific acts committed against children in conflicttorn countries. As the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/245) attests, there is no starker example of

10

where children desperately need the international
community’s help than Syria. As we speak, Syrian
children are being tortured and murdered, used as
human shields and conscripted as fighters. Syria is
unfortunately not the only place where abuses are
surging.
In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo armed groups, including the Mouvement du
23 Mars, have engaged in unlawful child recruitment,
as well as killing and maiming of children. We welcome
the commitment of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to address those horrors by
signing an action plan last October. We call for the
expeditious implementation of that plan.
We have also seen welcome progress in Burma,
where the Government has shown a degree of
commitment to the action plan signed in June 2012
by releasing 97 under-age military recruits in 2012.
However, we remain concerned that there was an
increase in complaints about unlawful child recruitment
in 2012 that occurred in 2011. We urge Burma, in
accordance with its commitments, to allow United
Nations access to military units to conduct verification
visits. Moreover, non-State armed ethnic groups in
Burma continue to use child soldiers. More progress is
needed on this front.
The Security Council requires more effective
ways to deal with the growing number of persistent
perpetrators, especially among armed groups. In that
regard, we appreciate the Working Group’s focus on
this issue and its effort to develop appropriate tools.
We also commend the Secretary-General’s proposals,
which deserve the Council’s serious consideration.
The question of persistent perpetrators, however,
raises a larger issue about the United Nations childrenand-armed-conflict process itself. We can be proud of its
accomplishments and must strive to make it as effective
as it can be. But it is only one tool among the many
that we should be using to protect children. Rather than
attempting to make the action plan process a one-size
fits all mechanism, we should promote children-andarmed-conflict action plans in tandem with other
tools, to comprehensively address the various contexts
in which children are subjected to abuse. A wider
range of efforts is needed, from holding perpetrators
accountable and preventing them from committing
abuses to resolving situations of conflict that enable
such heinous crimes. For example, the conviction

13-36540

S/PV.6980

of Thomas Lubanga for unlawful child soldiering by
the International Criminal Court sends an important
message that such crimes will not be tolerated.
Furthermore, several African countries, with the
support of the African Union, the United Nations, the
United States and others, are cooperating to end once
and for all the threat posed by the Lord Resistance’s
Army (LRA), one of the world’s worst perpetrators
of crimes against children. As noted in the Council’s
discussion on 29 May (see S/PV.6971), that effort has
resulted in a substantial decrease in LRA attacks,
the removal of two top LRA commanders from the
battlefield and the defection of scores of LRA fighters.
Finally, peacemaking efforts work to safeguard
endangered children by ending the armed conflict
itself. Connecting those efforts into a comprehensive
approach will strengthen the ultimate goals of the
children-and-armed-conflict action plan process and
concretely advance the issue of the plight of children
caught in harm’s way.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for convening
today’s debate on children and armed conflict and to
welcome Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, to
today’s meeting. I also wish to thank all briefers for
their extensive statements.
In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been placed firmly on the international
agenda, and a solid framework of international legal
norms and standards has been developed. Important
steps have been taken through the application and
enforcement of those norms and standards in order to
achieve accountability for grave violations committed
against children. The engagement of the Security
Council has increased the general awareness of the
issue of the protection of children in armed conflict,
significantly advanced the scope of actions and created
opportunities to improve common approaches in that
regard. We welcome the increasing attention of the
Security Council to this topic and commend the efforts
of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
under the able leadership of Ambassador Sylvie Lucas
of Luxembourg.
Azerbaijan’s strong position with regard to the
protection of civilians, including children, in situations
of armed conflict is based on my country’s keen interest
in contributing to the protection of human rights and

fundamental freedoms and to the achievement of
sustainable peace and development. Our interest also
stems from our practical experience in addressing
the devastating consequences of serious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
committed during the war unleashed against my
country. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from one of the
highest number of refugees and displaced persons in
the world, many of whom are children.
Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made in
preventing and responding to violations and abuses
committed against children, especially with regard to
the thousands of children who have been demobilized,
rehabilitated and reintegrated. We also note the
increasing number of action plans that have been
adopted or are under negotiation. At the same time,
we acknowledge that the provision of sufficient
and sustained resources is crucial to the timely
implementation of such agreed plans.
At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
by the high number of violations and abuses against
children in the various situations of armed conflict
throughout the world, where children are being used for
military purposes and continue be the indiscriminate
target of military targets. Furthermore, the military
use of schools, including as shields, as barracks or for
weapons storage, in the course of armed conflict deprives
children of their right to education and potentially puts
them at risk of attack. Other challenging issues that
call for urgent attention include children being taken
hostage, being reported missing in connection with
armed conflict, or being used as suicide bombers in
acts of terrorism.
Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of armed conflict on children and
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed against
children. We have always been consistent in demanding
the strict observance by the parties to armed conflict of
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law in all circumstances.
Governments bear the primary responsibility to
ensure protection of and provision of relief to all children
affected by armed conflict, and the United Nations
must continue to support and supplement such national
efforts. The monitoring and reporting mechanism of
the United Nations envisages the involvement of and
close cooperation with the countries concerned. It is

13-3654011

S/PV.6980

equally important that access by the United Nations for
the purpose of monitoring and reporting on violations
and abuses committed against children is carried out
with strict respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the State concerned.
The vulnerability of children in wartime brings an
element of urgency, dedication and strong commitment
to worldwide protection efforts, which must be free of
selectivity. Azerbaijan highlights the role of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflicts in that
regard. The fulfilment of the Special Representative’s
mandate with respect to all situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, is crucial in that
regard.
Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations against children, including the
development of international jurisprudence. However,
serious challenges remain.
In conclusion, I would like once again to reiterate
that more resolute and consistent efforts are required
to end impunity and to find a long-term and sustained
solution to eliminate and prevent illegal practices
affecting the rights of children.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in convening this debate. I also commend
Luxembourg for its work in chairing the Working Group
and guiding the negotiations that produced today’s draft
presidential statement on this topic. We will be able to
adopt a draft presidential statement today thanks to the
flexibility shown by the delegations, which Argentina
values very highly in the light of the importance of this
topic and the text to be adopted.
We also thank in particular the briefings by Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, Under-SecretaryGeneral Hervé Ladsous, the Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Johanna Brandt, and the Associate
Vice-President of Save the Children, Gregory Ramm.
We reiterate Argentina’s firm support for the work
carried out by the Security Council with a view to
ending grave violations of the rights of children in the
context of armed conflict. Such acts are unacceptable
acts that harm the international community as a whole
and which we therefore condemn in the strongest
possible terms.

12

The delegation of Argentina underscores the
important role played by the Special Rapporteur of
the Secretary-General in cooperation with UNICEF
and other agencies of the system in implementing
the scheme created by the Council in its successive
resolutions, which has recently achieved positive
results. However, as can be seen from the report before
us today (S/2013/245), a great deal remains to be done.
The Council’s condemnation should not be limited
to merely taking note of the public naming by the
Secretary-General in his report of those parties that
commit violations against children; rather, it should
also translate into specific measures that reflect a
genuine and comprehensive understanding of the
issues at all levels of the Council’s agenda. Indeed,
child protection should be taken into account in the
peacekeeping operation plans presented to the Security
Council, including support for the inclusion of child
protection experts in the operations mandated by the
Council and capacity-building and knowledge sharing
in the area of human rights.
We welcome the discussions held by the Working
Group on ways to step up pressure on parties that
consistently commit violations despite the repeated
calls by the Council to those parties to cease committing
such violations. In that regard, we reiterate the need
for greater coordination between the system for the
protection of children in armed conflict and the various
sanctions regimes, in order to make it possible to impose
sanctions aimed at the perpetrators of the most flagrant
violations against children in conflict situations.
Argentina believes that the fight against impunity
is fundamental in the broader context of State
responsibility for the protection of civilians. It is States
that bear the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and other serious infringements
of international law. When States cannot or will not
exercise that primary jurisdiction which belongs to
them, the international system provides alternative
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Thus the national and international mechanisms
for monitoring the application of international law must
be strengthened in order to ensure accountability. In
that regard, we wish to echo the position taken recently
by the International Criminal Court that any financial
difficulties that a country may be facing cannot justify
the failure to prosecute such crimes. Likewise, in
terms of measures against persistent perpetrators, the

13-36540

S/PV.6980

ICC has a fundamentally important role to play. When
adopting resolution 1612 (2005) in 2005, Argentina,
as a member of the Council at the time, emphasized
the important need for the Working Group created by
that resolution to work with the International Criminal
Court and share information as available. Reality has
confirmed that need, given that a significant number
of the countries mentioned in the report have ratified
the Rome Statute. In some cases, situations have been
referred to the Court either by the affected State itself
or by the Council.
In its first ruling — the case of Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo — the Court demonstrated its crucial role in the
investigation, trial and sentencing of criminals and its
ability to deter and prevent future serious violations of
international law and its ability to work towards justice,
truth and reconciliation.
We also welcome the transfer of Bosco Ntaganda
to the Court in March. That auspicious step forward
illustrates the importance of the growing cooperation
among States and the Court.
Argentina has always stressed the need to address
the deep-rooted causes of violence and to provide and
strengthen development assistance in order to assist
States in rebuilding. It is essential that rehabilitation
efforts for victims provide genuine programmes aimed
at reintegration, while avoiding the possibility of fresh
recruitment, which, unfortunately, continues to occur
frequently.
We are concerned about the growing use of schools
for military purposes and the increase in attacks on
schools, teachers and schoolchildren. We therefore
believe that the international community should devote
particular attention to that problem, as the right to
education of thousands of children worldwide is being
dramatically affected.
The report also mentions the effects on children of
attacks by unmanned aerial vehicles used in military
operations and the growing number of children in
detention, matters that are also of concern. We therefore
reiterate that anti-terrorism efforts must be carried out
in full respect for international law.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The Council is briefed
almost daily about the horrific impacts of conflict
around the world. We know that children are among
those who suffer the most. They are recruited, attacked,
tortured and abducted and are also victims of sexual

violence. Their schools and hospitals are attacked,
and they are often denied life-saving humanitarian
assistance.
The Council can never do enough to protect those
children. We strongly support the mandate and work
of Special Representative Zerrougui. We thank her,
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Ms. Brandt and
Mr. Ramm for their briefings today, and even more
so for their efforts. We also thank Luxembourg for
its dedication to child protection and for unifying the
Security Council through a draft presidential statement
aimed at moving the agenda forward.
The past decade has seen substantial progress on the
child protection agenda. We now have important tools
at our disposal, including an expanded set of triggers
for listing perpetrators of grave violations and for the
more regular inclusion of child-protection advisers
in peacekeeping missions; the signing of action plans
by the Governments of Myanmar, Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the past year are
also welcome developments. Yet, as the Council knows,
grave violations against conflict-affected children
continue and do so on a daily basis.
The situation in Syria is dire. Possibly half of the
almost 7 million Syrian internally displaced persons
are children; approximately half of the 1.6 million
refugees are children. Between 3 and 4 million Syrian
children are in need. Thousands of children have been
killed, gravely injured and even tortured. The damage
to Syria’s infrastructure, including schools — with one
in five either destroyed, damaged or converted into a
shelter — is depriving Syrian children of their basic
needs.
There are far too many other accounts of violations,
which we have been briefed on. In Mali and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo it is crucial that
peacekeeping missions ensure the effective protection
of children. We have also heard terrible reports of
the large number of children recruited in the Central
African Republic — a situation on which the Council
must be engaged.
More broadly, my country shares the concerns of
the Secretary-General that the evolving character and
tactics of armed conflict are creating unprecedented
threats to children. In particular, we share the serious
concerns about the use of schools for military purposes.

13-3654013

S/PV.6980

Obviously, more must be done. I would like to
focus very briefly on three areas where greater efforts
could be made.
First, action plans to halt child recruitment have had
a real impact on ending violations against children in a
number of countries. Given that many non-State armed
groups violate children’s rights during conflict, we
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue to focus on engaging with them,
as well as with Governments, in a concerted effort to
conclude action plans.
Secondly, some existing sanctions regimes have
child rights violations as listing criteria. The Council
should make better use of its sanctions regimes
to designate individuals or entities not previously
considered for listing, but whose child-rights violations
would qualify them for it.
Thirdly, it is crucial that we end impunity for those
most responsible for serious crimes against children.
We call on States to criminalize serious violations of
international law committed against children. In cases
where States are unwilling or unable to investigate
and prosecute crimes, the Council should consider
whether referral to the International Criminal Court is
warranted.
In conclusion, we must ensure that children, who
are those most vulnerable during armed conflict and
those least able to withstand its ravages, are shielded
from its impacts. Protecting children should compel
both Council unity and action. We should ask ourselves,
following Special Representative Zerrougui’s lead this
morning, “If not for these children, then for whom will
this Council act?”.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the United Kingdom for conducting
today’s debate. We are grateful to the briefers for their
attention to the protection of children in armed conflict
and for the useful information they have provided in
that context to the Council.
Children continue to suffer from the horrors of
war. Russia condemns all serious violations against
children, by whomsoever they may be committed, and
advocates the prosecution of all such perpetrators.
Crimes committed against children must be punished.
We too believe it necessary to deal with all six
categories of grave violations against children in
armed conflict, namely, the recruitment and use of

14

children, sexual violence against children, the killing
and maiming of children, abductions, attacks against
schools and hospitals and the blocking of humanitarian
access to children. A particular concern is the killing
and wounding of children during planned attacks and
as a result of the indiscriminate or disproportionate
use of force or the use of unmanned aerial vehicles.
It is unfortunate that such cases are taking place
with lamentable regularity. We call for the thorough
investigation of such incidents and the prosecution of
perpetrators.
Resolution 1612 (2005) and the Council’s followup documents on the matter provide a foundation for
ensuring the protection of children in armed conflict
and post-conflict rebuilding situations. That pertains
to the functioning of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict and
the activities of the relevant Working Group of the
Security Council. The Russian Federation is of the
view that those mechanisms must focus chiefly on
the most pressing major armed conflict situations on
the Council’s agenda. With respect to other situations,
the Working Group may consider those only upon the
agreement of the State in question.
There is no doubt that children need support and
protection in situations other than those involving
armed conflict; the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council also cover matters dealing with children.
In order to strengthen the effectiveness of work in that
important area, existing work distribution arrangements
among the appropriate United Nations entities must be
strictly followed, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and other international law instruments.
The Russian delegation has carefully studied the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/245), which
was introduced by the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict. First and foremost,
we would note that the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General does not
cover the protection of children as a whole; rather, it
covers the situation of children in armed conflict. We
do not see any justification for a broad interpretation
of the concept of armed conflict, as a result of which,
for several years now, the Security Council has been
presented with information on situations that are not
part of its agenda and cannot be qualified as involving
armed conflict. Moreover, the principle guiding the
selection of information for the report remains unclear.
Balanced evaluations based on well-deserved trust and

13-36540

S/PV.6980

reliable information provide a guarantee that, through
respectful dialogue with the States concerned, the
recommendations will be implemented.
The priority set forth during our debate
today — namely, the need to bring pressure to bear on
the so-called persistent perpetrators — is undoubtedly
important. However, taken out of the relevant context,
tackling the problem is impossible. We suggest first
and foremost that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General draw up clear procedures and criteria
for the listing and de-listing of parties to a conflict in
the annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, despite the multiple appeals over several
years made by a number of members of the Security
Council and the direct instructions given by the Council
in resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2068 (2012), no progress
has been made in resolving the problem.
We believe that, before deciding what should
be done with parties to a conflict characterized as
“persistent perpetrators”, we must understand why they
are being classified as such. The only criterion used to
date is continuous reference to a given party to a conflict
in the report of the Secretary-General over a five-year
period. In our view, that criterion is superficial.
With regard to the criteria for de-listing parties to
a conflict in the report, in our view the mere existence
of an action plan for halting some sort of a crime drawn
up by a party to the conflict with the United Nations
is not a guarantee that the situation of children will
improve. There is no denying the fact that a number of
States in whose territories parties to a conflict listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s report are
carrying out activities are doing things to change the
situation. The lack of clear criteria not only does not
help the Governments of those countries but also gives
rise to a sort of lack of trust regarding the objectivity
and effective of the approach as a whole.
With regard to efforts to bring pressure to bear on
perpetrators, the means could vary depending on the
situation. In our view, sanctions are not a panacea.
Of primary importance is constructive cooperation
between the United Nations and the States where
armed groups are acting. Undoubtedly, the leading
role for protecting children must be played by national
Governments, and the primary task of the United
Nations is to complement those efforts upon the request
of such States.

Effective cooperation with the Governments of
countries engulfed in conflict or in a post-conflict
reconstruction phase can be established only in an
atmosphere of trust and dialogue, which, in the final
analysis, will foster an improvement of the situation of
children on the ground.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the
Russian Federation attaches the highest importance
to the matter of the protection of children in armed
conflict and to international efforts to resolve that
important issue.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the President for having organized today’s
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers and other
speakers. I congratulate the delegation of Luxembourg
on the way it has conducted the chairmanship of the
Working Group, and I reiterate France’s support.
The United Nations approach to protecting children
in armed conflict has made it possible to demobilize
tens of thousands of children. Action plans are the
cornerstone of that approach. Thanks to them, in 2012
two States were taken off the list of shame.
Taken together, the approximately 20 action
plans that have been signed are a sign of progress
made in protecting children in armed conflict. The
implementation of those actions plans must be carried
out as soon as possible for them to be fully effective.
In that way, our credibility can be ensured. In order
to do that, the international community and the United
Nations must deploy all the material and human
resources they have at their disposal.
Action plans are based on cooperation between
States, and progress has been made in that area. In that
connection, we are encouraged by the cooperation and
political will shown by Chad to finalize its action plan.
The United Nations approach on the ground has
been strengthened over the years. Let us consider, for
example, the child protection sections in peacekeeping
operations, which play a crucial role and whose
deployment must continue. Nevertheless, countless
violations continue to occur, and each conflict shows
us that reality. Children are the first victims of conflict.
That is the case in Syria, where the regime and the
militias have been responsible for the worst atrocities
against children. Children are tortured and subjected
to sexual violence in detention. They are killed without
pity by elite snipers, who target them by design in

13-3654015

S/PV.6980

order to terrorize the people. Schools are being bombed
incessantly, to such an extent that only 6 per cent of
children have access to education in the region of
Aleppo. Since the beginning of the crisis, more than
6,500 children have been killed in Syria, and that figure
is probably lower than the actual figures.
Violations against children in Syria must be
condemned, whatever their source. The Syrian
opposition says that it is prepared to open a dialogue
with the United Nations on the issue. We would
therefore encourage the Special Representative to
launch, as soon as possible, discussions for the signing
of an action plan with them.
In Mali, armed groups in the north have mutilated
and tortured children. They have used children as
human shields and recruited them by force. The
situation has improved since the beginning of the year
but remains fragile. The deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali will help to stabilize the country and
provide better protection for children.
In the Central African Republic, Séléka armed
groups have been engaged in looting, rape and
summary executions, and they have not hesitated to
attack UNICEF disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration centres in order to re-recruit children who
had recently been demobilized, reversing the progress
achieved last year. The chaos caused by armed groups
has led to the closing of half of the schools in the
country, thus increasing the vulnerability of children
left to their own devices.
In the Kivus in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Mouvement du 23 mars rebels know
where to find children to fuel their war against
Congolese sovereignty. We count on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its strengthened mandate to
protect children and make it possible for them to return
to their families.
While new crises provide new challenges for the
protection of children in armed conflict, the long
list of persistent perpetrators continues to affect the
credibility of our action. It calls upon us to pursue our
efforts. In addition to the States that have already signed
an action plan, which should be our priority, we should
also improve our response to the armed groups that
want to engage in dialogue with the United Nations but
for whom access is impossible. The States concerned

16

have the responsibility to do everything in their power
to ensure and facilitate access for those groups, because
we are convinced that, in order to ensure the protection
of children trapped in conflict, political considerations
should give way to humanitarian imperatives.
France is also in favour of authorizing the Working
Group to set itself up as an ad hoc sanctions panel to
deal with armed extremists who refuse all dialogue
with the international community and who continue
their violations with full impunity.
Indeed, the fight against impunity should be central
to our action. Recently, the transfer to the International
Criminal Court of Bosco Ntaganda sent out a strong
signal on the criminal consequences of the recruitment
of child soldiers, which is considered to be a war crime.
That is why we are in favour of strengthening dialogue
with the International Criminal Court, which could,
in the first phase, include an invitation to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the Court, to brief the
Council on the issue.
France is also involved on the ground in improving
the protection and sustainable reinsertion of children
caught in armed conflict. Since 2008, we have led a
programme in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa
that has made it possible to reach 13,000 children, 2,000
of them child soldiers.
We continue to call on all States to endorse the Paris
Principles and Paris Commitments, which complement
the action of the Security Council and provide a
solid framework for the action of the international
community to protect children in armed conflict. We
are going modify the format of the annual meetings,
which will take on a regional and technical slant as we
approach the tenth anniversary of the Paris Principles
in 2017. With our partners from the Secretariat and
from UNICEF, I renew our call to join, without any
further delay, the one hundred States that have already
ratified the Principles. Let us not forget that we are
talking about the lives of children and teenagers who
are at risk.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate. We also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their statements.
We offer special recognition to Luxembourg for its
leadership in the Informal Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the negotiation of the

13-36540

S/PV.6980

draft presidential statement to be adopted at the close
of this debate. We welcome the presence of Mr. Jean
Asselborn.
The introductory statements and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/245) illustrate once again the
persistent violations and abuses that children affected
by armed conflict continue to face. The chapter on the
evolving nature of conflict and emerging challenges to
the protection of children cries out for the attention of
the Council.
Although the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians falls on the State, and while those States
that fail to protect their children are putting their own
future at risk, it is also true that new tactics emerging
in conflicts represent threats without precedent to all
children. In this regard, we are concerned that schools
are being used for military purposes, including as
military barracks, weapons caches, command centres,
detention and interrogation centres. This situation not
only puts children and their caretakers at greater risk of
attack, but also clearly increases school absences when
parents do not send their children to school out of fear,
and obstructs children’s own right to education.
We are further concerned over the use of unmanned
aircraft in areas inhabited by civilians, which increases
casualties among children, makes it impossible to
distinguish between combatants and non-combatants,
and seriously weakens the capacity of communities to
defend their children. By the same token, it is deeply
concerning that children are being used as suicide
bombers or human shields.
We support the Secretary-General’s call on parties
to armed conflict to immediately cease committing
grave violations against children. We also believe that
the issue of persistent offenders or perpetrators of abuse
against children should continue to be addressed. It is
imperative that those responsible for serious violations
be brought to justice in order to pay for their crimes; this
is a task that we must undertake until it is completed.
We believe in strengthening national capacities in
the justice and security sectors, as well as in the creation
of specialized chambers and mixed tribunals. We
consider the complementarity of international justice
to national mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court, to be equally as important, especially
in the fight against impunity for persistent perpetrators.

On the basis of the aforementioned points, we
support the further consideration of another mechanism
at the Council’s disposal — the application of a
sanctions regime. Currently, we have four sanctions
committees with criteria for the designation of serious
violations of the rights of children in Côte D’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan. We also have the lists in the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General, beginning with annex
I, which lists the parties to the armed conflicts on the
agenda of the Council. Further work is needed to ensure
the imposition of sanctions against offenders.
Regarding the signing of action plans to halt the
recruitment of children, we are pleased to see that
their numbers have continued to increase, as have the
establishment of dialogues with parties to conflicts.
However, from our own experience we prioritize the
signing of peace accords that comprehensively address
the problems of the country involved and seek a
sustainable solution and a construction of a firm and
lasting peace. We advocate for the issues of children
affected by conflict to be addressed in any ceasefire
agreement, as well as in post-conflict agendas.
We remain especially concerned about the
continuing conflict in Syria, where children have been
victims of unacceptable and unbearable violations, and
we join in the calls made by the Secretary-General to
the Government and affiliated groups to cease engaging
in acts of violence that kill children and cause their
suffering.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate. I take this
opportunity to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Mr. Gregory Ramm
for their statements and the efforts of their respective
entities. I welcome the presence in the Chamber
of Foreign Minister Asselborn, whose country,
Luxembourg, under the leadership of Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas, is playing a key role in the Council in
improving the situation of children and armed conflict.
For 10 years now, the Security Council has
undertaken many measures to end grave violations
against children in armed conflict. The strategies
defined to date, including the signing of action plans
between various actors and the United Nations, have
led to some progress. We welcome and encourage the
continuation of these strategies. These positive results,
however, should not allow us to forget that the number of

13-3654017

S/PV.6980

child victims of attacks with explosives, indiscriminate
bombings, and the use of materials and other methods
of warfare prohibited by international humanitarian
law continues to grow.
Moreover, there has been an upsurge in the use
of children to commit suicide attacks or to serve as
human shields. In Afghanistan, it is reported that more
than 500 children died in suicide attacks in 2012. The
Syrian conflict, which may already have claimed more
than 93,000 lives, has not spared children. An entire
generation of children has thus been sacrificed, and it
is reported that more than 6,700 children have already
lost their lives there.
On the African continent, the fate of children in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and the Sudan is rather dismal.
They are recruited, used as objects, killed, raped or
maimed, and subject to other forms of violence.
My country is just as concerned about another form
of war tactic, which is the targeting of hospitals and
schools. In this regard, it is reported that between 2005
and 2012, national armed forces and armed groups
used schools and universities in at least 24 countries
in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America as
military bases, interrogation and torture centres, and
weapons and ammunition depots, thereby exposing
these schools and universities to attack from the
opposing armed party.
There are several reasons that perhaps lie at the
heart of the ongoing violations against children in
armed conflict, first and foremost a lack of resources
for the implementation of plans of action by those
countries having signed them. It is also difficult to
establish contact with non-State armed groups with
a view to their signing action plans with the United
Nations. Finally — and this is hardly an exhaustive
list — there is the slow pace of the process of the
prosecution of perpetrators, owing to weak national
criminal jurisdictions and the inadequacy, or even
absence, of a cooperation framework between national
and international courts.
That is why Togo supports the recommendation
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245) and urges the Council to play a greater
role, alongside the Secretary-General, in efforts to,
inter alia, bring those parties to conflict that have
not yet done so to sign plans of action and to ensure

18

that the necessary resources are earmarked for their
implementation.
In order to induce non-State armed groups, which
generally do not consider themselves bound by the
obligation to protect children, to sign such action plans,
it would be advisable to engage in an open and frank
dialogue with them. The experience of certain countries
that have known conflict and have taken that path
should inspire us to move forward along those lines.
The various initiatives and the numerous efforts
undertaken to put an end to violence against children
will be ineffective if we do not resolutely tackle the
issue of impunity. Indeed, impunity must remain a
concern of the international community, given that
almost all perpetrators of such violations remain at
large, although there was a verdict in early 2012 in the
case of Thomas Lubanga.
Genuine and effective measures must be taken at
the national, regional and international levels to put an
end to impunity. The numerous meetings on the issue
of children in armed conflict will not help to resolve
this issue the perpetrators are not held to account, if
national Governments hesitate to prosecute and try
them or deliver them to the competent jurisdictions,
and if local populations do not cooperate in the process
of arresting them.
While continuing the process of reflection on the
decisive action that it could take in the context of this
combat through its peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations should help countries to build the capacities of
their national institutions and modernize their penal
legislation so as to carry out investigations aimed at
prosecuting perpetrators and bringing them to justice.
Moreover, States must, in a regional and subregional
framework, develop and strengthen cooperation and
reciprocal judicial assistance, which could prove
effective.
My country supports the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this debate and
thanks once again the delegation of Luxembourg for its
determined efforts to finalize it.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Mr. President,
let me at the outset express my sincere appreciation to
you for having convened this debate. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Under-SecretaryGeneral Hervé Ladsous; the Deputy Executive Director

13-36540

S/PV.6980

of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and the Associate
Vice-President of Save the Children, Mr. Gregory
Ramm, for their informative briefings.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2013/245). While encouraged by the positive
developments referred to in the report, we remain
concerned at the fact that grave violations against
children continue to occur. We are also worried about
emerging challenges for child protection, including the
military use of schools and the detention of children by
security forces. The situation in Syria is particularly
worrisome. It is disturbing that, among the well over
93,000 people estimated to have been killed to date,
many thousands are children.
Against that backdrop, my delegation appreciates
the crucial role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict
in protecting children from the devastating effects of
conflicts. We commend the tremendous efforts made by
and the commitment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui since her
assumption of the post last year. As a staunch supporter
of her mandate, the Republic of Korea will continue to
cooperate closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
I would like to underline the following key points.
First, ending impunity is the key to combating
violations and abuses against children, as well as
ensuring their non-recurrence. We fully acknowledge
that accountability for the most serious crimes against
children has been strengthened through the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) as well as
that of ad hoc and mixed tribunals. The verdict of
the ICC on Thomas Lubanga last year was indeed a
landmark decision. While welcoming that decision, my
delegation would like to encourage all States to extend
their full cooperation to the ICC to further enhance
accountability at the international level.
Ensuring accountability at the national level is
equally important. All States should continue their
efforts to strengthen national mechanisms, including
domestic criminal laws and executive and judicial
systems to investigate and prosecute those responsible.
We hope that all relevant United Nations entities will
pay greater attention to supporting States’ efforts in
that regard.

Secondly, I would like to underline the significance
of concrete, time-bound action plans as key tools for
protecting children from current and future abuses. My
delegation welcomes the signing of action plans by the
Governments of Myanmar, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last year. We also welcome the
fact that all parties in Nepal and Sri Lanka have been
removed from the lists contained in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report after the full implementation
of the action plan. We hope that all parties listed in the
Secretary-General’s report will prepare and implement
action plans without further delay.
In that regard, my delegation believes that
engagement by the United Nations with non-State
armed groups is crucial. To that end, independent
and unhindered access of the United Nations must be
allowed, and contact between the United Nations and
non-State armed groups should be further facilitated.
Thirdly, the Security Council should put increasing
pressure on persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children, including the adoption of targeted and
graduated measures against them. To that end, links
between the children and armed conflict agenda and the
sanctions regimes should be further strengthened. We
support the recommendation made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report to strengthen the provisions for
the protection of children in all relevant mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child-protection advisers.
Additionally, we would like to further encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to share specific information contained in the
Secretary-General’s reports with the relevant sanctions
Committees, including through regular briefings.
Last but not least, ensuring the compliance of parties
to armed conflict with international law should be the
starting point in preventing grave violations against
children. In that regard, I would like to encourage all
States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, which is the key legal instrument in
that respect.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to congratulate the
United Kingdom for having convened this important
debate under its presidency. I should like to thank
Mr. Ladsous, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt

13-3654019

S/PV.6980

and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their respective briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Luxembourg in this debate and congratulate
Ambassador Lucas on her commitment to this important
issue on the agenda of the Security Council.
The protection of children in armed conflict is a
major challenge for the international community, given
the size and seriousness of the crimes perpetrated
against human rights, international law and international
humanitarian and refugee law. That challenge compels
all of us to act in a concerted, coordinated and effective
manner.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/245)
is an exhaustive and very useful document of the
actions and initiatives taken by countries affected by
issues related to child protection and the prevention
of children’s involvement in armed conflict. It also
enables us to assess the challenges and constraints
that the countries concerned are dealing with in
establishing criminal responsibility for the perpetrators
of such crimes, strengthening punitive measures for
the guilty and ensuring that such crimes do not recur.
Signings of peace agreements and the implementation
of national action plans and programmes preventing
child recruitment by armed forces and groups have
made it possible to relaunch investigation processes and
criminal proceedings against the perpetrators of such
crimes.
The atrocities endured by children in armed conflict
have a devastating psychological and socioeconomic
impact on the victims and their families. Strengthening
access to support and social reintegration services will
enable those children to successfully reintegrate into
their societies and communities. In the view of my
delegation, the establishment in July 2011 of a human
rights due diligence policy should help to strengthen
existing mechanisms. The Secretary-General’s report
indicates that in some situations refugee children have
been forced to rejoin armed groups as soldiers. That
situation poses major challenges for United Nations
efforts.
Prevention strategies demand a global, integrated
approach that addresses normative aspects as well
as institutional ones. That applies particularly to the
establishment of laws that criminalize the recruitment of
children, strengthen awareness mechanisms for families
and communities and, ultimately, the establishment
of national re-education, training and job-creation

20

programmes that can offer children better prospects
through education and training. Implementing such
strategies also requires a participatory approach through
the involvement of public authorities, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and national human
rights and human rights protection organizations.
The protection of children in armed conflict
is also dependent on collective, coordinated action
supported by the United Nations system through
technical assistance and the strengthening of countries’
capacities. In that regard, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that donors be
invited into the discussion in order to mitigate funding
inadequacies and ensure that action plans that have
been signed or are under negotiation are effectively
implemented.
Morocco commends United Nations efforts in the
area of the protection of children in armed conflict
and hopes that the guidelines established jointly with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will be
regularly updated, particularly those dealing with
the terms of reference of the mandates for the child
protection advisers. Fighting child recruitment in armed
conflict is primarily the responsibility of the parties to
the conflicts, who have the duty to protect children.
Respect for the dignity of children is also a collective
responsibility. Coordinating the efforts of every sector
of the United Nations system involved should also be a
priority.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui
for her briefing and the important work her team is
doing to advance the protection of children in armed
conflict. And I thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm. We recognize that
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF
and Save the Children, which they represent here
today, are very pertinent to the advancement of the
children-in-armed-conflict agenda, and I thank them
all for their informative and comprehensive briefings.
Rwanda believes that the adequate protection of
children is both the primary responsibility and the
moral obligation of Governments, and even more so in
situations of armed conflict. That noble objective should
be encouraged and supported in the Security Council’s
work. In that context, we stand ready to support the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-

13-36540

S/PV.6980

General for Children and Armed Conflict and of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
In 2011, the Rwandan Government established a
national commission for children in order to promote
children’s rights and develop a plan of action to
protect children from abuse, violence and exploitation.
Children’s summits are also organized every year to
ensure that children’s voices are heard on issues that
concern them. A well-functioning system is in place
whereby children in orphanages are placed in families.
In addition, Rwanda has put in place child-protection
systems at the community, district and national level.
The judicial approach is child-friendly. Judges, police
and local authorities are trying to deal with abuses of
children.
We are concerned, however, that violations continue
against children in various conflict situations, and that
the number of persistent perpetrators has increased, as
evidenced in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/245). Rwanda calls on all parties to
cease violations against children and on Governments
to hold those responsible for such violations of
children’s rights accountable. The Security Council
should partner States in order to ensure that justice is
rendered.
We welcome some positive developments,
particularly where State and non-State armed groups
cited for violations and abuses against children have
formulated action plans to halt their violations. We call
for those plans to be implemented and urge those who
have not yet done so to enter into negotiations with the
United Nations for the preparation and implementation
of concrete, time-bound action plans concerning all
violations against children. In that regard, the signing
of action plans by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar and Somalia, in
addition to the progress made by other parties in
releasing children, is a good step.
Strengthening and increasing assistance and
national capacity-building is the important next step
in ensuring full implementation of the plans. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular,
the impact of the armed conflict there on children is
worrying. We call on all armed groups to immediately
cease all forms of violations and human-rights abuses
against children. We emphasize the indispensable
role of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and

the United Nations country team in monitoring and
reporting on grave abuses of children. In that regard,
we support supplying the Mission with adequate child
protection advisers.
Concerning the Central African Republic,
although violations against children decreased during
the reporting period, Rwanda is concerned about the
alarming reports that child recruitment and abuses
occurred throughout the first half of 2013. We call
on parties involved in those acts to exercise restraint,
release all child soldiers in their ranks and vacate
schools occupied by military forces or armed groups.
In Mali, we call for the immediate deployment
of an adequate number of child protection advisers
throughout the Mission to cover child protection
infractions. The United Nations should ensure strict
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as
adequate training for all peacekeepers, including all
those involved with child protection.
In Syria, Rwanda notes with concern the
unacceptable death toll on children in the conflict
there, and reiterates its call on Council members to use
their leverage over the parties to the Syrian conflict
to ensure the protection of civilians and of children in
particular. Belligerents should be required to vacate
children’s areas, schools and hospitals; measures should
be taken immediately by the parties to protect the lives
and dignity of those innocents caught up in the conflict.
Rwanda calls on the Secretary-General to strengthen
the child-protection capacity in all peacekeeping
and United Nations missions. In that regard, we
welcome the upcoming deployment of child-protection
capacity to the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
encourage the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to create and enhance
partnerships with independent organizations such as
the European Union, the African Union and NATO.
Their involvement in conflict mediation, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding missions will strengthen
implementation of the guidelines relating to children
and armed conflict.
In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
children in armed conflicts necessitates continued
commitment and consultations between the United
Nations and the Governments concerned, which should
take on primary responsibility for the protection of

13-3654021

S/PV.6980

their citizens, including children. The Government
of Rwanda remains committed to the protection of
children and ready to share our humble experience in
that regard.

violations of applicable international law impinging on
children’s rights. It demands that all parties to conflict
immediately put an end to such practices and take
special measures to protect children.

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We deeply appreciate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui’s remarkable work, undertaken in pursuance
of her mandate, to implement the international legal
framework for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. With a firm yet pragmatic approach,
she has been able to obtain the cooperation of States
and regional organizations. We welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Jean Asselborn to the Council. Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas and her team have done a splendid job in
putting together a very comprehensive draft presidential
statement. Luxembourg has conducted inclusive and
skilful negotiations to bring all Council members on
board.

In his report (S/2013/245), the Secretary-General
referres to an increasing number of child casualties
incurred through the use of armed drones. He has also
called for adherence to the principles of precaution,
distinction and proportionality and for transparent and
effective investigations when child casualties occur. For
its part, Pakistan believes that the use of armed drones
violates sovereignty, causes civilian casualties and puts
communities at risk of reprisal attacks. Drone strikes
radicalize disaffected communities and increase the
number of terrorists. Urgent and intense negotiations
are needed to address the issue of armed drones.

Children are the most valuable resource we have.
A society’s soul is reflected in the way it treats its
children. The United Nations Charter’s adage “to save
succeeding generations” urges us to invest in children’s
future, which is in fact our future. We know that
millions of children are trapped in wars and conflicts.
They are killed, maimed, raped and subjected to sexual
violence. They are recruited, abducted and detained,
and are coerced into becoming part of armed conflicts.
Some progress has been made to slow down this
scourge, especially in developing norms and standards.
Thousands of children have been demobilized,
rehabilitated and reintegrated. Much more needs to be
done to ensure compliance, fight impunity and protect
children’s rights in the face of new risks that come
about as a result of the evolving nature of conflict.
As Ms. Zerrougui pointed out this morning, the
absence of clear front lines and identifiable opponents
and the tactics used by terrorist groups make children
vulnerable in conflict situations. Children have been
used as suicide bombers and human shields. Schools
continue to be attacked, which particularly affects
girls’ education.

Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the childrenand-armed-conflict mechanism, including its reporting
and monitoring procedures. We want to strengthen
the political consensus around that mandate to ensure
better protection of the rights of children in situations of
armed conflict. For that purpose, the legal parameters
of the mandate must be respected. Focus should
continue to remain on situations of armed conflict and
those threatening international peace and security. We
are encouraged by Ms. Zerrougui’s outreach to Member
States to understand and address their concerns in that
regard.
The draft presidential statement to be adopted today
clearly recognizes the primary role of Government,
which is to be supported and supplemented by the
United Nations, in providing protection and relief to
children affected by armed conflict.
Before concluding, I would like to make the
following suggestions.

Persistent perpetrators of violence against children
must be brought to justice through national judicial
systems and, where applicable, the use of international
justice arrangements.

Every effort should be made to ensure that the
information collected through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism is accurate and verifiable. The
Council should finalize objective and balanced listing
and delisting criterial, in full consultation with Member
States. The terms “armed attacks” and “armed groups”
should be replaced by “terrorist attacks” and “terrorist
groups” in cases where a clear determination has been
made that the attacks were launched by terrorist outfits.
There is no need for legal euphemisms in that context.

The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today sends a strong signal: the Council condemns all

Finally, I thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous, UNICEF Deputy Director Yoka Brandt and

22

13-36540

S/PV.6980

Save the Children Associate Vice-President Gregory
Ramm for their statements. Their contributions have
enriched our discussion in the Council.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the United Kingdom’s
initiative to convene this debate on children and
armed conflict. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui; the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Brandt; and the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous, for their briefings. I have also listened to
the statement by Mr. Ramm, the representative of Save
the Children.
Children carry the hope for human progress. The
ability of children to grow up in a secure and safe
environment depends on the caring and joint efforts of
all Governments and the international community as a
whole. However, in many parts of the world, children
are the most vulnerable group and are subject to the
suffering caused by armed conflict. The protection of
children in armed conflict is the abiding obligation of
all parties to a conflict.
China is greatly concerned by violations of the
rights and interests of children and supports the
tireless efforts of the United Nations — and the
Security Council in particular — to use their respective
advantages to protect children in armed conflict on the
basis of their respective mandates. I would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize the following.
First, to protect children from harm in armed
conflict, it is crucial to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts. The Security Council should focus on the
maintenance of international peace and security as its
primary responsibility and give priority to preventive
diplomacy through mediation and good offices. Efforts
should be made to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts
by addressing their root causes. That is the best way
to protect children and is much more significant than
providing remedies in the aftermath of conflicts. All
conflicts are not the same, and the Security Council,
when addressing issues concerning children and armed
conflict, should not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach.
Although sanctions are one way to address threats to
international peace and security, they alone cannot
remove the root causes of those problems.
Secondly, Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting children in armed
conflicts. To ensure the effectiveness of mechanisms

for the protection of children in armed conflicts, the
Government concerned should play a leading role.
Communication and coordination with Governments
should be strengthened. The mechanism for the
protection of children in armed conflict should heed
and respect the views of the Government concerned
through dialogue, coordination and consultation.
Priority should be given to supporting and helping the
Government concerned in its efforts to protect children
and their rights and interests. China urges the parties to
armed conflict to carry out their relevant obligations,
abide by international humanitarian law and respect
and safeguard the rights and interests of children.
Thirdly, the protection of children in armed conflict
requires that the international community, in its efforts
at post-conflict reconstruction, adopt a comprehensive
strategy aimed at creating a conducive security and
social environment for the healthful development of
children. The international community should give
priority to the reintegration of children into their
families and societies and to their continued schooling,
so that they can resume normal lives.
We encourage UNICEF, the World Bank and
other international organizations to strengthen their
coordination and cooperation and use their respective
advantages in the joint effort to help countries in
conflict to build their capacity to protect children
and to aid them in their efforts to eliminate poverty,
to provide universal education and to work towards
sustainable development.
China will continue to work with all parties in an
effort to improve the situation of children in armed
conflict and will do its utmost to maintain international
peace and security so as to save children from the
suffering of war.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and other briefers for their
valuable contributions this morning. I welcome the
earlier presence of the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg at today’s
debate.
The progress already made during Luxembourg’s
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is encouraging. The United Kingdom

13-3654023

S/PV.6980

welcomes the strong leadership shown by both Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
Ambassador Lucas on this work. We look forward to
their continued efforts.
This debate is a reminder of why the Security
Council’s work is so important. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/245) documents hideous
violations — thousands of children killed and maimed
by explosive weapons and continuous shelling, the
systematic rape and torture of girls and boys and
the forcible use of children as human shields. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has demonstrated effective advocacy and active
engagement to prevent those grave violations against
children. I am grateful for her report and commend
United Nations country task forces for producing
reliable and evidence-based information on violations
against children.
But a high level of ambition for the childrenand-armed-conflict agenda must be sustained. The
Special Representative’s campaign, announced today,
for no child to be associated with State armed forces
in conflict by 2016 demonstrates such ambition. The
United Kingdom fully supports that goal. In the past
12 months, action plans were signed with parties
to conflict in Burma, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We expect, and look forward
to, the signing of the additional action plans under
negotiation. The expected adoption of today’s draft
presidential statement builds on that success by
strengthening Council consensus to tackle persistent
perpetrators.
I call on all of us to address three challenges in
particular, namely, implementing the action plans, the
reintegration of children and combating impunity.
We call on all parties to conflict that have not
concluded action plans to do so immediately. But
signing an action plan is only the first step. All parties
to conflict must honour their commitments as quickly as
possible. To support the implementation of such plans,
the United Nations, international partners and Member
States must address funding gaps and prioritize the
deployment of senior child-protection advisers.
The ultimate tragedy is that of children who grow
up to perpetuate the cycle of conflict as adults. Denied
a childhood, a home and an education, children become
trapped in a world of armed conflict. We can support the
successful reintegration of those children into society

24

by stopping the military use of schools and securing
provisions to protect children in peace processes.
Finally, impunity for those who commit violations
against children is unacceptable. Perpetrators should
be in no doubt that their crimes will be investigated
and that trials will follow, as demonstrated by the trials
of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Charles Taylor and the
recent transfer of Bosco Ntaganda to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Cooperation between the
Security Council and the ICC is critical to ensuring
such accountability.
The future of children across the world depends
upon the United Nations rising to these challenges.
No child anywhere or at any time should needlessly be
endangered or suffer in conflict. The draft presidential
statement to be adopted today signals that determination.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council has before it the text of a draft
statement by the President on behalf of the Council
on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank the Council
members for their valuable contributions to the draft
statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
draft statement, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under S/PRST/2013/8.
It is so decided.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
That way, we shall be able to conclude the debate before
lunchtime.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me join others in
congratulating the United Kingdom presidency of
the Security Council for convening this significant
debate. I also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Yoka Brandt; and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their

13-36540

S/PV.6980

important statements. Allow me to recognize the
efforts exerted by Luxembourg as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The presence
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Luxembourg underscores the importance
that Luxembourg places on its chairmanship.
On the issue of child protection, Thailand is no
less concerned than any other Government. Last
September, Thailand was the first country to sign the
Optional Protocol to the Convention to the Rights of the
Child on the communications procedure. Our current
efforts to harmonize domestic laws and regulations
and the relevant protective mechanisms in service to
our children further underscores our commitments
to enhancing child protection. Our cooperation with
UNICEF and other relevant United Nations agencies
has been fruitful, constructive and efficient for many
decades, and it continues to be enhanced.
Although Thailand is neither in a situation of armed
conflict nor on the Security Council’s agenda, Thailand
attaches great importance to the issue of children and
armed conflict. We condemn all grave violations and
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict,
and we support the effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the issue.
During the open debate on children and armed
conflict held last September (see S/PV.6838), Thailand
offered our humble views on certain aspects of how the
United Nations could better perform its tasks to address
the issue of children based on the interest of the child
and national specificities. Let me reiterate our views.
First, given the number of United Nations actors
working on child-related issues, it is absolutely
imperative that each and everyone has a clear mandate
and that those mandates and responsibilities are
respected. The United Nations is a principle- and
rules-based Organization. Respective mandates cannot
and must not be conducted, expanded or interpreted
arbitrarily. The misinterpretation or stretching of
such mandates will not lead us to our common goal
of enhancing child protection, but can rather weaken
the joint effort of the United Nations and inadvertently
put children at higher risk. Mandates should be
carefully drafted, endorsed, reviewed and adapted,
not in competition with one other but in support of the
comparative advantages and respective roles that each
United Nations actor should play.

Secondly, situations on the ground in different
countries are unique and require different approaches
and expertise. Therefore, the United Nations absolutely
needs to work in close cooperation with and with the
consent of concerned Governments, particularly when
it has a mandate to engage with non-State parties in
order to avoid unintended negative consequences.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245) and the appropriate
approach to bring about successful solutions rely
heavily on data collection and unbiased analysis.
We value receiving important information from all
stakeholders, including civil society as appropriate,
but such information needs to be accurate, objective,
reliable and verifiable. Thailand wants to emphasize
strongly the importance of the involvement and consent
of Member States in preparing the report from the
outset.
Fourthly, more new parties to the conflict continue
to be listed in the annexes. In this connection, it is
imperative, as well as a logical expectation, to see
both listing and de-listing criteria clearly specified in
the report after being discussed among the Council
members and formally endorsed by the Council, as
stipulated in operative paragraph 19 (d) of resolution
1882 (2009). Thailand encourages the Council to give
equal importance to both listing and de-listing, as well
as to carry out the necessary discussions on this issue
in a transparent manner, in close consultation with
affected Member States.
Thailand cannot stress strongly enough the
importance we attach to the mandates of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We believe that children
and women alike must stop bearing the brunt of war and
conflicts. The Security Council has a clear role to play
in their protection in situations of armed conflict or in
situations threatening international peace and security,
but this role has to be applied with precision and within
the framework of a clearly-defined mandate.
For other situations outside the realm of armed
conflict, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, an inclusive and holistic remedy must be adopted
to ensure the promotion and protection of basic human
rights, sustainable development efforts and security
considerations. Anything else could exacerbate the
situation on the ground and become a self-serving

13-3654025

S/PV.6980

prophecy when the wrong remedy is applied to the
wrong situation. A case in a point is Thailand, which
is neither in a situation of armed conflict nor on the
Security Council agenda. The issue of independent
monitoring and access should not be raised because it
is simply not in the mandate and will not be granted.
Moreover, the Thai Government and the United Nations
country team have already put in place mutually
agreed arrangements and continue to enjoy very close
cooperation.
Finally, the diversity of views by Member States
should not be misinterpreted as a sign of opposition to
this important cause, as negligence or non-cooperation,
but instead as critical input to strengthen and sustain
the work of the United Nations in the protection of
our children for the long term. I believe we all aim
to strengthen Governments’ capacity to protect our
children, our future.
Mr. Al-Hakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245), which is
before the Security Council today, and to congratulate
the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are also very grateful to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her role. Through her work she is helping to shed a
light on the suffering of children in armed conflict. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg for her work in this respect.
The report refers to incidents involving children
that have been caused by terrorist organizations
included in the list of parties responsible for violations
against children. As all know, Iraq is currently
suffering a spate of terrorist attacks and violations
against children. Groups are exploiting children to use
them in these terrorist attacks. The incidents involving
children are not very numerous if we consider that half
the population is under 18 years.
The Iraqi Government, however, has taken
preventive measures to prevent terrorists from
exploiting children. Foremost among these is the system
of compulsory education, ensuring that children are
enrolled in school and following up on their registration
to ensure they keep attending. This is to prevent
their exploitation by terrorists. The Government is
also responsible for rehabilitating children who have

26

been sentenced by the judicial system, and works to
reintegrate them into society.
With regard to the participation of children under
18 years in troops of the Awakening Councils, as noted
in the report, Iraqi law forbids those under 18 years from
joining the armed forces. Moreover, the Awakening
Councils troops have been incorporated into the regular
armed forces. The minimum age for joining the armed
forces is 18 years. To be a volunteer in the security
forces requires a written waver and authorization from
one’s parents.
In addition to the constitutional requirements, Iraq
has signed the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols. This is essential for protecting
the rights of children. A national, cross-ministerial
body has been created to protect Iraqi children and
counter the phenomenon of school drop-outs. This body
also attends to the special needs of children from poor
areas by directly following up on their cases and raising
children’s awareness of their human rights, which is
part of the school curriculum. It is also undertaking
other activities to prevent children being recruited
by terrorist groups. Iraqi society is conservative and
attaches particular importance to family, children and
social interaction.
Finally, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and her entire team. We reaffirm
that we will continue to cooperate with United Nations
bodies to guarantee the rights of children in general and
as a priority of the Iraqi Government. We look forward
to the next visit of Ms. Zerrougui to Iraq.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate on
the issue of children and armed conflict. I would like
to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui. Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and today’s other briefers
for their statements.
Over the past 12 years since the adoption of
resolution 1379 (2001) in 2001, the issue of children
and armed conflict has been a regular item on the
Security Council’s agenda. A great deal of progress has
been made to implement the provisions of the relevant

13-36540

S/PV.6980

resolutions. However, a great deal more remains to
be done, especially as the nature of armed conflict
threatening the maintenance of international peace
and security has metamorphosed significantly during
the past decade. This is evident from the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on this subject, and the comments
made by several delegations during our debate today.
India has been a strong supporter of peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council. Over
160,000 Indian troops have served so far under the blue
flag in all corners of the globe. The experience that we
have acquired during the course of that service makes
us acutely conscious that adequate resources are still not
being made available to fulfil the mandate of Security
Council resolutions on this subject. Specifically, we
call for more child protection advisors to be deployed
in peacekeeping operations.
During such operations, especially in recent times,
United Nations peacekeepers from India have also come
across the outrageous practice of children being used
as combatants in armed conflicts, notably by so-called
militia groups. There is a need for the Security Council
to examine the implications of this phenomenon on the
Council’s mandates for peacekeeping operations.
In the wider framework of the subject of our debate
today, we would encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue to work with
national authorities in developing capacities to deal
with children in armed conflict. Support for the efforts
of national authorities to ensure accountability should
be a key focus area. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism of the United Nations envisages the
involvement of and close cooperation with the country
concerned for its effective functioning, and can play a
useful role in this regard.
It is also important that United Nations access
to non-State armed groups be carried under the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the Government concerned. It is imperative in this
regard that action plans signed between the concerned
Governments and the United Nations be implemented
rigorously.
United Nations disarmament, demobilization, and
rehabilitation and security sector reform programmes,
among others, must focus on guaranteeing the safe
return of children and their reintegration into society.
We believe that the United Nations Peacebuilding

Fund can be used to formulate projects to focus on the
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict.
There is one issue regarding the report of the
Secretary-General before us today (S/2013/245) on
which my delegation would like to join others in
expressing concern.
Paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001) requests the
Secretary-General to report on situations that are on
the Security Council’s agenda or that may be brought to
the attention of the Security Council by the Secretary
General, in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter,
which specifically limit such issues to those that, in
his opinion, “threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security”. All subsequent resolutions, which
draw upon paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001), have
reiterated this framework for the Secretary-General’s
report. However, we note with concern that despite that
clearly spelt-out mandate, the report of the SecretaryGeneral includes issues that cannot be considered a
threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as laid down in Article 99 of the Charter.
In our view, by going beyond its mandate, the
Secretary-General’s report has the potential to divert
our already scarce resources in dealing with the issue
of children and armed conflict to areas beyond the
parameters of Security Council resolutions on the
subject. We request the Council to take note of this
concern while considering the report.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s strong
support for the objectives set out in Security Council
resolutions on the issue of children and armed conflict,
and our continued commitment to helping achieve these
objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your invitation
to participate in this debate and for the opportunity to
present the comments of the Government of Colombia
on a topic to which we ascribe the greatest importance.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
before us today (S/2013/245).
In this regard, I recall that resolution 1612 (2005)
provides for the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the presentation of reports in
close consultation with the concerned countries and,
therefore, with their Governments. In that regard, we

13-3654027

S/PV.6980

emphasize that such close consultations should be held
at all steps in the process, in particular in the phase
prior to the submission of draft reports to New York.
For these reasons — and in view of the agreement
reached between the Colombian Government and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts that, in implementing
the monitoring and reporting mechanism pursuant
to resolution 1612 (2005), any dialogue between
representatives of illegal armed groups and the Special
Representative, the United Nations country team or
task force on monitoring and reporting is possible only
with the express prior consent of the Government of
Colombia — it is with concern that we note that the
practice of establishing unauthorized contact with such
illegal armed groups continues.
I therefore reiterate the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs at a meeting of the Security
Council on this issue on 12 July 2011:
“It is entirely naive to think that the United
Nations or any other multilateral organization can
change the minds of terrorist organizations that for
decades have struck fear in civilian populations,
that profit from illicit activities, that utilize terror
as a modus operandi, that use children as their tools
to those ends and that have always ignored national
and international norms.” (S/PV.6581, p. 8)
Against this backdrop, it is important for the
Colombian Government that the monitoring mechanism
strengthen international pressure on such terrorist
groups to cease their violent acts and their activities
against children rather than creating procedures that
may legitimize those groups as political interlocutors.
Colombia reiterates that the role of the United Nations
role regarding issues related to children and armed
conflict should, given the gravity and importance of
the issue, an approach that prioritizes cooperation and
prevention. Calls for the Secretariat to enter into contact
with illegal armed groups even as it seeks to establish
punitive mechanisms are contradictory and discourage
countries that are working to implement action plans
and develop their national capacities to prevent, combat
and tackle such problems.
On the other hand, it is important, in examining
such situations, to always bear in mind that the work
of the Security Council should focus on those conflict
situations that pose a threat to international peace and
security. It is therefore imperative to distinguish them

28

clearly from situations that are not on the Council’s
agenda. Every situation must be dealt with individually,
and appropriate responses must be sought for the
specific circumstances and context of each case.
In strengthening the Council’s consideration of the
issue of children in armed conflict, denunciation and
naming can be useful tools, but they are not completely
effective. In that sense, both the Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should evaluate
the effectiveness of existing mechanisms in terms of
their contribution to strengthening States’ national
capacities. That has been a central preoccupation of the
Colombian Government, which understands that the
defence of children involves not only an indisputable
constitutional mandate, but an ethical and moral
imperative.
Finally, taking into account the context of
this debate, I would like to note the possibility of
establishing a sanctions mechanism related to children
and armed conflict. We should note that sanctions
make sense only when applied to Governments that
do not respond to the international community’s calls
for action. However, the implementation of sanctions
mechanisms with respect to non-State armed actors
in situations not on the Council’s agenda could lead
to various complications related to the legitimacy of
the mandates, the effectiveness of the actions and the
credibility of the Organization. It is important that
the Council bear in mind the fundamental elements
of States and their security before implementing new
mechanisms the consequences of which are not yet
clear.
Attempts to establish targeted sanctions
mechanisms raise questions of all kinds, particularly
questions related to illegal armed groups that have
carried out terrorist activities and respect neither
domestic nor international law. In that context, how
does the Council expect to implement its sanctions?
On the other hand, under which parameters would such
sanctions be enforced against illegal armed groups?
What types of issues would be addressed and what
types of Government actions would be taken into
account with regard to prevention and cooperation?
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
has lengthy experience in managing and protecting
child soldiers, based on the deepest respect for its

13-36540

S/PV.6980

national legislation and international obligations, as
it has suffered the tribulations of many civil wars and
wars in neighbouring countries. Various so-called
“politico-military” movements have been a feature of
my country. In other words, Chad is indeed a postconflict country, but it is also a country that has
endeavoured to achieve stability through an ongoing
national reconciliation policy and to build a country
where the rule of law and democracy prevail.
My country has also fulfilled its obligation to protect
refugees from neighbouring countries, particularly
children. The reconciliation policy reflects our concern
for the fate of children as former combatants in armed
movements and seeks to provide them with training
aimed at returning them to civilian life.
I take a moment to thank our bilateral and
international partners, in particular UNICEF, Care
International and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which have provided extremely valuable
assistance on that front.
However, we have never denied the accidental
presence, in the past, of children in our armed forces.
Mistakes in determining the ages of children were on
occasion inevitable in that the State infrastructure was
at an embryonic stage.
Having said that, in 2011 it became possible to state
that there are no longer any child soldiers in Chad. My
country would therefore have been de-listed from the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General had it not
been for the isolated cases of about 30 children from
the Baba Laddé group, who returned from the Central
African Republic following a reconciliation agreement.
Those children have, in any case, been freed.
My country has many young people and adults and
does not need minors in its military. The paradox is that
our armed forces remain on the Secretary-General’s
list, generating an unfair denigration campaign
against the Chadian national army, which carries out
its international missions responsibly, with courage,
dignity and respect for human rights, particularly the
rights of the child.
We are on that notorious blacklist owing simply
to a process that began in 2012 and that is aimed at
implementing, with our partners, an action plan
that had not been completed. That process has been
accelerated since the most recent visit of Ms. Zerrougui
to N’Djamena in mid-May, during which a road map

was signed in that connection. We rely on our partners
in UNICEF to work actively beside us to implement the
road map.
If there is time, allow me to underline certain
essential measures already undertaken by my
Government aimed at accelerating Chad’s de-listing
from the list and at preventing any violations
against children. First, in early July we improved
the aforementioned legislation on prohibiting the
recruitment of minors by adopting a draft directive,
worked out with the support of UNICEF. A programme
of work has been agreed upon with respect to the joint
verification, involving the Chadian national army and
a United Nations task force, of the situation in the eight
military regions.
The first pilot joint mission will launch activities
in two regions on 24 and 30 June. Other regions will
follow in July and August. Draft legislation on child
protection, including civilian status and penalties for
recruitment and the use of children under the age of
18, was submitted to the National Congress on 31 May.
It has also created a department on child protection
within the national army.
Once again, it appears unfair to us that, for
procedural reasons, our entire army should be
denigrated and its reputation tarnished in the eyes of
the world. We call for the clear-sightedness of those
who defend the rights of children and who, it is certain,
are playing a role that we respect, but who appear to
assess the situation in Chad more unfavourably than
it deserves to be, thereby exacerbating the situation,
which is much healthier than that in many countries
throughout the world.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that there are no longer
any child soldiers in the Chadian national army or
the Chadian contingent in Mali and that Chad is
cooperating actively with the United Nations to ensure
that the Chadian national army no longer appears on
the Secretary-General’s list. Chad respects and will
continue to respect its commitment to the rights of the
child in armed conflict.
Allow me to conclude by congratulating you,
Sir, on having organized this important debate. I also
congratulate all of the eminent persons present on their
important and relevant comments which have been
closely followed by the Chadian delegation.

13-3654029

S/PV.6980

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. The
38 Member States that make up this informal network,
representing all five regional groups of the United
Nations, are Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Benin, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Mexico, Namibia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, San Marino,
Slovenia, Slovakia, South Africa, the Republic of
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay.
The Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
thank the United Kingdom presidency for holding this
debate and thank the Special Representative and the
other briefers for providing the Security Council with
timely information and analysis on the impact of armed
conflicts on children around the world.
In that regard, however, the Group of Friends
regrets that today’s debate could not be held in an open
format, as has been the case in the past. The traditional
open debate provides all Member States with the
opportunity to publicly reconfirm their commitments
to the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict throughout the world and to provide advice and
recommendations to the Security Council for further
concerted action from the wider membership on an
issue relevant to all of us. The 38 Member States that
constitute the Group of Friends on Children in Armed
Conflict reaffirm their support in the strongest terms
for the work that the Security Council has undertaken
to ensure the full protection of children from the grave
violations committed against them in armed conflict.
Since 1999, the Security Council has established
a robust system of protection that has been tirelessly
implemented by the Council’s partners in the field,
including the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF, the task forces and civil society organizations.
Part of the system of protection is ensuring that the
Security Council is seized of and receives information
concerning the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. In that regard, the Group of Friends welcomes
the recent annual report of the Secretary-General

30

(S/2013/245) on children and armed conflict and
reiterates the importance of such annual reporting, so
that the Council may better protect children affected by
conflict and hold perpetrators to account.
(spoke in French)
The Group of Friends welcomes the recent signing
of action plans by the Governments of Myanmar,
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, the Group of Friends calls on Member
States to establish local groups of friends, such
as the one established in Kinshasa, to support the
Governments concerned and the United Nations in
the implementation of the action plans. We applaud
the work of the Special Representative to promote
the conclusion and implementation of action plans
with listed Governments and now call on the Special
Representative to redouble her efforts with non-State
actors.
The Group of Friends further urges the relevant
Member States to allow for dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State actors in order to influence them
to cease violations against children and conclude and
implement action plans to that end. The Group of Friends
also wishes to see greater transparency in action plans
and calls for signatory parties to widely disseminate
action plan commitments to facilitate community-wide
efforts to monitor and support implementation efforts.
(spoke in English)
The next true test of the Council’s work in halting
violations against conflict-affected children is how the
Council deals with the category of parties listed by the
Secretary-General as persistent perpetrators. Those
parties to conflict, which chronically violate children’s
rights and which have been listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s annexes for more than five years, make up
more than half of the parties listed by the SecretaryGeneral.
The Group of Friends reiterates its call for the
Council to ensure that grave violations against children
trigger the imposition of sanctions in all the relevant
Sanctions Committees, to take decisive action against
persistent perpetrators and, in those cases where there is
no designated Sanctions Committee, to consider how to
address that gap through proactive means. We welcome
the recent discussions in the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict on options
for increasing pressure on persistent perpetrators. In

13-36540

S/PV.6980

that regard, we call for a Secretary-General’s report
specifically addressing perpetrators and how to hold
them accountable.
The Group of Friends also calls on the Council to
ensure that the Special Representative regularly briefs
the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, the Council’s relevant Sanctions
Committees and the Security Council directly,
especially on emerging situations such as Libya, Syria,
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and northern Mali.
(spoke in French)
Concrete measures for holding perpetrators to
account for grave violations against children continue
to be rare, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
his annual report; yet, holding perpetrators to account
is a crucial element for protecting children’s rights.
The Group of Friends encourage Member States to
strengthen national accountability mechanisms and
judicial capacities, including by developing childprotection legislation that criminalizes all serious
violence perpetrated against children. In those cases
where national authorities are unwilling or unable to
hold perpetrators to account, due, for instance, to a
lack of capacity or resources, international justice
mechanisms, including through the work of the
International Criminal Court or ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, can and should play a complementary role.
Another means by which accountability measures
can be reinforced, and by which the Council can make
a direct positive difference in the lives of the world’s
children caught in conflict, is to strengthen provisions
for the protection of children in all the relevant Security
Council mission mandates. The Group of Friends
further calls for the Council to ensure that childprotection advisers are deployed in sufficient numbers
to carry out a mission’s child-protection tasks, and that
they have direct access to senior mission leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Croatia, Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

We thank today’s briefers for their presentations
and express our appreciation to Special Representative
Zerrougui for her highly esteemed work. Her tireless
efforts have contributed to the advancement of the
children and armed conflict agenda. We would like to
assure her of the EU’s strong support for her mandate.
We welcome the opportunity to speak today.
Acknowledging the practical reasons for the format of
the debate at this meeting, we look forward to returning
in the future to the practice of addressing the subject in
open debates.
The annual report of the Secretary General
(S/2013/245) reminds us of the challenges ahead. We
have seen progress in some areas — for example, with
the increasing number of action plans. Still, children in
too many countries are suffering terribly from armed
conflict. The situation in Syria is of a special and most
urgent concern. Children there have been suffering for
more than two years from the most heinous crimes. In
addition, the difficult situation of children in Mali and
the Central African Republic has been highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report.
The widespread targeting of schools and their
military use is very worrisome. Children are threatened
when schools or hospitals are being attacked or occupied
by armed groups. We strongly urge conflict parties to
end that practice.
The report also highlights the growing practice
of States to arrest and detain children, making them
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence. Urgent
action is required to prevent and address sexual violence
against children, including by providing appropriate
and accessible services for their rehabilitation and
reintegration, which demonstrates the importance of the
Security Council’s work on the issue. We also support
the work of the delegation of Luxembourg as it chairs
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
We welcome today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/8). In order to achieve further progress,
we would refer to the valuable findings of the
recent seminar organized by Liechtenstein and the
non-governmental organization Watchlist.
Let me just mention some of those findings.
Briefings by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to Security Council, its Working Group and
the relevant Sanctions Committees, such as the one she

13-3654031

S/PV.6980

made following her visit to Syria, should be a regular
feature. In addition, the Working Group toolbox should
in general be fully applied to perpetrators of grave
violations.
Those recommendations go hand in hand with
those in the report of the Secretary-General and
would contribute to adequately addressing the issue
of persistent perpetrators. Still, 29 parties have been
listed for a period of five years or more. The instrument
of regular Security Council Working Group field trips
would help in the follow-up on the implementation of
action plans, as would well-coordinated local networks
of Governments and United Nations actors. In that
regard, it is also essential that Member States allow
the United Nations unconditional access to armed
non-State actors.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a crucial role in fighting impunity. Serious
crimes of international concern should be dealt with by
national judicial systems, but when they are unwilling
or unable to do so, States parties to the Rome Statute
should consider referring those situations to the ICC.
Further institutional dialogue between the ICC and the
Security Council and effective follow up of referrals
made by the Security Council to the ICC could assist in
ensuring accountability.
As it is crucial to implement existing commitments,
I would like to provide the Council with an update on
the EU’s strong commitment.
The EU and its member States spent €200 million
between 2009 and 2012 on assistance related to
children and armed conflict in the countries listed
in the Secretary-General’s report. The EU is also
systematically addressing child protection in all of
the EU’s crisis-management missions and operations.
For example, the EU has adopted minimum training
standards and in 2013 introduced a specialized
training programme on children and armed conflict
for its diplomatic staff, in cooperation with UNICEF.
EU training missions, the most recent one being in
Mali, provide training to armed forces on, inter alia,
humanitarian and human rights law.
Children have the right to be free from fear and want.
Let us make sure that they can enjoy their childhoods,
so that they will become strong, self-confident and
responsible members of our communities.

32

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like at the outset, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I thank also the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
briefing, and those speakers who also briefed the
Council at the beginning of this morning’s meeting.
I also welcome the presence of Mr. John Asselborn
among us.
We have read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General before us on children and armed
conflict (S/2013/245). Despite the fact that the Special
Representative has, for the first time, addressed in her
report the issue of the crimes and violations committed
by armed terrorist groups, particularly with regard
to recruitment of children, it is regrettable that she
disregarded other incidents reported and documented
by many governmental and non-governmental sources.
Those sources have reaffirmed that Salafist and Wahhabi
fundamentalist groups have recruited children. It took
the Special Representative two years to include those
armed terrorist groups on the list, despite the fact that
they recruit children in the context of the conflict in
Syria.
We would have wished that the Special
Representative had requested in her recommendation on
Syria that the States sponsors of fundamentalist terrorist
groups, which are known to all by now, stop supporting
those groups by financing them and providing to them
arms, munitions, information and intelligence, and that
they lift the unilateral coercive economic measures
that they have imposed on the Syrian people, of which
Syrian children are the primary victims as a result of
the lack of development programmes and financing and
due to the weakness of the national economy.
It is most alarming that the Special Representative
insists on including the Syrian armed forces on the list
and on considering them responsible for the bombing of
schools and hospitals, even for disfiguring children and
committing acts of sexual violence against them.
Allow me to address those claims one by one.
First, with respect to the bombing of schools and
hospitals, let me say that we welcomed the Special
Representative and her delegation in late 2012. She met

13-36540

S/PV.6980

with the ministers concerned, particularly the Minister
of Education, who provided her with documented proof
of the extent of the acts of terrorism committed against
educational establishments and schools by armed
terrorist groups. She also made expanded field visits
to schools, hospitals and shelters in Damascus, Homs
and the surrounding areas; however, for some reason,
she chose to disregard what she saw with her own eyes:
that the Syrian Government is using those schools as
shelters for numerous families.
Acts of aggression by armed terrorist groups
continue to be perpetrated against educational
establishments in Syria; this has been documented.
Such acts include forcibly preventing inhabitants from
sending their children to school and bombing schools
and nearby areas, including deliberately, as happened
with an engineering school and other schools in
Damascus.
The health-care infrastructure has also been
targeted by those armed terrorist groups, which have
destroyed, burned and looted more than 35 per cent
of Syrian hospitals. We have provided the Special
Representative with a video recording, with sound,
of terrorists preparing to bomb a hospital and another
recording of the detonation itself. However, there is
no mention of that heinous crime in the report. That
incident alone should have been sufficient to warrant
the inclusion of those terrorist groups on the list of
shame for having bombed schools and hospitals.
Secondly, with respect to the killing and disfiguring
of children, the world has seen the repulsive crimes
perpetrated by terrorist groups against children since
the beginning of the crisis. Mohammed Qatta, a 14-yearold child, was shot to death in Aleppo by elements of
a fundamentalist terrorist brigade of the al-Nusra
Front calling itself the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant. He was whipped and tortured in front of his
parents on charges of blasphemy. In another incident, a
4-year-old child named Faisal was hanged by terrorist
fundamentalist groups after being raped and dragged
for a great distance.
Two days ago, on the Saudi Al-Arabiya satellite
channel, we witnessed the excitement of a Salafist
Wahhabi sheikh from Kuwait, Shafi al-Ajami, who
takes pride in having cut the throats of Syrian children
in Hatla, in Deir Ezzor. Many other heinous crimes
have been committed by the al-Nusra Front that should

have been included on the list of terrorists provided to
the Council.
Thirdly, concerning sexual violence against
children, how is it possible that the crimes committed
by those terrorist armed groups, including rape and
sexual violence, the murder of children, and acts of
violence against girls and women throughout Syria
were not mentioned in the report? How could the taking
of girls and women as spoils of war and sex slaves not
be mentioned? How could that group of thugs of war,
sexual perverts and cannibals who reside in certain
Gulf sheikhdoms be free to issue edicts on satellite
channels making such crimes permissible under the
banner of sexual jihad or “fornication jihad”?
We denounce the fact that the report fails to make
mention of the suffering of Syrian children under
Israeli occupation in the occupied Syrian Golan. We
have drawn the attention of Ms. Zerrougui to this issue
several times since she took office, emphasizing the
necessity to give it due importance in her reports. She
has not done so, however.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the
Syrian Government is committed to protecting its
citizens, particularly children, and that all perpetrators
of acts that violate the safety and security of children
will be held strictly accountable. In addition, the Syrian
Government passed a law this year criminalizing the
involvement of children under 18 in any armed conflict,
punishable by 10 to 20 years of hard labour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Thu (Myanmar): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting
on the important issue of children and armed conflict.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for providing us with the report
contained in document S/2013/245. And I take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
positive commendation of the Government of Myanmar
on the important steps it has taken to better protect
children.
Indeed, my delegation is pleased to see many
positive conclusions about my own country in the
Secretary-General’s report. The very first paragraph
on Myanmar highlights the fact that

13-3654033

S/PV.6980

“[i]n 2012 there were encouraging commitments
and actions by the Government of Myanmar to
prevent and end grave violations against children”
(S/2013/245, para. 99).
It also acknowledges that the number of cases of the
recruitment and use of children by the national armed
forces has decreased, thanks to prevention measures
and strengthened recruitment processes. That progress
was the result of the wide-ranging democratic reform
measures instituted by the new Government just over
two years ago, which included its renewed commitment
and efforts towards promoting and protecting the
fundamental rights of the people, including women and
children. The signing on 27 June 2012 of an action plan
between the Government of Myanmar and the United
Nations country team was a historic development that
demonstrated the Government’s firm commitment to
ending the recruitment and use of underage children by
the armed forces.
The implementation of our action plan has gained
momentum with the launching, in cooperation with the
country task force on monitoring and reporting, of an
awareness campaign among the armed forces, at various
levels, designed to increase understanding of the laws
and regulations prohibiting underage recruitment.
There were reports of a slight rise in the number of
complaints of underage recruitment in 2012 compared
to 2011, but that was due not to actual recruitment
increases but to enhanced awareness of the complaint
mechanism and a newfound freedom of expression.
Just seven months after the signing of the action
plan, a total of 66 underage recruits were allowed to
demobilize and reintegrate with their parents on two
occasions. During 2012 alone, 538 potential underage
recruits were rejected at the screening stage. The
number of demobilized so far may not yet match the list
of suspected underage recruits provided by the country
task force, as it is a time-consuming job to check and
verify them thoroughly around the country; the list
may also include fabricated complaints. My delegation
fully recognizes that many challenges remain to be
addressed. There may still be some cases of individuals
who are guilty of illegal recruitment, intentionally
or unintentionally. The Government does not
condone such individual violators. We must therefore
distinguish isolated cases of certain individuals from
the policy of the armed forces as a whole, which have
laws prohibiting the recruitment of underage children
for military services.

34

With regard to access to operational regiments,
since the action plan was launched the Government has
already allowed the country task force to make at least
10 visits to monitor regional commands, basic military
training facilities, military recruitment centres and
mobile recruitment teams. Visits to some areas have
been put on hold due to the absence of many officers and
other ranks from their regiments on ongoing national
duty for overriding reasons of defence, security,
disaster prevention or resettlement. The absence in
large numbers of the rank and file does not make for
effective or meaningful monitoring visits.
As my delegation has stated time and again, the
best way to enhance the protection of children in armed
conflict is to address the root causes of those conflicts
by promoting peace, national reconciliation, sustainable
development, poverty eradication and the protection of
human rights. The reported violations took place during
military clashes in Kachin State more than a year ago.
That fighting is now a thing of the past. The guns have
fallen silent in every corner of the country since the
Government recently reached ceasefire agreements with
almost all the armed groups, including the remaining
group of the Kachin Independence Organization, which
has also struck an agreement with the Government
in recent peace talks. Just last week the Government
granted humanitarian access to Kachin State for the
first time in a year. We hope that the spread of peace
and security will eliminate the alleged violations in
both our armed forces and non-State armed groups.
The action plan and renewed commitment are now
in place to further address the issue. The Government
needs greater encouragement from the United Nations,
with full understanding of our challenges, in order to
speed up its implementation. If the United Nations can
increase its support for Myanmar’s efforts to achieve
full implementation of the action plan, and de-list
Myanmar’s armed forces, the Tatmadaw Kyi, Myanmar
could become a model success story of the ending of
the use of child soldiers. To that end, Myanmar looks
forward to working closely with the Office of the
Special Representative and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I would like to ask the interpreters
to listen carefully to my statement, as I will try to

13-36540

S/PV.6980

skip details in view of the limited time available. At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased I am, Sir,
to see you presiding over the Security Council for the
month of June. My delegation is grateful to the Council
for putting on its agenda an issue that particularly
affects the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that of
children and armed conflict. I would also like to take
the opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report on the issue (S/2013/245). And I thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their work on the
problem of children and armed conflict.
On 28 June 2012 Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, stated in her annual
report to the Human Rights Council in Geneva that
“thousands of children continue to be killed,
maimed, abducted, subjected to sexual violence,
denied humanitarian access and deprived of health
care in many countries” (A/HRC/21/38, para. 2).
She went on to say that in several countries children
were also “used as suicide bombers and human
shields”. That description corresponds exactly to the
purgatory that Congolese children endure daily owing
to the presence of various foreign and domestic armed
groups, particularly the rebels of the Mouvement du
23 Mars (M-23), the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces-National
Army for the Liberation of Uganda and others who
plunder the western part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
In fact, the language of weapons and violence has
resurfaced in North Kivu since the M-23 rebels who
deserted from the ranks of the Congolese army in
April 2012 turned their weapons on the regular army.
The conflict situation currently prevailing in that part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and more
specifically in and around North Kivu, has led to a
resurgence in violence and crime, the primary victims
of which are women and children.
Massive displacements due to violence continue in
North Kivu, where it is well known that many children
are kidnapped by the rebel forces of M-23 and pressed
into forced labour for mining. Children are also used
to break up rocks to make gravel in quarries. Once
broken up, coltan is used in electronic devices. The
highly radioactive nature of that substance explains the
frequency of respiratory ailments, which are sometimes

fatal, among those who handle it. Many Congolese
children have been used to transport and mine coltan.
Those who survive are traumatized by the acts of
vandalism and barbarity committed against them by
M-23 rebels.
Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by
M-23 have suffered serious physical and psychological
damage. Adequate reparations are needed to cover
emotional damage, for example in cases of depression,
loss of self-esteem, stress, involuntary abortions for
young girls who were raped, infant mortality and
sexually transmitted infections.
In areas affected by insecurity, education has been
suspended because dozens of classrooms have been
destroyed, and some schools are overcrowded due
to the arrival of displaced children or are serving as
temporary housing for persons displaced within their
own countries.
My delegation is speaking on behalf of children
whose families, usually in dire economic straits,
cherish the hope that concrete steps will be taken to
provide them with reparations. In terms of education,
children displaced by fighting have virtually no access
to school, which makes them more vulnerable to being
recruited by armed groups. We also note that many
schools have not resumed classes following the clashes
provoked by armed groups in South Kivu. Moreover,
it remains true that in recent years the armed forces
and non-State armed groups have used schools and
universities for military purposes in violation of the
right to education laid out in the main international
instruments on human rights. Their acts constitute war
crimes or crimes against humanity.
My delegation takes this opportunity to appeal
to the armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo to put an end to their mistreatment
of children and to comply with their international
obligation to protect the safety and rights of children.
In terms of security, the Security Council must
take into account the protection of children’s rights,
including in peace negotiations, and the urgent need to
end impunity for crimes against children. It must also
support the development of programmes and policies
to protect children and improve their living conditions.
In conclusion, my delegation protests the intentional
and generalized targeting of schools, teachers and
students as a tactic of war. In his 2013 annual report

13-3654035

S/PV.6980

on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245), the
Secretary-General recognizes that the military use
of schools is widespread. Of the 22 cases covered in
the report, 19 involve violations related to education,
including schools being bombed and razed by the
warring parties and students and education personnel
being threatened, kidnapped and killed.
Finally, my delegation welcomes the Security
Council’s commitment to working for the protection
of children from serious violations committed against
them in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): Today’s agenda item on the plight of children
in times of conflict provides me with the opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
accession to the presidency of the Council for this month
and to assure you of my delegation’s support during
your presidency. I take this opportunity to reiterate
my gratitude to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Togo, who carried out his work in an
exemplary manner last month while presiding over the
Council.
I express our gratitude to Luxembourg, represented
by Ms. Sylvie Lucas and the Deputy Prime Minister,
and which chairs the important Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue,
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, UNICEF and Save
the Children, which is indeed doing exemplary work on
this issue that is so important for humankind.
The agenda item under discussion today is a crucial
issue for us, as it relates to children and the future of
humankind and of our shared world, which must be
protected from threats, particularly in conflict.
The situation concerning children in the Central
African Republic, which improved slightly in 2012,
has once again become alarming and even critical
since the crisis that led to regime change on 24 March.
Indeed, whether it is the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA), children enrolled in the various rebel groups,
or simply those deprived of education because of the
war, the children of the Central African Republic are
experiencing severe hardships that compromise both
their future and their lives.

36

In the case of the LRA, attacks often target schools,
where the rebels recruit children for use as child soldiers
or to carry loot and stolen and pillaged items if they
are boys or as sex slaves and cooking staff if they are
girls. It is the same for other rebel groups, in particular
the Séléka, which has recruited children for the same
tasks. What is distressing is that even those previously
removed from conflict and who have passed through
transition centres and returned to their family and
social environment are recruited again. These children,
including street children in cities, have not been not
spared forced or voluntary recruitment.
While the proper place for children is and
remains in their family, at school, on the playground
or at recreation centres, those affected by conflict are
enrolled in so-called self-defence militia to protect their
village, becoming choice targets in conflict. Those
fleeing into the bush with their parents to avoid being
killed are exposed to the weather, mosquitoes and wild
beasts and risk certain death.
Meanwhile, schools, if they are not destroyed,
simply become barracks where tables, benches and
textbooks are used for firewood. What kind of a world
do we live in? Teachers themselves try to shelter in the
bush to save their own lives and those of their family
members. This sad picture, as I just said, ruins any hope
of building a peaceful country, as its future workforce
will not be adequately trained or educated.
The scourge can be contained or ended in the Central
African Republic only if we build a State of law that
respects and guarantees rights and freedoms, including
those of children; create a peaceful environment
where families can do their best to create a decent life
for themselves with a view to promoting the healthy
emotional and physical development of the child; and
make school a second venue for socialization, after
the family, by ensuring that it remains status-neutral
and protected from conflict and that its facilities and
property are not occupied, vandalized or destroyed
by belligerents; and only if the State, civil society and
non-governmental organizations mobilize financial,
human and logistical resources to that end. That is why
a reasonable share of the budgets of these moral and
physical entities must be set aside and increased each
year for children and their development.
The Central African Republic, a fragile country
and victim of recurrent conflict, must break the cycle of
rebellion if it wishes to build a State of law and effectively

13-36540

S/PV.6980

preserve its achievements, and do its all to comply with
international standards in order to protect children in
their lifestyle and environment. That is why we express
the desire to strengthen our cooperation with the United
Nations, UNICEF and non-governmental organizations
involved in the issue in order to find ways and means to
eradicate the scourge. If, as the saying goes, “the child
is the father of man”, in the future we must spare no

effort to protect children if we want this to be a world
of peace, security and, above all, development.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

13-3654037
