asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6905

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6905th meeting
Tuesday, 22 January 2013, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan/Mr. Ahmad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Mali

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21314 (E)

*1321314*

S/PV.6905

with national and regional actors to resolve the situation
in Mali.

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Côte
d’Ivoire, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria and Senegal to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule of 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule of 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule of 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: The Council is convened today
at a potential turning point in the crisis in Mali.
The military struggle over northern Mali has been
engaged. The Secretary-General has applauded France
for its courageous decision to deploy forces to arrest
the troubling push by extremist groups southward.
He greatly appreciates the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union (AU) and the troop contributors to the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) to accelerate its deployment.
The Secretary-General has been clear in his
instructions for the United Nations system to move
with all speed to contribute, within the Organization’s
mandates and capabilities, to resolving the crisis in
Mali within the framework of resolution 2085 (2012).
I am pleased to be joined here today by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit, who
has been working tirelessly and cooperating closely

2

As we focus today on solutions in Mali, let us
not forget that the factors behind the sudden collapse
10 months ago of one of West Africa’s most vaunted
democracies, and the takeover of half of the country
by extremists, run deep. Solutions will not likely
come quickly or simply. Dangers line the path ahead.
Whether the international community is successful in
helping Mali to restore its democracy and recapture
its territory in a lasting way will depend on the
breadth of its vision and the comprehensiveness of its
response. Vigorous military actions must be matched
by an equally strong focus on the political challenges
in Mali. They must be carried out with full attention
to human rights and humanitarian concerns, and they
should be reinforced by strategies to address the many
transnational threats that combine to breed extremism
and weaken governance not just in Mali but across the
Sahel.
As the members of the Council are aware, the
dynamics in northern Mali have shifted dramatically
in recent days. The fall of Konna on 10 January, as part
of an apparent attempt by extremists to push southward
towards Bamako, had the effect of galvanizing the
concerns of Mali and its friends and accelerating the
regional and international response to the crisis.
The capabilities of the armed groups occupying
northern Mali have proven to be strong, as they are
better equipped and trained than initially anticipated.
This was illustrated on 14 January, when radical forces
opened a new front in Diabaly, only 350 kilometres
from Bamako. The extremist armed groups’ advance
into eastern Mali was successfully repelled and the
fighters have reportedly fled these areas. Yet it appears
that in the western area, armed elements have moved
closer to the Mauritanian border. Meanwhile, the latest
reports indicate that the cities of Konna and Diabaly are
now under control of the Malian army.
Military sources in Bamako have indicated that in
deciding to resume hostilities, the extremists intended
to capture Bamako and that the risk of infiltration and
further attacks by these groups on southern towns,
including Bamako, remains high.
With regard to developments in the subregion
related to Mali, on 20 January Nigerian troops on
the way to Mali were attacked in northern Nigeria by
Boko Haram, and three soldiers were killed. Member

13-21314

S/PV.6905

States with access to intelligence and other reports not
available to us may have additional information about
the situation in Mali and the region, and we would
welcome any information that can be shared with us.
On 19 January, ECOWAS held an extraordinary
summit in Abidjan to review the latest developments
in Mali, particularly the modalities for an accelerated
deployment of African forces. The summit endorsed
the appointment of AFISMA’s military command,
called on all troop-contributing countries to make their
contingents immediately available, and authorized
AFISMA contingents to engage in operations with
their units. The summit called upon the United Nations
to immediately furnish the logistical and financial
support for the deployment of AFISMA. The summit
also called on the Government of Mali, the AU and
ECOWAS to establish a functional mission headquarters
for AFISMA in order to facilitate coordination and
deployment, and to establish a joint coordination
mechanism on resolution 2085 (2012) to facilitate
regular consultations on political leadership, resource
mobilization and disbursement, as well as reporting,
monitoring and evaluation.
The deployment of AFISMA troops and
headquarters staff officers began on 18 January. As of
20 January, 855 troops from Benin, Nigeria, Senegal
and Togo had been deployed, along with a full Nigerien
battalion at the border with Mali. There is general
agreement amongst key stakeholders in Bamako that the
envisaged AFISMA strength of 3,300 personnel needs
to be increased if AFISMA is to engage effectively in
offensive operations and enhance force protection.
The deployment of the Force Commander and
establishment of the force headquarters have set the
conditions for the planning effort, supported by planners
provided by international partners. The planning
process also provides an opportunity to review and
revise, as necessary, the AFISMA troop requirements,
command and control structures, liaison mechanisms
and other important matters.
On 21 January, the President of the ECOWAS
Commission and the Chair of the ECOWAS Committee
of Chiefs of Defence Staff visited Bamako. They met
with the AFISMA Force Commander and other officers,
and visited AFISMA troops already on the ground, as
well as the French forces. They also met senior Chadian
officers to discuss the deployment of the 2,000-strong
Chadian troops and their coordination with AFISMA.

13-21314

Due to the accelerated deployment of AFISMA
troops, critical equipment, logistical and other support
for the troops are urgently required. In accordance
with paragraph 10 of resolution 2085 (2012), the United
Nations is supporting AFISMA headquarters in planning
activities, including assessing the units’ equipment and
operational readiness. AFISMA is currently facing
critical gaps, including communications capacity,
air mobility and medical capabilities. Additionally,
it is expected that the deployed contingents will have
only very limited capacities for self-sustainment. The
Malian defence and security forces also have capacity
gaps requiring immediate attention.
The African Union and ECOWAS are finalizing
a comprehensive list of priority requirements, while
the Malian Minister of Defence has indicated that a
comprehensive list of the needs of the Malian Defence
And Security Forces has been submitted to Interim
President Traoré. These will inform the donors’
conference that the African Union has called to take
place in Addis Ababa on 29 January.
In a welcome development, on 17 January the
European Union established a Common Security and
Defence Policy mission, headed by Brigadier General
François Lecointre of France, that is expected to be on
the ground by mid-February to support the training
and reorganization of the Malian Armed Forces. The
mission will not be involved in combat operations.
As noted in his letter to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General is firmly committed to using
the tools of the United Nations, as authorized by
the Security Council, to help to address the crisis in
Mali and to promote the implementation of resolution
2085 (2012). His letter outlines several options for the
Security Council’s consideration, and he also identifies
several concerns regarding capacity, human rights and
the safety and security of United Nations personnel
and facilities. The Secretary-General is confident that,
in exercising its responsibility to debate, and perhaps
authorize, the use of United Nations assets, Security
Council members will consider carefully both his
proposals and his concerns. The options proposed in
his letter are as follows.
One option would be for all logistics support to
AFISMA to be provided through bilateral channels. That
option could be funded through one or a combination of
bilateral, United Nations trust fund or United Nations
assessed contributions channels.

3

S/PV.6905

A second option would be for the United Nations to
provide a logistics support package to AFISMA in all
phases of its operations. Given that a finalized concept
of operations for AFISMA is under development, it is
currently not possible to produce a detailed plan for
such a support package. Nonetheless, at the request of
the Council, the Secretariat has conducted additional
planning for a logistics support package. The elements
of a possible United Nations support package to
AFISMA are contained in the annex to the letter
that the Secretary-General submitted. This option
would be financed through United Nations assessed
contributions.
A third option would be for bilateral partners
to provide logistics support to AFISMA during the
combat phase of operations, and for the United Nations
to provide support to it during the deployment and in
the stabilization phases of its operations. This option
would significantly reduce some of the risks to the
Organization and personnel who are associated with
the second option.
Meanwhile, the start-up team for the establishment
of the United Nations multidisciplinary presence in
Mali arrived in Bamako over the weekend and renewed
contacts with stakeholders to continue discussions on
the implementation of all aspects of resolution 2085
(2012), including the political and the security processes.
The head of the United Nations team in Bamako,
Mr. João Honwana, is already on the ground and has
begun discussions on a transitional road map, including
regarding reconciliation, with Malian partners.
In his meetings with Malian authorities, he
emphasized the need for the political and military
tracks to go together, as well as the need for a clear
vision on the part of Malian authorities on what needs
to be done, around which international support can be
rallied to move the transitional process forward. He
also raised the need for raising awareness of the risks
of ethnic tensions and retaliation taking place in Mali.
In that regard, I note again that the multidisciplinary
office includes human rights expertise.
The Malian Government has expressed its full
agreement on the need for the military and political
processes to evolve jointly, and informed the United
Nations team that it was moving swiftly with an
inclusive consultation exercise with key civil and
political actors on the transitional road map, prior to
its submission for approval to the National Assembly
within two or three weeks. The Malian Government
4

also reiterated its desire for a discrete and light United
Nations presence in Bamako, with interlocutors with
whom they could frankly exchange views and rely on
for advice. The authorities also noted that Mali needed
a broader reconciliation process, which could be carried
out only once basic State authority and control had been
re-established in the north. On elections — an essential
element of the political process — Malian officials
were of the view that elections would have to take place
once critical northern positions had been brought back
under Government control.
Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Djinnit has also continued to engage
national and regional actors to shore up support
for the implementation of resolution 2085 (2012).
On 17 January, he met with President Dioncounda
Traoré in Bamako and highlighted the importance of
the political process. On 18 January, he attended the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council meeting in
Abidjan, and on 19 January Mr. Djinnit participated in
the ECOWAS Summit of Heads of State. He provided
clarification on the United Nations role in support to
the immediate deployment of AFISMA, following a
request from the President of ECOWAS Commission to
the Secretary-General dated 17 January.
There is serious concern about the well-being
of the population in the north of the country, where
malnutrition rates were already reaching emergency
thresholds before the resumption of the conflict.
The insecurity has forced many humanitarian actors
to reduce an already limited presence, or in some
cases evacuate the area. The few non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) still active the north of Mali
point to the region’s growing isolation, with the main
supply roads from the south and Algeria now cut off.
The isolation is increasingly exacerbating the existing
shortage of food and other commodities, with fuel
shortages already having an impact on the functioning
of hospitals and urban water-supply systems.
Despite the challenging environment, the United
Nations and its partners are working to address the
most pressing needs. Food distribution by the World
Food Programme of the United Nations (WFP) is
ongoing for 12,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Bamako. UNICEF is currently working with NGO
partners to provide and distribute aquatabs in Gao
after the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa seized the fuel used for the water distribution
network. The WFP is also preparing to deliver food to

13-21314

S/PV.6905

the three northern regions of Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal,
to be implemented as soon as possible, as well as the
provision of food assistance to 22,000 IDPs and 32,000
IDPs in the Mopti and Ségou regions, respectively.
There are also mounting protection concerns, with
reports of retribution attacks against civilian Tuareg
and Arab populations and continued allegations of
the recruitment of child soldiers and the use of sexual
violence as a tool of war. Meanwhile, on 16 January,
the International Criminal Court announced that it
was opening an investigation into alleged war crimes
committed on the territory of Mali since January 2012.
The situation underscores the need to ensure
that parties to the conflict avoid harming civilians
and comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights norms, including
facilitating the rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel. In that regard,
the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy applies to
any United Nations support to the military operation
undertaken. The policy establishes a set of principles
for United Nations entities contemplating or involved
in providing support to non-United Nations security
forces. Key elements include an assessment of risk,
transparency with receiving entities an effective
implementation framework.
For 10 months now, the world has watched with
horror as the people of northern Mali have been subjected
to almost unspeakable brutality at the hands of armed
extremists and terrorists. Friends of the Malian people
in the region and beyond were shocked by the abrupt
collapse of constitutional order in Mali and the threat
to Mali’s territorial integrity and unity, exacerbating
an already dire humanitarian situation. The Council,
along with regional and subregional organizations,
debated how best to assist the people of Mali to address
the full spectrum of the severe political, security,
humanitarian, and human rights challenges that they
faced. As we have discussed before, the problems of
Mali also need to be seen in the context of the broader
Sahel region, as we cannot expect to alleviate the crisis
in the Sahel without simultaneously improving the
situation in Mali, which can spill over, and has in fact
done so, into neighbouring countries.
In recent weeks, African and international leaders,
including the members of the Council, have by their
actions demonstrated their resolve to assist the people
and institutions of Mali. We welcome the clear, unified
message that we have heard from Council members
13-21314

and beyond that the military and political tracks must
proceed hand in hand, with full attention paid to the
humanitarian situation and to human rights.
We fully concur that ongoing military operations
should take place within the framework of a political
process to ensure sustainable peace, stability, and
national reconciliation. Likewise, the ongoing military
operations should provide the necessary political space
for negotiations between the Government and groups
that have renounced violence and distanced themselves
from terrorist networks. The United Nations will
continue to impress upon the Malian leaders the need
to agree quickly on a transitional road map to restore
effectively constitutional order. We urge others to
reinforce that message, for reliance on an exclusively
military approach will not allow for the building of a
lasting solution for Mali.
The Secretary-General and other senior officials
will be in Addis Ababa over the weekend for the
AU Summit. The Summit will provide additional
opportunities for discussions between United Nations
officials and our African and international partners on
how collectively we can help the Malian people.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
the delegation of Mali is delighted to see you preside
over the work of the Council in the month of January
and wishes you every success in fulfilling your
mandate. We would like to pay warm tribute to your
great country, Pakistan, and its invaluable contribution
to the strengthening of international peace and security.
I take this opportunity also to thank all of the
members of the Security Council for their solidarity and
their commitment, shoulder to shoulder with the people
and the Government of Mali, during this difficult time.
On 20 January 2012, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2085 (2012),
authorizing, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the deployment in Mali of an Africanled international support mission for Mali (AFISMA)
so as to assist the Malian Defence and Security Forces
to liberate the northern part of the national territory,
which is controlled by armed extremist and terrorist
groups — the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Dine
and their allies.

5

S/PV.6905

At that time the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali reiterated
the commitment of the Government of Mali to fully
cooperate with the Security Council and to abide by its
obligations under the resolution, including the holding,
through the auspices of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) facilitator, of talks
with the Malian rebel groups aimed at inducing them
to cut all ties with the terrorists and to recognize the
integrity and sovereignty of the national territory as
well as the republican and secular character of the State
of Mali.
Flouting the spirit and the letter of resolution
2085 (2012), international law, the rule of law and
fundamental human rights, terrorist and extremist
groups, as well as irredentist movements and criminal
networks, continue to defy the international community.
The interim President of Mali, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré,
in his speech to the nation on 12 January last, rightly
noted that
“those who are occupying Gao, Timbuktu and
Kidal and who are inflicting such terrible suffering
on the local population have turned a deaf ear to
our request for dialogue. They want to extend their
criminal activities throughout our entire country.
They have proved this by attacking the positions
held by our Defence and Security Forces in Kona,
in the Mopti region”.
The highest Malian authorities have tirelessly
advocated a political solution and deployed unflagging
efforts to achieve lasting peace. Unfortunately, driven
by hatred and obscurantism, jihadist extremists and
criminals of all stripes have opted for armed aggression,
the taking of further territories, a scorched-earth policy
and subjugation so as to fulfil their sorry objectives.
Given that critical situation, the interim President of
the Republic issued an appeal for general mobilization
and imposed a state of emergency throughout the
country. In addition, as supreme leader of the armed
forces and in consultation with ECOWAS, he requested
and obtained, in the framework of international law,
the military support of France to halt the advance of
the terrorists, who threaten not only Mali but also other
countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region.
May I, on behalf of the Government of Mali, pay
warm tribute to France, its people and its President,
Mr. François Hollande, who, taking stock of the threat
posed by the southward march of the terrorist groups,

6

immediately granted the Malian President’s request,
thereby making it possible to save Mali as a State and
to restore hope to the people and the army of Mali.
Today Malian political circles, civil society,
community and religious leaders, as well as young
people, all aware of the gravity of the situation and
determined to make even the ultimate sacrifice to
defend their homeland, have joined in single-hearted
unity around the President and the institutions of the
Republic, so as to support the Malian army in the combat
against terrorists, rebel forces and drug traffickers.
Even as the Security Council is meeting, the fighting
continues on various fronts. Together, the Malian army
and French troops are continuing to advance.
The sacrifice of the lieutenant helicopter pilot,
Damien Boiteux, who perished on the field of honour
on the first day of the French offensive against the
rebels in the area of Konna, was not in vain. Mali pays
tribute to the memory of that brave combatant and all
the martyrs of the Malian army who have shed their
blood so that the worthy values of human dignity,
freedom and human rights may prevail. Our thoughts
also go out to the oppressed peoples in the north, the
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
and the refugees in neighbouring countries. The time
has come to liberate Mali’s northern region. The towns
of Konna, Djabali and Douentza have been retaken and
are now fully under the control of the Malian army,
supported by French forces.
While we commend the Council on its unanimous
commitment to and its support for France’s action in
Mali, on behalf of my country’s Government, I would
like to make a solemn appeal to the international
community, all friendly countries and all partners to
help to mobilize the financial resources necessary for
the prompt deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali.
As Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, has just said, an extraordinary
meeting of the ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government, which also included several countries
and organizations, took place on 19 January in
Abidjan to consider the deployment of AFISMA. My
colleague Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and on behalf of the
Chairman of ECOWAS, will inform the Council about
the summit shortly and will report its conclusions.

13-21314

S/PV.6905

Meanwhile, for my part, I would like to express
the warm gratitude of the people and Government of
Mali to ECOWAS and to commend the promptness with
which the countries members of that organization, as
well as Chad, offered their troops for early deployment
in Mali. All those countries have already dispatched
advance groups to prepare for the deployment of their
contingents in the coming days.
With regard to the swift deployment of AFISMA,
given all the difficulties faced by troop-contributing
countries, I would once again like to underscore the
urgency of providing international logistical support
to AFISMA. In that respect, I am pleased to relay to
the Council the request made to the United Nations
by the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS
to immediately provide the necessary logistical
and financial support for AFISMA’s deployment.
I would also like to call on the whole international
community to participate in the donors conference on
the mobilization of financial, logistical and material
resources for AFISMA’s deployment. That general
mobilization on 29 January in Addis Ababa, which we
very much hope will include the presence of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, will once again show that what
is at stake today in Mali is nothing less than the defence
of freedom and democracy.
We are certain that military intervention in Mali to
combat the terrorist and rebel groups will promote the
political process leading to normalization. I am pleased
to recall that the Government of Mali is actively working
to simultaneously achieve the transition’s two major
goals, namely, the restoration of our territorial integrity
and the organization of free, transparent and credible
elections, in order to bring the transition to an end and
to provide the country with legitimate institutions,
consistent with the spirit of resolution 2085 (2012).
In that regard, a meeting between the Government
of Mali and its technical and financial partners was held
yesterday, 21 January, to consider the recommendations
and conclusions of the United Nations multidisciplinary
assessment mission on Mali’s electoral needs, which
visited the country from 19 to 30 November 2012.
In conclusion, I would like to convey the gratitude
of the Malian authorities to ECOWAS, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations, our
bilateral and multilateral partners, neighbouring
countries and all countries of the region for their
unwavering support during this difficult time that my
country is experiencing.
13-21314

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: Allow me to start by congratulating
your country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January on the threshold of a new year. I also wish
to convey to you and, through you, to the wider
membership of the Council, the gratitude of the African
Union Commission for this opportunity to contribute
to this important and timely briefing on the situation in
Mali. We are confident that our discussions today will
give a strong impetus to the high-level engagements
to be held on the margins of the African Union (AU)
Summit, including the donors conference scheduled for
29 January.
(spoke in French)
Before dealing with the situation in Mali, allow me
to undertake the painful duty of offering my condolences
to the Algerian Government and people and to all
Governments and peoples whose citizens were victims
of the barbarous act committed by terrorists during
the hostage-taking in Amenas. The Chairperson of the
African Union Commission has condemned that odious
act in the strongest terms in a communiqué issued in
Addis Ababa.
(spoke in English)
Turning to the situation in Mali, following the
adoption of resolution 2085 (2012), on 20 December
2012, the efforts of the African Union Commission
have focused on helping to create the necessary political
conditions, both internally in Mali and within the region,
for the effective implementation of that resolution, in
close consultation and coordination with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Malian authorities and the United Nations, as agreed
in the Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crisis
in Mali.
The renewed attacks by armed terrorist and criminal
groups in northern Mali earlier this month, resulting
in the capture of Konna and the subsequent advance
towards Sevare, was a clear manifestation of the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in northern Mali. Those
attacks not only had far-reaching implications for the
territorial integrity of Mali and the countries of the
region but also were a potential security threat to Africa
and the world as a whole.

7

S/PV.6905

Such developments underscored the urgency
of accelerating the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA),
authorized by the Council through resolution 2085 (2012).
That new situation reinforces the recommendation made
in the report of the Secretary-General (see S/2012/894)
that both the international support mission in Mali and
the Malian forces would need the requisite capacities
to carry out operations against terrorist and affiliated
groups in northern Mali. That will require the timely
and well-coordinated provision of a significant amount
of support by international partners, including general
and specialized equipment, logistics and funding. We
have therefore keenly taken note of the information
provided by the Secretary-General during his briefing
this morning regarding his letter transmitted to the
Security Council, as requested in resolution 2085 (2012),
containing options for a voluntary and United Nationsfunded logistics support package to the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). We
look forward to the Council’s reaction, taking into
account Africa’s concerns as outlined by Mr. Feltman,
whom we thank for his very detailed briefing.
For its part, the African Union, through the
Chairperson of the Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, strongly condemned the renewed attacks
by armed terrorist and criminal groups in northern Mali
and called upon all African Union member States to
extend the necessary logistical, financial and capacitybuilding support to the Malian defence and security
forces in line with relevant decisions of the AU Peace
and Security Council and United Nations Security
Council resolutions.
We wish to thank the African Union member
States that have so far pledged troops to AFISMA and
those contemplating doing so, as well as other partners
for providing logistical and financial support. In its
press statement issued on 14 January, the African
Union Peace and Security Council acknowledged
the assistance provided by France at the request of
the Malian authorities and within the framework of
Security Council resolution 2085 (2013).
The Commission of the African Union and
ECOWAS held a coordination meeting in Addis Ababa
on 16 January as part of their efforts to speed up the
deployment of AFISMA and help Mali to re-establish
its national unity and territorial integrity and facilitate
the effective restoration of constitutional order in the
country. The discussions focused on the following areas:

8

modalities for expediting the effective implementation
of Security Council resolution 2085 (2012); command
and control issues pertaining to AFISMA, including
how best to expeditiously operationalize and enhance
the command and control of the Mission based on the
ECOWAS/AU-harmonized concept of operations and
best practices from recent AU-led operations; and force
generation and funding.
The meeting agreed to set up a Mali integrated task
force at the AU headquarters made up of experts from
the AU, ECOWAS and the United Nations, including
representatives of other international stakeholders, to
provide strategic guidance and advice for AFISMA.
The meeting also agreed to source additional troop
contributions to AFISMA from other AU member
States.
The meeting also agreed to hold a donors conference
on 29 January, as decided by the AU Peace and Security
Council in its communiqué of 13 November 2012 and
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2085
(2012) following the AU Summit in Addis Ababa. The
Conference is expected to mobilize resources and other
necessary support for the Malian defence and security
forces, as well as for AFISMA.The Chairperson of
the AU Commission and the President of ECOWAS
Commission will meet on the margins of the AU Summit
to further consider issues relating to the deployment of
AFISMA and the implementation of other aspects of
resolution 2085 (2012).
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the commitment
made by both the African Union and ECOWAS in their
coordination meeting to spare no effort to expeditiously
deploy and operationalize AFISMA, as well as to
provide the requisite support, in consultation with the
United Nations and other partners, to the process aiming
at the full restoration of constitutional order in Mali.
The concrete measures taken by the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS during the Summit held on
19 January in Abidjan provide a prompt response to the
urgency of the current situation in Mali.
We also wish to reaffirm the AU’s full solidarity
with Mali, as well as our full support to the transitional
authorities of Mali, namely, interim President
Dioncounda Traoré and his Prime Minister Diango
Cissoko.
Finally, we wish to appeal to all partners to actively
participate in the forthcoming donors conference to
be held in Addis Ababa and to contribute generously

13-21314

S/PV.6905

to the proposed trust fund. We also wish to take this
opportunity to reiterate the appeal of the African
Union that efforts to secure funding through United
Nations-assessed contributions should continue and be
expedited.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).
At the outset, I would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman for his very informative briefing on the
current situation in Mali. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Oumar Daou, Permanent Representative
of Mali, for his statement, as well as Ambassador Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union, for
his intervention, which ECOWAS fully supports.
Before taking up what Ambassador Téte António
has just said, I would like, on behalf of the 15 ECOWAS
member States, to pay tribute to the victims of the
tragic events that took place at the in Amenas gas
plant in Algeria. The events claimed victims of several
nationalities. In the light of these events, the whole
world is once again reminded of the brutality and
barbarism constantly displayed by terrorists.
Those tragic events confirm, as if there were
any further need, that terrorism is a global threat, to
effectively counter which will call for strengthened
international solidarity. The intervention of French
troops, at the request of the legal authorities of Mali,
to assist the Malian armed forces in beating back the
offensive by terrorist groups underscores the urgent
need for such international solidarity.
That was, moreover, the core of the message
delivered by President Alassane Ouattara, Chairman of
ECOWAS, at the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government held on
19 January in Abidjan, when he said “The time has
come for a broader commitment … to show greater
solidarity with France and Africa”.
It is fitting to express our sincere gratitude to
France for its leadership in handling the crisis in Mali
and to the Governments of the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, Canada, Germany, Belgium,
Denmark, Russia, Spain and many other countries

13-21314

for the various forms of support they are providing
in the ongoing operations in Mali. We welcome the
substantial involvement of the European Union as well,
which confirmed at the end of the 17 January meeting
its commitment to providing training for the Malian
armed forces. In the same vein, we would like to thank
the neighbouring countries in the Sahel and Maghreb
regions for their frank cooperation in this process. We
call on them to cooperate further to improve security
across the entire region.
The extraordinary ECOWAS summit took
important decisions in the context of resolution 2085
(2012). Those decisions relate to the specific and
immediate methods for a stepped-up deployment of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA), given the deterioration of the security
situation in Mali and the neighbouring countries. In
that regard, as Mr. Feltman said, the appointments of
Major General Shehu Usman Abdulkadir of Nigeria and
Brigadier General Yaye Garba of the Niger, as the Force
Commander and Deputy Commander of AFISMA,
respectively, have been approved.
The establishment of a joint coordination mechanism
for implementing resolution 2085 (2012) by the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS was decided
for the purpose of facilitating regular consultations
on political leadership, resource mobilization and
accountability, as well as the monitoring and assessment
of expenditures. It was also decided that logistical
supplies and financial support would be requested of
the United Nations for the deployment of AFISMA,
pending the Council’s decision on the logistical support
called for in resolution 2085 (2012) and given the
evolution of the events on the ground in Mali, which
has required the accelerated deployment of AFISMA.
The President of the ECOWAS Commission was also
instructed to take, in close collaboration with the
African Union, all the necessary steps for the holding
of the donors conference scheduled for 29 January in
order to mobilize financial, logistical and material
resources for the deployment of AFISMA.
With regard to force generation, I would like to
say that the following ECOWAS countries have pledged
troops — Burkina Faso, Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, the Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo. A number of other
African countries, although not members of ECOWAS,
also pledged troops or other forms of support, thereby
showing the great solidarity of the African continent

9

S/PV.6905

on this matter. Among others, those countries include
Burundi, Chad, Rwanda, South Africa and Tanzania.
From a practical point of view, I would like to inform
the Council that, on the orders of President Alassane
Ouattara, a mission led by the Minister for Foreign
Affaires of Côte d’Ivoire went to Bamako yesterday in
order to support and encourage the ECOWAS troops
deployed in AFISMA. The delegation also visited
French troops, held a working meeting with the
AFISMA command and met the troops already there,
namely, troops from Benin, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo.
Given all the announcements that were made, the total
number of AFISMA personnel, which was projected to
be 3,300, could be doubled. Up to now, however, only
946 have been deployed.
The visit on the ground brought up three major
difficulties, as Mr. Feltman indicated. First, the
AFISMA budget has not yet been established, given
that contributions are not yet available. Secondly,
the AFISMA Force Commander does not have the
resources needed for its smooth operation. Thirdly,
AFISMA does not have the logistics support it needs to
deploy outside Bamako, while AFISMA troops should
be rapidly deployed to reinforce Malian and French
troops in places liberated from the terrorists.
Given the gravity of the situation in Mali and the
subregion, ECOWAS therefore calls the attention of
the Security Council to the vital need of making the
emergency logistical and financial support package
available as requested by the ECOWAS Commission
President in his correspondence dated 18 January,
which was passed on to the Secretary-General and the
Council as an official document.
Motivated by the urgent needs that have arisen in
the theatre of operations in Mali, the African Union and
ECOWAS, as stated in the press release of the African
Union dated 11 January, renewed their request to the
Council that it authorize emergency financing through
United Nations contributions in order to allow for the
swift deployment of AFISMA and the effective conduct
of operations. For its part, ECOWAS is taking internal
measures to make its contribution in order to deal with
the situation.
Furthermore, ECOWAS calls on the goodwill of all
people to play an active role and to make commitments
to contribute during the donors conference scheduled
for 29 January in Addis Ababa, in order to mobilize
the financial, logistical and material resources that

10

are essential to accelerating an effective and efficient
deployment of AFISMA. On behalf of the Chairman of
ECOWAS, I would like to renew the appeal launched
to the Secretary-General for him to continue to be
personally involved with a view towards making the
logistical and financial support package available to
AFISMA on an emergency basis. ECOWAS would
therefore like the Secretary-General to be able
personally to attend and co-chair the donors conference,
given the stakes of that meeting for the entire African
continent. In that regard, we are convinced that the
effective presence of the Secretary-General at that
important donors conference would not only ensure its
visibility but it would above all ensure its success.
In conclusion, as was emphasized by President
Ouattara at the summit held last week in Abidjan,
the military intervention and the current course of
events were imposed upon us just as all of the efforts
of ECOWAS and the African Union were focused on a
political resolution among the Malian parties as part of
the discussions of Ouagadougou and Algiers and in the
context of resolution 2085 (2012).
ECOWAS therefore would strongly remind the
transitional Malian authorities of the need to comply
with resolution 2085 (2012), the relevant decisions of
ECOWAS and those of the African Union as it develops
the transitional road map that will permit the holding
of the presidential election within the timetables given,
with the support of the international community. In the
light of that, ECOWAS would like to reiterate that the
Tuareg issue and the question of the north of Mali cannot
be hijacked by terrorist forces. All mingling between
Tuareg and narco-terrorists must be avoided, and the
settlement of the underlying causes of the conflict must
be approached with pragmatism. The Government of
Mali must therefore establish, in collaboration with
ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations
and all partners, the conditions for a genuine national
dialogue with all components of the nation, including
the representatives of the communities of northern
Mali.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
let me commend you, Sir, for holding today’s Security
Council briefing on the tragic situation that the people
of Mali are going through. We would also like to
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very useful briefing. We
13-21314

S/PV.6905

also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Mali, Ambassador Oumar Daou, for the additional
information that he was kind enough to bring to the
attention of this body.
My delegation fully endorses the statement that
was just made on behalf of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) by Ambassador
Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent Representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mali is the victim of aggression accompanied by
serious and unacceptable violence against its people.
That fraternal country, which no doubt is enduring
one of the darkest periods in its otherwise storied
history, will suffer forever the destruction of a portion
of its cultural and religious heritage at the hands of
obscurantist gangs. That cynical enterprise, under the
devious, covert guise of religion, poses a serious threat
to the peace and security of the entire West African
region and, beyond that, of the entire world.
In order to grasp the reprehensible nature and scale
of the plot taking shape in the region, I would call on
each Member of the Organization, in particularly of
this body, to pay heed to the number of Islamist groups
involved in the war in Mali. Close to 10 groups are
wreaking havoc with full impunity in that area, as they
seek to turn Mali into a hub for narco-terrorism and
every kind of smuggling in Africa and beyond.
It is in that light that we should understand and
welcome the rapid intervention by one of Mali’s
historic allies — France — upon that country’s request
and with the support of countries of the subregion, to
halt and neutralize the jihadists’ offensive against the
large urban centres of the country. While the French
intervention has already allowed the Malian army to
retake the towns of Konna and Diabaly, the deployment
of African troops, which was confirmed during the
recent ECOWAS summit, will decidedly contribute to
stepping up the pace of operations for retaking northern
Mali.
I would like here to welcome the decision taken
by Chad, a brotherly country that, although it is not a
member of ECOWAS, wanted to share this heavy burden
by deploying a large contingent. That is irrefutable
proof of the growing international solidarity being
shown in support of this crusade against international
terrorism.
For its part, ECOWAS has already deployed
hundreds of enabling elements, to be joined by others
13-21314

to complete the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA), which is predicted to reach
a strength of over 5,000 troops.
In order to remain true to its ideals of regional
solidarity, and given its historic, cultural and political
ties with Mali, Senegal will deploy a contingent
of 500 troops, made up of a command element, an
artillery battery, an engineering company, a company
for command, support and services, and a motorized
company. In addition, as part of its participation in
AFISMA, Senegal will fill nine command posts, seven
of whom are already in Bamako. An initial group of
enablers was sent out to the field on 20 January in order
to prepare for the arrival of the rest of the contingent.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Mali, the Security
Council has exhibited commendable willingness to
find appropriate solutions to the crisis, as evidenced
by its many statements and resolutions on the matter,
the most recent of which is resolution 2085 (2012), of
20 December 2012, which authorized the deployment of
a military force under African command. My country
welcomes the positive attitude of all Council members
in dealing with the risks of the terrorist threat.
I would like to take the opportunity provided by
this briefing to call on all peace-loving countries, which
have been dedicated to curbing the terrorist threat for
some time now, to support, finance and arm the African
troops engaged in that theatre of operations. In that
regard, the donors conference for Mali scheduled to be
held on 29 January in Addis Ababa will certainly be
a watershed moment that will gauge the international
community’s determination to fight that scourge.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
gravity of the situation in Mali requires — and even
demands — a reaction that is commensurate with the
threat looming over an already unstable region. The
success of the international force remains dependent,
to a large extent, on the support that a unified and
determined international community will show for
the people of Mali in order to see the ideals of peace,
liberty and justice prevail throughout the world.
The recent hostage-taking at the Algerian gas
refinery on the border with Libya is clear proof of the
collateral damage that will be incurred by the plot to
turn the Sahelo-Saharan region into a new sanctuary
for international terrorism. If we allow that to happen,
no country, region or continent will be spared.

11

S/PV.6905

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and to extend our congratulations to you for having
put the situation in Mali on the Council’s agenda
at such short notice, thus demonstrating — as if it
were necessary — that your country is committed to
dealing with all matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security throughout the world.
My country welcomes this.
The terrorists wanted to catch the international
community unawares, in order to control all of Mali
and turn it into truly reliable staging grounds for their
operations in the subregion and throughout the world.
That is something that could have been foreseen very
early on, at least in Chad’s view, as we were among
the countries that first stressed the urgent need for the
international community to take appropriate measures
to eradicate this evil before it spread throughout the
Sahel and beyond.
It was clear that the situation constituted a grave
threat to peace and security, not only in Mali and the
subregion but throughout the world. A failure to act
promptly would have opened the door to an expansion
of terrorism, obscurantism and organized crime. The
international community had to act to guarantee
collective security, which was under daily threat by this
scourge that was centred in Mali.
The President of Chad, His Excellency Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, therefore did not hesitate to commend
France — and other de facto allies — for so promptly
responding to the Malian President’s appeal to halt the
southward progression of the terrorists. Moreover, he
called on African States and the entire international
community to support the truly lifesaving initiative of
the French army.
The new situation emerging in Mali as a result of
the terrorists’ intention to extend their occupation into
the south of Mali means that the French intervention
is a case of acting under force majeure, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2085 (2012), with a
view, of course, to ensuring the speedy establishment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA) and, ultimately, achieving a peaceful
political solution to the crisis.
It is in that context that my country decided to send
a military contingent of 2,000 troops to Mali, made up
12

of one infantry regiment and two support battalions.
Chad responded to the request of 14 January by Mali’s
Head of State, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, and the calls by
the African Union, confirmed in the letter of 16 January
from the Peace and Security Commissioner of the
African Union, in accordance with resolution 2085
(2012). That decision by the Government of Chad was
unanimously supported by Chad’s national assembly,
including the majority and the opposition.
My delegation welcomes the unanimous support
shown by the members of the Council to France and
the African countries that have mobilized in support of
Mali in these difficult circumstances. That diplomatic
support must be continued and be strengthened to
ensure that the terrorists, in their desperation, cannot
exploit any weakness. Furthermore, on the practical
level we urge the international community as a whole,
especially the United Nations, immediately to provide
the logistical means necessary — a logistical support
package — to the troops arriving in Mali. In addition to
the urgent need for the logistical support of the United
Nations, the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali also needs the necessary financial support so
that it can successfully carry out its tasks.
My country has called on the Secretary-General
and the African Union Commission to met that need.
Africa hopes that the international community will
forthwith give concrete expression to its solidarity in
the form of logistics at the donors conference to be held
in Addis Ababa on 29 January 2013, in accordance with
paragraph 22 of resolution 2085 (2012).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your country on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and to thank you for holding
this public debate on the situation in Mali.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the observer of the African Union Commission
and the representative of the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
The crisis that has struck Mali in recent months
unfortunately took a dramatic turn a few weeks ago
with an outbreak of attacks by armed groups seeking
to conquer the southern part of the territory, in spite
of warnings by the international community and a call

13-21314

S/PV.6905

for dialogue for a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
The ECOWAS mediator for Mali, President Blaise
Compaoré of Burkina Faso, deplored the violation of
the commitments made by the Malian parties as a result
of their meeting on 4 December 2012 in Ouagadougou,
and condemned the resumption of hostilities. The armed
group Ansar Dine, in deciding to join terrorist and
extremist forces in attacking Malian units in Konna,
has seriously violated the declaration of cessation
of hostilities and repudiated its public rejection of
terrorism, thereby compromising the possibility of a
negotiated exit to the crisis.
There is no need to dwell on the tireless efforts of
the countries of the region and ECOWAS to broker a
dialogue between the Government of Mali and the rebel
movements in the north that had pledged to break all
ties with the terrorist groups. Throughout the process of
political dialogue, the ECOWAS mediator and associate
mediator, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria, patiently and firmly
indicated to the different protagonists, including Ansar
Dine and the Mouvement national pour la libération
de l’Azawad (MNLA), the benefits conducting frank
negotiations on the basis of objective grievances, which
would preserve the unity and territorial integrity of
Mali and obviate the use of force.
Unfortunately, the unilateral breakdown of the
dialogue and the rejection of the commitments by
some protagonists, particularly Ansar Dine, has left
ECOWAS and the international community with no
choice but to use force against the extremist groups,
which have revealed the limits of their good faith.
My delegation takes this opportunity to thank
France for its diligent response to Mali’s requests to
contain the advance of terrorist groups. Burkina Faso
welcomes the courageous decision of French President
François Hollande to provide prompt and critical support
for the restoration of peace and stability in Mali and
therefore throughout the entire region. Burkina Faso
calls on the international community to immediately
implement resolution 2085 (2012) authorizing the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali by supporting France’s action on the
ground, particularly by providing military logistics and
the speedy establishment of the trust fund.
With respect to Burkina Faso, the announced
deployment of a battalion of 500 men to Mali, alongside
the ECOWAS troops, is being implemented. Moreover,
a force of 1,000 men has been deployed along the border
13-21314

with Mali to stave off infiltrations by fleeing terrorist
groups.
In conclusion, Burkina Faso will spare no effort
in supporting the struggle against terrorism in all its
forms and in restoring the territorial integrity of Mali.
Burkina Faso affirms its readiness, once the situation
has been stabilized, to work to promote a dialogue and
the effective conduct of the political process in order
to reach national reconciliation and to establish lasting
peace in Mali.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Niger.
Mr. Boureima (Niger) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express my delegation’s
pleasure at seeing you, Mr. President, presiding over
the Security Council for the month of January. We
warmly congratulate you. I also wish to thank you
for having organized this briefing, which is an ideal
opportunity to discuss a matter of great importance to
us all, namely, the situation in Mali. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his informative briefing.
This briefing, which follows the public ministerial
debate on a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism (see S/PV.6900), held on 15 January under
your presidency, Sir, once again demonstrates the great
importance that you and your great country attach to
the issue of peace and security, particularly in the Sahel
region.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire
on behalf of the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
that delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union. I would just like to add a few comments of my
own.
The situation in Mali has gone on too long. That
should not have happened because the international
community’s eyes have long been focused on the threats
looming over the entire Sahel following the crisis in
Libya. Indeed, the joint United Nations-African Union
mission to assess the impact of the crisis in Libya on the
countries of the region was exhaustive in its diagnosis
and even provided appropriate recommendations.
Meanwhile, the high-level meeting on the situation in
Mali, initiated by the Secretary-General, was also very
clear as to the need to effectively, comprehensively and
above all promptly address the problems of the region
13

S/PV.6905

in general, and those in Mali in particular, in order to
forestall an even graver state of affairs.
Certainly, everybody took an interest in the
situation, encouraged by ECOWAS, the African Union
and other stakeholders. However, the progressive and
sensitive approach, far from leading to a peaceful
settlement, appears on the contrary to have encouraged
the armed groups, which soon exploited the institutional
crisis to consolidate their dominance of the entire north
of Mali. They must have viewed the phased reaction of
the United Nations through the adoption of successive
resolutions 2056 (2012) of 5 July, 2071 (2012) of
12 October and 2085 (2012) of 20 December 2012 as
sign of lax resolve to counter their Machiavellian
intentions. They therefore dared to venture farther
south in ultimate effort to occupy the entire country.
Had it not been for the prompt and beneficial
action taken by France, which quickly grasped the
implications of the fall of the city of Kona to the armed
groups, the situation today might be very different.
That is why the entire international community must, as
did the Conference of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, commend France’s intervention, which
forestalled a situation that would have been very
difficult to remedy. It must also provide effective and
timely support to the joint efforts deployed by the forces
of Mali and of France.
Over and above the legitimacy and legality
conferred by the express request made by the authorities
of Mali under the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, and specifically pursuant to
article 51, which enshrines the universally recognized
principle of individual and collective self-defence,
France’s intervention is, in our view, consistent with
the spirit of resolution 2085 (2012), whose ultimate
objective is none other than the restoration of Mali’s
territorial integrity — an essential precondition for the
implementation of the other provisions of the resolution.
It is in that same spirit that the Conference of Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS authorized the
deployment of the international force, the Africanled international support mission for Mali (AFISMA);
neighbouring and friendly countries are involved in
that context.
For its part, the Niger, which is deeply concerned
about the situation in Mali, will participate in
AFISMA; in fact, the Deputy Force Commander is a
general from the Niger. Niger also recently increased

14

the number of its troops from 500 to 650. I must also
take this opportunity to state that all the constitutional
formalities have been complied with and that the
contingent is ready to go. This morning it was visited,
before its imminent deployment, by the President of
the Republic, the Head of State and of the army, His
Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, whose firm
commitment to Mali since the outset of the crisis has
been unflagging.
My country welcomes the expressions of solidarity
with Mali, which are becoming more and more
numerous and whose nature and scope will be made
clear at the donors conference to be held in Addis Ababa
on 29 January and in the meeting of the international
support and follow-up group, to be hosted by the
European Union in Brussels on 5 February.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): May I begin,
Sir, by once again congratulating you most warmly
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and thanking you for having convened this
important meeting on Mali, which is being held at a
critical juncture in the history of the country. Over
and above Mali, the crisis affects the stability of the
entire Sahel region, West Africa and the continent as a
whole, and even the entire world. I wish also to thank
Mr. Feltman for his very informative briefing on the
situation.
Since northern Mali fell under the control of
fundamentalist groups, the whole world has witnessed
grave violations of human rights and the destruction of
the cultural heritage of that country. That heritage is
part of the historical memory of Africa; UNESCO has
rightly determined it to be the heritage of all humankind
and called for the mobilization of resources to restore
the sites that have been destroyed.
We pay tribute to all agencies and partners, as well
those persons of goodwill, who are seeking to provide
humanitarian aid to the peoples affected by the crisis,
particularly refugees and internally displaced persons.
The evolution of the situation in Mali has dispelled
any doubt as to the nature of the threat and the
challenges faced by Mali. The crisis in that country
is the undeniable outcome of the fall of the former
Libyan regime and in particular the result of the inflow
of hegemonistic outside elements with ties to criminal
networks and religious extremists, who have sought to
13-21314

S/PV.6905

subjugate a free and independent State by making use
of a tiny subgroup of one of the ethnic minorities.
Since 10 January 2013, they have clearly shown
themselves to be terrorists and they have made clear
the nature of the threat that they pose to the State of
Mali. Over and above their actions in Mali, in recent
days they have attacked Algeria’s vital infrastructures,
causing the deaths of innocent victims who had been
taken hostage as retribution for that country’s support
for the efforts undertaken against the terrorists in
Mali. Here Benin wishes to convey its condolences
to the families of the victims of that attack, including
the hostages, dozens of whom died at the hands of the
terrorists. May their souls rest in peace.
There is no doubt that Mali will recover from
this situation. It will rise again to pay tribute to the
illustrious memory of its sons and friends who died
on the battlefield to prevent the country from falling
to the terrorists. Indeed, Mali is a State member of
the Community of Democracies and the site of the
conception and adoption of the Bamako Declaration,
which in November 2000 laid down a shared conception
of democracy in francophone countries.
In the view of Benin, Mali is and wishes to remain a
secular State. Mali’s borders have impregnable ramparts
forged by respect by its neighbours for the principle
of the intangibility of borders, which is so dear to the
African Union, and by the recognition of the territorial
integrity of Mali by the international community.
Mali can count on the solidarity of the States of
Africa in general and those of West Africa in particular,
which are strongly committed to regional integration
and to mutual defence among its member countries.
At no time was Benin’s belief shaken that the
free world would not let Bamako fall into the hands
of a transnational criminal network masquerading
in different forms. The President of the Republic of
Benin, His Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, has reiterated
his belief in the ability of the international community
to demonstrate the necessary decisiveness with respect
to the advancing threat of religious intolerance and
fanatical fundamentalism, which fuel terrorism, which
is seeking safe haven in Mali.
We wish to express our admiration of and deep
gratitude to France, historically Mali’s closest partner
beyond the continent. At the decisive moment, France,
through a robust intervention, came to the assistance
of the Malian State, at the request of its legitimate
13-21314

authorities. It came to Africa’s help a few hours after
the urgent appeal launched by President Yayi, in his
capacity as Chairman of the African Union, in the
face of the swelling ranks of armed criminal groups
advancing on Bamako.
France’s intervention brought firepower consistent
with the threat looming over Mali, stopped the
aggressors from advancing and paved the way for the
arrival of troops of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) that are part of the Africanled International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA).
The developing situation has placed Mali in a situation
of extreme urgency and requires an immediate increase
of AFISMA’s strength, mindful of the fact that it is an
international force open to all contributions from other
African countries that wish to participate in destroying
the terrorist hydra in the Sahel.
We thank the countries that are providing logistical
support for the deployment of the ECOWAS and African
Union troops. AFISMA must be able to rapidly deploy
its full capacity, in terms of troops and equipment, in
order to assert itself on the ground before the terrorist
groups with the sustained support of France and all
countries of the free world highly concerned by the
situation.
For us, the start of that military campaign is
fully authorized by resolution 2085 (2012). The
United Nations should immediately deploy to the
African Union and ECOWAS the logistics, equipment
and financial support package provided for by the
resolution, and finance the implementation of the
Organization’s earmarked resources and other available
resources ahead of the donor conference expected to
help set up the trust fund, pursuant to paragraph 22 of
the resolution.
In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General
for his relevant proposals to the Security Council, on
which we have been briefed here. We urge him to act on
the most appropriate options to respond to the urgent
situation on the ground so that the lack of resources and
assistance does not jeopardize the lives of the deployed
troops. We encourage France to maintain its active
presence on the ground and to maintain its offensive
position to prevent the terrorist groups from retaking
the initiative.
That said, their leaders, who have the greatest
responsibility for the crimes committed against
humanity, should be sought out, found and brought

15

S/PV.6905

before international justice for their heinous crimes.
Beyond the military campaign in Mali, the international
community should redouble efforts to cut the supply
lines and financial channels to the terrorist groups
raging in the Sahara desert and should put an end to the
trafficking from which they live.
Benin has decided to actively participate in
AFISMA by making available the most battle-tested
elements of its armed forces. In this Chamber, Benin
launches an urgent appeal for international solidarity,
in particular the material and financial support of all
countries devoted to peace and justice, and to the troops
of African States being deployed to commit themselves
as soon as possible alongside the French troops and the
Malian armed forces.
The prompt success of the military action under way
will make it possible to launch the democratic process
that will lead to free and transparent elections open to
all Malians, from north to south, east to west, pursuant
to resolution 2085 (2012). The United Nations must take
all necessary measures to support that campaign and
to prepare the ensuing political process. My delegation
welcomes the deployment of the advance team of the
United Nations political mission. The political process
should be conducted in strict respect for the national
loyalty owed by all communities that make up Mali to
the Malian nation and for their increasing inclusiveness,
while taking fully into account their influence in
relation to the country’s demography.
The United Nations must ensure that the terrorists
answer for their acts before an appropriate international
jurisdiction. Beyond the military campaign, it is
necessary to redouble efforts to promote dialogue at the
level of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
in order to counter all kinds of fanaticism and
fundamentalism.
In that way, we can prevent the resurgence of
practices of past ages in order to promote the progress
of humankind in upholding the common values of
respect for dignity and the integrity of the individual
for the greater good of its nations and peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this rather important meeting. I would also
like to congratulate you on mounting the exhibition
on Pakistan’s 52 years of service to the international
16

community through its peacekeeping efforts, which
you undertook yesterday. We are not far behind you.
We have been participating in peacekeeping missions
for 52 years and, as long as circumstances permit, we
will continue to do so.
We would like to sincerely commend Mr. Feltman
and to congratulate him on the comprehensive message
that he has sent to the international community today.
We thank him for briefing us on the unhappy situation
in Mali. We also thank him for mentioning the loss
of lives of our soldiers, who are brutally attacked by
terrorists on account of a decision to deploy to Mali.
That is a price that we are willing to pay and we will not
run away from our responsibility to Mali or any other
country in the region.
I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Mali in his country’s capacity as Chairperson
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We also wish to congratulate and thank the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations for providing the African Union (AU) overview
of the situation in Mali.
This is a very timely meeting as it comes only days
after the convening of the Extraordinary Session of the
Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government
in Abidjan on 19 January. We would particularly like
to draw attention to the Final Communiqué of that
meeting as it is rather central to the resolution of the
Malian crisis.
Let me seize this opportunity to express our deep
and heartfelt condolences to the Government and people
of Algeria for the loss of lives of both innocent hostages
and members of the security forces in the recent heinous
terrorist attack at the gas plant in Amenas. In strongly
condemning those senseless and inhumane acts of
violence, Nigeria stands together with other members of
the international community, especially those countries
that lost some of their nationals in the horrific incident.
Such acts regretfully remind us that the scourge of
terrorism remains a continuing challenge and that no
country is immune from its malignant tentacles.
While we convey our deepest sympathies and
condolences to the traumatized and bereaved families,
my delegation wishes to reiterate that the Security
Council has a critical role to play as a forum for
advancing collective action against global terrorism.

13-21314

S/PV.6905

The fight against terrorism remains a very high
priority for Nigeria both domestically and across our
subregion. We also recognize the terrible threat that Mali
is now facing from terrorist groups and armed militants.
As part of the unfolding international effort to free
Mali of this threat and danger, Nigeria has commenced
the accelerated deployment of 1,200 troops as part of its
contribution to the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). We note with satisfaction
that other ECOWAS and AU member States and other
countries have also decided to contribute troops in
support of the Malian army’s efforts to free its country
from the terrorist and extremist menace.
As has already been mentioned, Major-General
Shehu Usman Abdulkadir of the Nigerian Army was
endorsed as Force Commander of AFISMA by ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government at their recent meeting
in Abidjan. It is important to underline the fact that
the availability of a Nigerian military officer to head
AFISMA and Nigeria’s financial assistance to Mali, as
well as the role of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan
as associate mediator in Mali, together with President
Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso, are all reflections of
our deep concern at and interest in the security situation
in Mali and the subregion as a whole.
Nigeria’s actions are in line with the Security
Council’s decision of 10 January and resolution 2085
(2012), which calls for the rapid deployment of AFISMA
and the strengthening of international support for Mali.
Nigeria desires a peaceful resolution of all disputes.
Indeed, in October 2012, President Goodluck Jonathan
undertook a mission to Bamako to meet with all parties
and foster dialogue. However, in a situation where
room for such reconciliation is not allowed or given,
regrettably the use of force becomes inevitable and
indeed necessary.
Our action in Mali is in line with the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law, and therefore needs no justification or defence.
We are also adhering to the norms and. principles
that underpin the protocols of our regional grouping,
ECOWAS, on collective security and the protection of
member States’ territorial integrity. We went into Mali
to assist its army to free its territory and defend its
integrity, independence and unity.
Beyond all of these considerations, we would
like to underscore the fact that the Sahel region and
countries like Mali have been ignored or neglected
by the international community for too long. The
13-21314

sufferings of their people and the deteriorating security
situation were not deemed worthy of the attention of
the world until matters became compounded and it was
too late to deal with them peacefully. The debate of the
Security Council on 10 December 2012 (see S/PV.6882)
and the high-level meeting on the Sahel convened by
the Secretary-General on 26 September 2012 were, in
our view, actually more about the neglect of the Sahel
region than anything else. The Secretary-General had
consistently drawn attention to the situation in the
region, and had the foresight to draw up an integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel. His appointment of
Mr. Romano Prodi as his Special Envoy for the Sahel
also reflected his concern.
Sufficient, accelerated and timely delivery
of humanitarian assistance is desperately needed
for the entire Sahel region. In the medium and
longer terms, structured peacebuilding initiatives,
the strengthening of security sector reform and
institution-building — including good governance, the
entrenchment of democratic institutions, human rights
and youth empowerment — are direly need across
the region. Nigeria therefore recognizes that the use
of force, while necessary to tackling the immediate
terrorist threat and instability in Mali and the entire
region, cannot be an effective long-term strategy or
solution.
The international community must do more.
Promoting uniform economic development and
increasing development assistance would enable the
Governments of the region to address the root causes
of instability and conflicts. They would, for instance,
be able to address concerns such as extreme poverty,
the impacts of climate change, pervasive illiteracy,
unemployment, general discontent and even secessionist
tendencies, if they were properly assisted by the rest
of the world financially and materially. This would no
doubt help to engender cohesion, counter extremism
and reduce the appeal of violence.
It is in that connection that Nigeria would urge the
active participation of all Member States in the donors
conference, scheduled for 29 January in Addis Ababa, for
the trust fund established in paragraph 22 of resolution
2085 (2012). We hope that the donors conference
will galvanize all Member States, international
organizations, civil society organizations and other
stakeholders to work in concert for the attainment
of the common objective of tackling terrorism and

17

S/PV.6905

addressing human rights and humanitarian concerns in
the subregion.
My delegation wishes to commend the unique and
invaluable contributions of France and other countries,
including Niger, our sister country Chad, Togo and the
many others that have pledged troops to this onerous
effort of the global community to restore the sovereignty
of Mali. The pivotal and timely action of France, in the
light of the deteriorating security situation in Mali and
in the context of the resolution 2085 (2012), was a key
lesson of the significant value that a single country can
add to global counter-terrorism efforts. There is no doubt
that the impact of the French efforts and the significant
contributions of many countries towards assisting Mali
in the resolution of its security and institutional crisis
confirm that close and systematic cooperation among
Member States is an essential prerequisite and effective
strategy for tackling terrorism.
It is our hope that similar commitment and forwardlooking action will be taken by the world in addressing
other concerns of the countries in the Sahel and in
supporting the United Nations to achieve the objectives
of the Secretary-General’s integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel.
The President: I now give the floor to Head of the
Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his important and
informative briefing.
(spoke in French)
I also thank the Permanent Representative of Mali for
his statement today.
The European Union condemns the actions carried
out by terrorist and criminal groups against the Malian
Armed Forces, threatening the territorial integrity of the
country and the safety of its population. Against such
a backdrop and in keeping with relevant resolutions of
the Security Council — specifically resolutions 2056
(2012), 2071 (2012) and especially 2085 (2012) — the
European Union supports the efforts of the region
and of the international community. We welcome the
rapid response of France, with the support of other
States members of the European Union and a number
of African countries, to the request from the President
of Mali for military assistance against terrorist and
criminal groups.

18

The European Union supports the rapid deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA), pursuant to resolution 2085 (2012),
and reiterates its commitment to swiftly providing
financial assistance to the Mission, in particular
through the mobilization of the African Peace Facility.
Preparations are under way to provide financial and
logistical support in close cooperation with the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States.
The European Union will also participate in the
donors conference scheduled for 29 January in Addis
Ababa. In that context, the European Union takes a
favourable view of the most recent letter of the SecretaryGeneral on the different options for providing logistical
support to AFISMA. The European Union hopes that
the Security Council will be able to quickly decide on
authorizing a solid system for financing the Mission.
In response to the direct request of the Malian
authorities, and in accordance with resolution 2085
(2012), the European Union decided to deploy a training
mission to provide military training to the Malian
Armed Forces. Brigadier General François Lecointre
has been appointed Force Commander, and an initial
technical team should arrive in Bamako in the coming
days in order to deploy the Mission in February.
Political progress is crucial to ensuring stability in
Mali over the long term. In that respect, the European
Union earnestly requests the Malian authorities to
adopt and implement as soon as possible a road map
to re-establish democracy and constitutional order. It
encourages an inclusive national dialogue open to the
populations of the north and all groups that have rejected
terrorism and recognized the territorial integrity of
the country. The army must be reformed and placed
under civil authority. Once those conditions are met,
the European Union is determined to gradually resume
its development cooperation and to swiftly disburse the
scheduled funding.
The European Union reiterates the importance it
attaches to close cooperation with the Malian efforts
and those of other regional and international partners.
Accordingly, and in close connection with the United
Nations and the African Union, the European Union
is planning to convene, in Brussels on 5 February, the
next ministerial meeting of the international support
and follow-up group on the situation in Mali, as many
have mentioned today.

13-21314

S/PV.6905

The European Union is prepared to strengthen
without delay its support for the efforts of humanitarian
organizations to assist the populations in Mali
and neighbouring countries in need. It emphasizes
the importance of effective coordination among
humanitarian stakeholders under United Nations
auspices, and reiterates its call on all parties involved to
allow unfettered humanitarian access to populations in
need and to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
The European Union calls on all parties to ensure
the protection of civilian populations and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. Very
particular attention should be focused on the situation
of children — not only those who live in combat zones
or who carry weapons, but also those whose daily
lives have been disrupted by forced displacement or
humanitarian problems. All parties and individuals

13-21314

engaged in Mali will be held accountable for their
actions.
The European Union emphasizes the importance
of maintaining stability in the Sahel and of preventing
a negative impact on neighbouring countries. In that
context, it reiterates its commitment to supporting
Mali’s neighbours as part of its Sahel strategy in order
to strengthen their security and development. To that
end, the appointment of a Special Representative of the
European Union for the Sahel should be forthcoming
shortly.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

19
