TWENTY-F:lGllT~I

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

16 MAY 1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

17 13) . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. .. . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
fa) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to
the President of the Security Council (S/1 0925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920 and Corr.1) . . . . . . . . . _ _ , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

SlPV.1713

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDTHIRTEENTHMEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 16 May 1973, at 4 p.m.
Puesidetit: Mr. Rahmatalla ABDULLA

(Sudan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1713)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question
concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 0925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia (S/10920 and Corr.1).
The meeting wus called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of
Guinea and Kenya to the President of the Security
Council (S/10925);
@J/ Second special report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920 and Corr. I)
I. The PRESIDENT: I have received from the representative of Somalia a letter containing a request for an
invitation to take part in the discussion of the item on the
agenda under the terms of Article 31 of the Charter,
without the right to vote. In accordance with the usual
Practice of the Council and with the provisional rules of
procedure I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in the discussion
under the terms of that Article.
At the imitation of the President, Mr. NW Elmi (Somalia)
took a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: The first name on the list of speakers
is that of the representative of Somalia, on whom I now
call.
3. Mr. NUR ELMI (Somalia): Mr. President, I am very
grateful f& you and to the members of the Security Council
for giving my delegation an opportunity to take part in this
debate on the question of the implementation of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia-a question which my delegation
has always followed closely and in which we have in the
past been directly involved.
4. But before turning to this question permit me to
express my delegation’s sense of satisfaction at your
presence this month as President of the Security Council,
an office which you are eminently qualified to fill. We
recall with pleasure the close co-operation which existed
between our two delegations during Somalia’s term of
office on the Council and we know that your personal
qualities of statesmanship and concern for justice will
continue to be used in the cause of peace.
5. In the view of my delegation, the second special report
of the sanctions Committee poses the following questions.
Is the Security Council serious about the implementation of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia or is it not? Will the
Council continue with the policy of applying pressure by
such gradual steps that the illegal Rhodesian regime is given
ample opportunity to arrange to circumvent the sanctions,
or will it act decisively and powerfully to achieve the
objective of bringing down the Smith rCgime and helping to
establish a just society in Southern Rhodesia?
6. Of course, the Security Council, like the United Nations
as a whole, represents only the thinking of its members. It
has no separate will apart from theirs and no magic wand to
turn its decisions into reality. One can only hope that once
the Council has committed itself to a course of action its
members will co-operate in its effective implementation SO
that threats to peace can be prevented or ended and the
Council’s authority can be maintained. In the context of
the Southern Rhodesian situation that hope often seems in
vain.
7. For example, there is a frightening similarity between
the way in which the Rhodesian situation is developing and
the way in which the South African problem was allowed
to develop. In the Rhodesian problem now, as in the South
African situation a decade ago, there is the same correlation
between the increasing boldness of the minority rCgitne in
applying its racial policies and the failure of the international community to match its condemnations with effective action.

8. The newspaper headlines tell us, on the ane hand, that
the Smith r6gimc in Southern Rhodesia has taken the first
steps towards establishing Bantustans or that the civil
liberties of Africans in Southern Rhodesia-in Zimbabwe,
that is-have been further curtailed on racial grounds, and
on the other hand we are told that sanctions have been
openly breached by the supply of Boeing jet airliners from
a West German company, and, of course, that sanctions
have been breached by the United States importation of
$13 million worth of strategic commodities since the
passing of the Byrd amendment. It is interesting to note in
this connexion that the United States now plans to sell its
stockpile of strategic metals, and accox,ding to aNew Yorlc
Times
report of I May, nickel, which 1s one of the metals
imported from Southern Rhodesia, is one of the surplus
metals to be sold. I need makeno further comment on the
discrepancy between this development and the reasons
which were given originally for the import of strategic
materialsfrom Southern Rhodesiaby the United States.
Whether sanctionshave been breachedopenly or secretly,
the fact is that they have beenseriouslyundermined.This is
authenticated by statistics given in annex V of the fifth
report of the sanctions Committee1 and noted by the
representativeof Yugoslaviain his statementto the Council
last Monday ll712th \neetz’ng/. He pointed out that
exports from Southern Rhodesiaare almostat pre-sanctions
level and that imports into that Territory have surpassed
the pre-sanctionslevel by $60 million.
9. It is clear from all the information that is availablethat
the I35 violations reported to the sanctions Committee
represent only the tip of the iceberg, so to speak, with
regardto sanctionsviolations.
10. It is in the context of the shameful gap between
principles established by the United Nations and the
practice of many Member Stalesthat my delegationwishes
to expressits strong support for the proposalsbut forward
by the African membersof the Council. These proposals
represent the absolute minimum that should be expected
from the Secu.rity Council at this time. My delegation
supportsalso the suggestionof the delegationof China in
paragraph 37 of the report. My delegation also fully
supportsthe proposalsof the Soviet Union, which represent
the optimum approach to the problem, calling as they do
For the extension of sanctiotlsto South Africa and the
PortugueseTerritories and the interruption of all meansof
communicationwith Southern Rhodesia.
11. Both the African and the Russianproposalsare aimed
principally at stopping the major leaksin the sanctionsat
their principal sources. It is obvious to everyone that
sanctions against Southern Rhodesiawill never succeed
unlessconcomitant action is taken againstSouth Africa and
the Portugueseadministrationin Mozambique and Angola,
which not only disregardthe sanctionsthemselvesbut act
as the channels for the clandestinetrade carried on by
many of the highly industrializcd countries. The Security
Council is, after all, committed under rcsolution
320(1972) to attacking this particular aspect of the
problem, and the frame of referencegiven to the sanctions

Committeeincludes proposalsfor extending the scopeof
sanctionsaswell asfor improving existing arrangements.
12. My delegationbelievesthat the recommendationsand
proposalscontained in section III of the report, on which
there is a consensus,are valuable ones which would
certainly go far towards improving existing arrangements,
However,with the exception of the proposalsfor action by
the sanctions Committee to assist Member States in
implementing sanctions, the recommendationsdescribe
what one would expect to havebeenthe normal procedures
enforced during the past eight years by Governmentswith
any real intention of complying with sanctions.There is a
certain irony, for example, in the fact that after sanctions
have been in effect for eight years it is still necessaryto
crnphasize,as in paragraph16of the report, that awareness
on the part of Member Statesof the whole purposeof the
UnitedNationssanctionspolicy is vital.
13. It is section IV of the report, on which no consensus
has so far been reached, that contains proposah for
extendingthe scopeof sanctionsand for a truly significant
sharpeningof the application of existing measures.The
feasibility and scopeof the African proposalscontained in
both sections III and IV of the report have been fully
describedby the representativeof Guinea/ibicl.J and need
no further elaboration. My delegationwishes,however, to
singleout a few proposalswhich appearin sectionIV of the
report and which, in our view, particularly deservewide
support, The African and British proposalsto involve
insurancecompaniesin the effective application of sanctions measuresseem to us to be eminently practical
nteasureswhich at least deserveexploration. The denial of
landing rights to the national carriers 01’countries which
continue to grant landing rights to aircraft from Southern
Rhodesiaor operate air services to Southern Rhodesia
would bc a direct and telling indication of the seriousness
or purposeof the Security Council. The extension of the
Beira blockade to cover Lourenc;oMarques and a call to
MemberStates to join with the British Navy in patrolling
Beira would be valuable extensionsof measuresthat are
essentialto any blockade. The British proposalon domestic
legislation to provide for action against nationals atld
companiesthat seekto avoid sanctionswould seemto bea
basic prerequisiteto the control of trade with Southcm
Rhodesiaand, therefore, to the implementation of sanctions ia accordancewith the international obligations of
MemberStates.
14. My final observationon section IV concernsparagraph
33. My delegationhasnoted the significantly wide support
that has been expressedfor the recommendationthat the
United States be asked to co-operate fully with the
implementationof sanctionsby revoking its existing legislation permitting the importation of mineralsfrom Southern
Rhodesia.My delegationjoins its voice now-as it hasSO
often donebefore-with other voiceswhich call for a return
by the United StatesAdministration to a senseof its moral
responsibilitiestowards the African people of Southern
Rhodesiaand of its political and legal responsibilities;LS ‘L
permanent l’lember of the Security Council. It is to 1~
hoped that despitethe lack of consensus
over the propos&
in section IV of the report the way is still open for

2

agree~~ t to be reached on many of the valuable measures
that are autlined

1% Fhally,

not have been achieved but for the untiring efforts of the
who1e Corndtee under the able leadership of its Chair-

therein.

man, Mrs.JeanneMartin CissB,
in collaborationwitll the
Officersof the Committee,to all of whommy delegation
WodI like to express
its gratitude.

1 should like to take issue with one view

eWEssod in section V, that, since existing provisions are
not being adequately applied, it is useless to add new

measures with 110 guarantee that they till be *ore
adequately enforced than the existing measures. Obvjously
he is as llludl
need for the will to enforce measures as
fiere is for their devising. ht the cynicism and apathy of
the past ahouId 110t constitute a permanent barrier against
new initiatives and bold approaches.My delegationbelieves
that the time k ripe for sUCh initiatives. With all their
sllofi-oomin& existing sanctionsare hurting the modesian
CcollomY by creating a chronic shortage of foreign currency. This has given rise to a number of political and
econon1ic problems and no doubt causedthe regimeof Ian
Smith to seek a formula-albeit an L!nsatisfactory one-for
solving the constitutional problem with Britain in 1971.
This is certainly not the time for the Security Councilto
feel defeated over the issueof Southern Rhodesia.Perhaps
the Council should remind itSelf of Ihe reasonswhy it is

committed
to the use of economic sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, and why it must not fail to achieve its
goals.It should remind itself that it hastaken this actionin
order ta prevent the full implementation in that Territory
of the same apartkid policies whose application in South
Africa constituted a crime against humanity. It hastaken
this action on behalf of a people who seekthe modestgoal
of equal opportunity in their own native homeland.The
Council should remind itself, too, that it is committed to

the effort to establish a just society in Southern Rhodesia
becausethe massive attack on the rights of innocent people,
such as is being attempted in that Territory, creates a
situation which threatens the peace of the region and
which, within the context af the whole southern African
situation, could well threaten international peace and
security. It is within these wider contexts that the vigorous
application of new and old measuresto bring down the
rebel r@ghnc in Southern Rhodesiamust be made.
16. Mr. SOEGOMO (Indonesia): Mr. President, before

speaking on the substance of the question before us today,
my delegation would like to avail itself of this opportunity
to congratulate you upon your assumption of the presi-

19. Having beendirectly involved in the proceedings
of
the Committee,ashavethe membersof the Council,my
delegationwill thereforelimit itself to somebrief corn.
meritson the Committee’s
report whichwasintroducedto
the Council by the representative
of Guineaon Monday

I1 712th meeting] with her usual eloquence and clarity.
20. The recommendations
andsuggestions
8 presented
in
sectionIII aswell asthe proposals
containedin sectionIV
of the report werebaseduponthe working paper submitted
by the delegations
of Guinea,Kenya and the Sudan.The
proposalsasthey originally stoodin the African working
paperweredesigned
to exert moreeffectivepressures
upon
those countries which continue to demonstratevarying
degreesof laxity in their observance
of the obligations
decidedupon by the variousUnitedNationsagencies.
The
originalAfrican proposalsenvisaged
adequatemeasures
to
copeeffectively with the increasingclandestine
andovert
violations of the sanctionsin contraventionof the provisionsof resolution253(1968). Theseproposalswould
imposea more detailedexaminationof documentson
consignments
emanatingfrom South Africa and the PortugueseTerritories; they would alsoensurerigid probing
and identification of “suspectcargoes”.Theseproposals
furthermoreenvisagedmorespecificmethodsin the procurementof detailsregarding
sanctions-violating
operations
and the waysand meansto expeditethe necessary
actions
once this information was supplied.Moreover,greater
public pressurewasto be exerteduponthoseGovernments
whichdo not live up to their obligations.
21. Theseproposalsshouldhave merited more serious
considerationsince,in the opinionof my delegation,they
are consistentwith the reality of the situation. It is
thereforewith regretthat my delegationnotedthe inability
of somedelegations
to acceptthe just andproperdemands
submittedby the African members
of the Committee.

22. My delegationsupportedthe African proposals
in the
belief
that
their
adoption
would
more
POSitiVdy
SSSiSt the
dcncy of the Council for the month. of May. We are
implementationof the variousmethodsof sancconvinced that under your able and experiencedguidance effective
tions alreadyprescribed
by the SecurityCouncilin Previous
the Council can look forward to a month marked by meetings.We would indeed
have beenhappierif those
achievement. In this regard, my delegation Promises You its
propos&
could haveenjoyedthe Committee’s
Unanimus
fullest co-operation.
approval
in order to accommodate
more effectively the
provisions
incorporated in paragraph4 of resolution
17. May I also express, on behalf of my delegation, our
320(1972). My delegation would like to stressthe foredeep appreciation to your predecessor, Ms. P&ez de CucGr
going
becauseit is now more importantthat we pursuea
of Peru, for the skilful manner in which he conducted the
moreeffective implementationof the sanctions
ratherthan
affairs of the Council during a most difficult and delicate
endeavourto formulatenumerous
sanctionmethodswhose
period.
implementation
lack practicability. hl this connedon,
permit
me
to
remind
the Council that one of the
18. The Council has before it the second special report Of
conclusionsof the Security Council SpecialMissionto
the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of
Zambiain its assessment
of the conditionsin the areaWas
resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
that
tile
key
to
the
solution
of the problemdealtwith in
Rhodesia. This report is submitted to the Council in
resolution 326 (1973) lies in the applicationOf, among
accordance with Council resolution 320 (1972) which was
others the strict implementationof the mandatorysane-

adopted in September of last year. The report is a Product
of hard and often frustrating work and its fin?lization could

tions igainst the aed regime of Southern Rhodesia. 1 feel
3

the need to refer to the Special Mission’s report2 to
underscore the importance for stricter implementation
of
the mandatory sanctions because of “the flagrant and
widespread violations of sanctions,” that are still being
practiccd in certain quarters, as is clearly brought out in
paragraph 21 of the Committee’s secgnd special report.

27. As I stated earlier, my delegation does not intend to
tax the patience of this Council by commenting indi.
vidually on the numerous recommendations and proposals.
The Committee’s report is clear and self-explanatory. The
proposals, though not fully meeting the wishes of my
delegation, could be considered a step in the right direction,
As such, they should not be considered as being conclusive,
but rather as a step leading towards a more stringent and
effective implementation
of the sanctions in order to
achieve the ultimate purpose of the United Nations with
regard to Southern Rhodesia: namely, the elimination of
the illegal minority regime of Ian Smith.

23. My delegation does not suppress the fact that it is not
completely satisfied that the proposals submitted by the
African members could not have been accommodated in
their entirety. Nevertheless, WC are happy to note that there
arc rccolnlnendations that have enjoyed unanimity
of
approval by the Committee. I do not need to take up the
time of this Council to dwell on these recommendations at
length. The representative of Guinea had already dealt with
them when she introduced the report to the Council at
Monday morning’s meeting.

28. It is with these considerations in mind that my
delegation commends the Committee’s report for unanimous approval by the Council.
29. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): The second
special report of the sanctions Committee gives me my first
opportunity to speak to an issue to which the United States
delegation attaches great importance.

24. I should like, however, to revert briefly to paragraph 19
of the report, which is actually an offspring of paragraph 13
of the Committee’s special report of 9 May 1972
[S/10632/. The latter stated very clearly that the secretariat of the Committee should be in a position to keep the
Cumrnittcc continuously informed of all developments
relevant to the task entrusted to it by Security Council
resolutions 253 (1968), 277 (1970) and 314 (1972). The
secretariat should also initiate any spccialized studies
required by the Committee with the assistance, when
necessary, of other competent departnlents of the Secretariat. It is obvious Illat tllis task involves a great deal of
extra duties for the already heavily burdened secretariat of
the Conunittce. My delegation therefore fully endorses the
recommendation in paragraph 19 of the report, which
recommends the appointment of an individual with expericnce in international commerce, particularly of trade
conducted through third parties, to assist the Committee’s
sccrctariat so as to enable the latter to keep the Committee
continuousty and adequately informed of developments
relative to its task as entrusted to it by the relevant Council
resolutions. The reasons for and desirability of reinforcing
the secretariat with an individual of such wide experience
Irave already been clarified by the representative of Guinea.

30. At the outset I wish to reaffirm my Government’s full
support for majority rule in Southern Rhodesia and the
sooner the better. This is the objective fixed by this Council
and is the reason that it voted for sanctions in the first
place.
31. That objective ,has not yet been achieved. At the same
time, there is no doubt that sanctions have inflicted
hardships on the illegal r&me in Southern Rhodesia. The
original framework of sanctions as set out in resolution
253 (1968) is a valid one. What is required is to act now to
make the present sanctions more effective rather than to
expand or widen their scope. For the first time the
sanctions Committee has come to grips with some of the
fundamental stumbling blocks to full implementation. The
agreed recommendations and suggestions in the report offer
a serious prospect of making sanctions more effective,
Therefore, they have our full support.
32. What has the Committee accomplished? If we accept
its recommendations and suggestions, the Council would
request States to take effective measures to examine
cargoes which, because of their nature or because they were
shipped from Angola, Mozambique or South Africa, can
reasonably be suspected to be of Southern Rhodesian
origin. States would also be asked to report on measures
taken to prevent sanctions evasions. With the co-operation
of Governments, experts would be made available to an
importing country, if so desired, to inspect suspicious
cargoes to determine their true origin. If it were established
that such cargoes originated in Southern Rhodesia, they
would be seized or disposed of in accordance with domestic
laws and regulations. These recommendations are fundamental and can be effective if we, the Members of the
United Nations, respond, quickly and positively, without
exception.

25. The recommendations and suggestions that we now
have before us, as they appcnr in section III of the report,
are, to a great extent, a rather watered-down version of
sc~tne of the African proposals. This mild version of the
original Africarl proposals lcavcs, in the view of my
delegation, 110 room for expansion of sanctions, nor other
concrete actions which should be taken against the open
and persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal to
irllplerntrlt sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
26. I have already stressed the necessity of a more
effective implementation
of the sanctions. My delegation
therefore regrets the absence of censure in the Committee’s
report against Mcmbcr States that violate these sanctions.
WC arc convinced that a corresponding degree of censure
against such violations would cffcctuate a more rigid
inlplcmcntatiwn of the sanctions as defined in the related
Security Council resolutions.

33. The Committee has also recommended that it urgently
produce a manual containing information on the necessary
documentation and clearing procedures to help determine
the true origin of suspected cargoes. My delegation will
co-operate fully in the preparation of such a manual, We
4

will, for example, pass on to the Committee the lessons that
we have learned in testing products that might be of
Southern Rhodesian origin. I would point out, hoWeVet,
that while such tests can be very effective for such products
as chrome ore, ferrochrome and asbestos, we have not yet
developed technical tests to determine the origin of some
other products.

spirit which lies behind resolution 253 (1968)-the achievement of self-determination and majority rule in Southern
Rhodesia. We commend the Committee for its efforts,
which are a concrete and realistic step towards that end.
38. Mr. SEN (India}: Mr. President, in congratulating you
on your presidency of the Council for the month of May
we express more than our usual goodwill for, in our
.opinion, it is most apt that you who have struggled
persistently and diligently for the freedom of oppressed
people should preside over our debate on Rhodesia. You
have our full co-operation and understanding in guiding the
work of the Council ,on this and other difficult questions
which we shall be facing this month.

34. Members of the Council may recall Mr. Phillips’
statement of 29 September 1972 [1666th meeting] in
hid1
he noted that close study of trade statistics contained in the Committee’s fourth reports would be illuminating. He underscored the fact that import statistics of
certain materials-produced both in Rhodesia and in neighbouring countries-provided
by importing States show
considerably higher figures than export statistics provided
by Rhodesia’s neighbours. The natural inference is that
trans-shipment of Rhodesian commodities through those
areas accounts, in large part, for the discrepancies.

39. We should also like to place on record our admiration
for the smooth and efficient manner in which your
predecessor, Mr. Pdrez de Cukllar of Peru, conducted the
affairs of the Council last month.

35. My delegation welcomes the fact that this point was
stressed in paragraph 21 of the Committee’s report. That
paragraph noted the discrepancies in trade statistics in the
Committee’s
fifth report and recommended that the
Secretary-General bring them to the attention of Countries
trading with Angola, Mozambique and South Africa. It also
recommended that the comments of countries concerned
be solicited along with information on those countries’
procedures to ensure that products from Southern
Rhodesia are not being imported disguised as products of
Angola, Mozambique and South Africa. These replies are to
be published. However, it would have been more appropriate to ask States to take the necessary action to ensure
that such discrepancies do not mask the importation of
disguised Rhodesian goods. This would have gone to the
heart of the problem and been consistent with other
recommendations of the Committee. We hope the Committee will give fuller attention to this matter with
particular reference to the relevant sections of the fourth
and fifth annual reports. In this connexion the cornpen&urn on South Africa’s external trade for the years
1965 and 1971 prepared for the Committee as working
paper S/AC.lS/WP.65/Corr.l
of 9 April 1973 is. also a
useful document.

40. We have noted the admirable and eloquent manner in
which the Ambassador of Guinea, Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse-who is unfortunately not here with us todayintroduced the second special report on sanctions on
Rhodesia. Listening to her and subsequently reading the
text of her statement again and again in the verbatim record
[I 712th meeting], my delegation could not help feeling
that she was speaking with utmost distress at the delay
which has occurred in introducing the principle of selfdetermination and independence of Zimbabwe on the basis
of majority rule. We share her feelings and find nothing in
the present report which encourages us to believe that
sanctions in the future months and years will be more
effective than they have been until the present in their main
objective of bringing down the Ian Smith regime. The
reasons for this conclusion are well known and have indeed
been referred to by speakers before me. When one analyses
the various proposals mentioned in section IV of the report,
it is quite clear that only two or three countries prevent the
application of measures, which the vast majority not merely
of the Security Council but of the United Nations
membership as a whole consider necessary-indeed essential-to make the policy of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia effective.

36. The sanctions Committee has worked long and hard to
prepare its report and, I am glad to say, my delegation
actively participated in its preparation. I wish to express
our appreciation to the delegations of Guinea, Kenya ad
the Sudan for making a wide variety of proposals for the
Committee’s consideration. All these proposals were genuinely intended to obtain wider compliance with sanctions.
If we could not accept all of them, it was because they
raised certain practical and legal difficulties. For the most
part, however, the proposals were accepted, and we hope
they will contribute to tightening sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia.

41. This morning those of us who wished to hear heard
over the wireless that, according to Rhodesian sources, two
young Canadian women and an American had been killed
by Zambian soldiers. Assuming that the facts are correct,
we must regret the death of innocent people and convey
our sympathies to the families. Nevertheless, this reported
incident, which has been covered by various news media
this morning and which is supposed to have been announced by sources. described variously as the Government
of Southern Rhodesia, a Minister of the Government of
Southern Rhodesia, and an official spokesman of the
Government of Southern Rhodesia, raises a number of
questions.

37. The United States has constantly reiterated its belief
that sanctions could have more effect on the policies of the
Smith regime if they were thoroughly implemented in the
3 Bkf,

42. First, how and why do these visitors tind themselves in
Rhodesia? Who authorized their passports, endorsements
for Rhodesia and visas for Rhodesia? Why is it that the
news media, which should know better, continue to refer to
the illegal r&me of Ian Smith as “the Government of

Twenty-sixth Year, Special Supplement No. 2 and 2A.

5

the sanctions Committee to study the proposals on a future
occasion and decide if they could not be combined in a
manner which would not invite a veto.

Rhodesia”? If these unfortunate people went to Rhodesia
as tourists-Victoria
Falls is supposed to be attracting
thousands of tourists every year-is it not time that we
should, as part of our sanctions, take steps to discourage
such tourism? Lastly, does not this incident, with its
attendant circumstances, portray an insensitivity-I almost
said callousness-about the fate of Zimbabwe and all that
the majority of the people there are suffering? It seems to
my delegation that apart from the policy of sanctionsbecause of the attitude of some counttics, not all of which
are necessarily great Powers-very little has been done
through the news media and general official policy of
Governments to bring to the attention of the public the
tragedy of Zimbabwe and the need to make everyone
conscious that any help, encouragement or recognition,
direct or indirect, to the white regime of Ian Smith in that
country adds to the length and bitterness of the struggle for
freedom of the Zimbabwe people as a whole and frustrates
to a great extent the efforts of the United Nations and of
the Security Council in particular.

47. On paragraph 26, my only comment is that I have
heard with great regret a recent announcement that
Portuguese civil airways have planned regular halts in a
north African country.
48. I have also received several disquieting reports from
different sources relating to various other administrative
matters. I propose to take them up in the first instance with
the authorities concerned rather than mentioning them in
the Council.
49. In paragraph 30, the United Kingdom has suggested
alternative proposals to the African proposals contained in
paragraphs 27, 28 and 29. We do not believe that the
United Kingdom proposals provide an effective deterrent to
the violations which are undoubtedly taking place. Wealso
do not believe that the British delegation can have
suggested these proposals in the full knowledge of the
practical difficulties involved. None the less, as a first step
we would be prepared to give the British proposals a chance
on the understanding that we strongly prefer the African
proposals.

43. Turning to the specific report before us, we consider
that section III, containing the agreed recommendations,
does mark a small step forward. This section falls far short
of what we, along with the African members and Indonesia,
Panama, Peru and Yugoslavia, would have wished. But it
was clear to the Committee that agreement on the African
proposals could not be achieved.

50. The proposal in paragraph 31 seems to us a logical
consequence of the application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. The fact that this proposal has not been
accepted makes us doubt the genuineness of the desire of
all members of the Council to make the sanctions work.

44. However, as section IV indicates, a large number of
proposals was forthcoming, and we do not see why some of
them, on which there is no general ageement in the
Committee, cannot be pursued in the Council. In paragraph
23 of the report the Soviet Union made comprehensive
proposals which would deny South Africa and Portugal, as
also the illegal r&ime of Zimbabwe, the export or import
of many vital goods. We would have been quite prepared to
support this proposal. The African counter-proposal that
States should limit their purchases of certain goods from
South Africa and Mozambique to the 1965 level is not only
modest but eminently justified.

51. Similarly, paragraphs 32 and 34 are entirely innacuous, and if the Council cannot accept these two proposals
I think the outside public, particularly those who wish to
make sanctions effective against Southern Rllodesia, will be
greatly disillusioned.
52. Paragraph 33 is directed specifically towards the
United States, and I think we have said enough on this
subject for the United States delegation to realize the
strength of feeling in the Council on the need for relaxation
by the United States Government of the measures it has
sought and obtained from its Congress.

45. On paragraph 24, my delegation feels that while the
African proposal is more suitable there is room for
compromise between the African proposal and the United
Kingdom proposal. We have not, however, been able to
understand the United States proposal in this paragraph, for
it seems to imply that while Governments can break the
sanctions the nationals of the same Government would
incur a penalty if they did not declare the “true point of
origin” of goods imported from Southern Rhodesia. Apart
from the distinction between the nationals and the Government in this respect, one of the difficulties of the
Committee, as also of the Council, has been to determine
the true point of origin. Or is it the intention that if the
true point of origin were revealed, the penalties would not
apply? I know that this can never be the intention, but the
paragraph as drafted today in the report does give rise to
much ambiguity.

53. The purpose of my commenting in detail on these
proposals on which there is no agreement is mainly to
emphasize that there is scope for further study and sci,ous
attempts to find common ground in some groups-if not all
the groups-of suggestions where differences now exist. 01ze
encouraging feature of this report, as also of the debate that
has taken place in the Committee and in the Council so far,
is that no false tears are being shed over what would happen
to the unprivileged black population of Zimbabwe if
sanctions were indeed made effective.
54. We also believe that the Secretary-General should be
authorized to pursue the Governments concerned in any
suspected violations committed by them or their nationals
or vessels,or in their territories. Many speakers have already
referred to the recent acquisition of planes and railway
engines by the Ian Smith rBgime and I think such
complaints could easily be pursued by the Secretary-

46. In paragraph 25 the various proposals could again
perhaps be combined. I do not suggest that this would be
easy to achieve in the Council meetings, but we can make
some attempt. In any event, it would be worth while for
6

General with the Governments concerned if we gave him
the authority to do so.

60. Along with these repressions,the illegal rigime is
moving firmly along the road to apartheid. Residentialareas
and public recreational facilities are already largely segregated. Laws have been introduced to makeit compulsory
for all Africans to carry identity cards, and the first steps
have been taken towards establishingregionalauthoritiesin
Mashonaland and Metabeleland on the South African
Bantustan pattern. There hasalsobeenspeculationthat the
Ian Smith r6gime is making utmost efforts to revive the
Pearce Commission proposals and suggestingin various
ways that those Africans who rejected the proposalswere
not true representatives of the people. In their own
opinion, the true representativesare only those who agree
with the white minority.

55. Similarly, we think that thought should be given to
enabling the United Nations to sue individuals and companies in any national courts. The money for this purpose
can be found and such prosecution can be arranged in
advance and with the co-operation of the country concerned,
56. Lastly, we believe that the co-operation of the
non-governmental organizations, particularly
of trade
unions, should be sought much more systematically and
vigorously than we have done until now.
57, Much of our work in the Committee related to the
collection of accurate information on violations and sanctions. Indeed, section III of the report gives considerable
attention to detecting these violations and to giving
publicity to them. I had, in the Council’s debate last year,
pressed for such publicity and I am glad that some of our
ideas have been accepted. As regards the information about
violations, the sources of supplies and so on, my delegation
considers that there is enough technical equipment and
trained manpower to detect all the violations if some of the
Powers who have thesefacilities would co-operatewith the
Councilin this matter. When it comesto detectingmilitary
movements,these meansare liberally used,irrespectiveof
legalconsiderations;yet, when it comesto detectingillegal
trade by Southern Rhodesia and thus furthering the
independenceof severalmillions of people,we seemto shy
awayfrom the meanswhich are at our disposaland which
canbe usedwithout much cost.

61. These methods of the Ian Smith regime will not
succeedany more than similar measuressucceededelsewhere in suppressing peoples’ desire for freedom and
human dignity. While, therefore, we would continue to
make the sanctionsas effective aswe can, despiteflagrant
and most cynical violations by many countries, we must
not overlook the broader context of the struggle for
freedom which the people of Zimbabwe are waging and
waging successfully. We are convinced that they shallwin,
even if these sanctions are ineffective and therefore the
struggle becomesmore bitter, more long-drawn and more
full of human tragedies. If through the application of
sanctions we can shorten the struggleand make it a little
lesspainful, we shallhave contributed just a little.

58. While, therefore, we have considerablereservationson
the efficacy of the measuressuggested
in sectionIII of the
report, we are, none the less,encouragedthat there has
been some movement. We hope this process will be
strengthened,even if we realize that the independenceof
Southern Rhodesiawil! not be brought about through
sanctionsbut by the struggleof the peoplesthemselves.In
this processsanctions can contribute but cannot be a
determiningfactor. The extent to which this struggle for
freedomhas gathered strength in recent yearsis reflected
by the new oppressiveand disastrousmeasures
which the
regime of Ian Smith has adopted. Alarmed by these
successes,
the Smith rCgimehas reacted with more and
morerepression.Giving up its pretence that five and a half
million blacks of Southern Rhodesiaare loyal and happy
undertheir white rule, the Provincial Commissioners
have
now been authorized to imposecollective fines and other
punishmentson whole communitiespurely on suspicion
that any of them are harbouring or otherwise aiding
freedom-fighters.

62. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation ,frc~m
French): Mr. President, may I first of all add my congratulations to those of other membersof the Council who have
already expressedto you what a great pleasureit is to see
you take over the presidency of our work during the month
of May. We are convinced that under your guidanceour
work will be conducted with effectivenessand also with
wisdom.
63. May I alsosay to your predecessor,
the Ambassadorof
Peru, Mr. l%rez de CuBlIar, how very much we admiredhis
diplomatic talents, aswell ashis courteousauthority, in the
course of the delicate debates which occupied US last
month.
64. On the agendaitem I shallbe brief. The Council has
indeed on many occasions considered the question of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesiaand our position in
regardto their application hasalwaysbeenclearly stated.

65. Although from the outset we felt some doubts about
the results to be expected from sanctionsin seeking a
soiution to the Rhodesianproblem, we voted in favour of
their establishment in 1968 in order to respond to the
expectations of the African countries and to the requestof
59, In application of these punitive measures,no notice
the administeringPower. In 1970we werein favour of their
needbe given and no representationis to be allowed. With
extension. Nationally, we have establisheda regulatory and
the renewalof the state of emergency,the majority of the
penal system intended to prevent violations, and we have
people of Zimbabwehave been deprived of all meansof
given strict directives to our customsservices;and, also,we
protest and their political activity has been effectively
have actively participated in the work of the Committeeset
stopped.The African National Council, which has offered
up under resolution 253 (1968). Having nevertheless
peacefulnegotiationsfor settlement, is beingsubjectedto
accepted the fact that despite certain effects on the
all kinds of restrictions and harassmentsand its members economy of Southern Rhodesiathe systemestablishedis
arebeing arrestedarbitrarily.
insufficient, and becauseof the importance we attach to
7

the strictest and most complete application of the sanctions
system, we supported, in February and September of 1972,
the initiatives intended to increase the effectiveness of the
work of the Committee.
66. TO&Y the Council is called upon to reach a decision
on the second special report of. the Committee,
as is
provided for in resolution 320 (1972).
67. The French delegation, for its part, wishes first of all
to pay tribute to the important work which has been
accomplished by the Committee under the wise and diligent
guidance of Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cissd, with the assistance of
Mr. Soegomo of Indonesia and the representative of Yugoslavia.
68. The French delegation obviously approves the recommendations and suggestions contained in section III of the
report. We note that these recommendations are within the
terms oE reference of the Committee. We have, furthermore, always indicated that we would be in favour of
recommendations intended to strengthen the sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia, whenever the means of application met the Criterion of effectiveness. In this connexion,
it would seem that the measureswhich after lengthy
discussionsled to unanimous agreement in the Committee
should contribute to the prevention of the violation of
sanctions and thereby further isolate the Ian Smith r6gime.
gut, es certain delegations have already emphasized, it goes

without saying that more satisfactory resultsthan those
registered so far cannot be attained unlessthe provisions
adopted are scrupulously complied with by all Govern.
n-rents. For its part the Government of France will, as
always, seeto it that they are applied. On the other hand,We
cannot agree with certain proposalscontainedin sectionIV
of the report, and more particularly thoseintended to
declare a kind of economic war on southernAfrica asa
whole.
69. Just asno draft resolution concerningsanctionscanbe
effective unlessthe administeringPower supportsit sono
political solution-and this is where the real problem
lies-can be obtained without the administering
Power. The
latter has had the wisdomto admit the failureof the Pearce
Commission, and we hope it will continue to seek a
settlement so as to lead Rhodesia on the course to
self-determination in accordancewith the freely expressed
wishes of the population. It is, in fact, not possibleto
accept perpetuation of the illegal and unjustregimeunder
which a minority of 250,000 people maintainsdomination
over 5 million Africans. We hope that, beforethe internal
situation in Southern Rhodesia deterioratesfurther, the
state of affairs of which the international community
disapproves, and the prolongation of which warrants our
concern, will be endedassoonaspossible.
The meetingrose at 5.35 pm,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may he obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

L.es publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IlOJIS’INTb

Rrrna~m

H3AAHMfl

Oprabmsaquu

sanax

n arearcraax

~ar.nem
HarviR,

KHII~~ON
Cmqm

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no

OPSAHII

Od~efimiemcbzx

so scex
~ara3mie
npojqame

paaosax

3A4NN

OB’hEAWHEHHhIX

Hauut?

hfonwo

mipa.

Haaonure

H~A miunme
no anpecy:
N3ARHWti,
HIdO-HOpK
mu

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

HAIWFi

Kynurb

n KHHmmlX

cnpaaxn

Oprmn3aqm
HhIeBa.

NACIONES

nfcw&-

06 UDAaHUsX

B

06ze~metxwdx

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estAn en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidocas
an todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su Iibrero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in othet

currencies)

73-82146-November

1976-I

,925
