78

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

of the General Assembly, and to submit, if possible, a
single draft Declaration to the Assembly at its twentyninth session through the Economic and Social Council;
2. Invites Governments to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral their additional comments and suggestions on
the said articles and amendments in time for their consideration by the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirtieth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit all
the documentation on the subject that was before the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session to the
Commission on Human Rights;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of the twentyninth session the ítem entitled "Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance" with a view to considering,
completing and adopting, if possible, a Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance.

2185th plerwry meeting
30 November 1973
3070 (XXVIII). lmportance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Faithful to its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the importance of the t:niversal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and
of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples,
Bearing in mina the Political Decla:ration adopted
by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from
5 to 9 September 1973, 2 º
Recalling its resolutions 2588 B (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and 2963 E
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, as well as resolution
VIII adopted by the Intemational Conference on
Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968, 21
Noting with satisfaction the Secretary-General's report of 21 September 1973 22 ,and the assistance being
given to dependent Territories by certain Governments,
specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations
and non-govemmental organi21ations,
Disturbed at the continued irepression and inhuman
treatment inflicted on peoples still under colonial and
foreign domination and alien subjugation, including
inhuman treatment of people imprisoned because of
their struggle for self-determination,
Recognizing the imperative need to put an early end
to colonial rule, foreign domination and alíen subjugation,
1. Reaf]irms the inalienable right of ali people
under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation to self-determination, freedom and indepen20 A/9330 and Corr.l, p. 3.

21 Final

Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 9.
12 A/9154.

dence in -accordance with General Assembly resolutions
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2649 (XXV) of
30 November 1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971;
2. Also reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples'
struggle for liberation from colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation by all available meaos,
including armcd struggle;
3. Calls upon ali States, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with relevant resolutions of thc United Nations, to recognize the right
of all peoples to self-determination and independence
and to offer moral, material and any other assistance
to ali peoples struggling for the ful! exercise of their
inalienable right to self-determination and indcpendence;
4. Strongly condemns the Governments of Portugal
and South Africa, as well as all others which continue
to disregard United N ations resolutions bearing on the
right of ali pcoples to self-determination and independence;
5. Further condemns the policies of those members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and other
countries which assist Portugal and other racist régimes
in Africa and elsewhere in their supprcssion of peoples'
aspirations for, and enjoyment of, human rights;
6. Condemns ali Governments which do not recognize the right to self-determination and independence
of peoples, notably the peoples of Africa still under
colonial domination and the Palestinian people;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations associated
with the United Nations which have extended various
forms of assistance to dependent Territories and appeals to them to increase fuirther such assistance;
8. Welcomes the initiative taken by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities in appointing a Special Rapporteur2:i at
its twenty-scventh session to prepare a detailed study
on the historical and current development of the right
of pcoples to self-determination, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and othcr instruments
adopted by Unitcd Nations organs, with particular
reference to the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out
measures for the provision of increased international
assistancc to the peoples _of colonial Territories;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on thc implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.

2185th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
3074 (XXVIII). Princip1es of intemational co•
operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persona guilty of
war crimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2583 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2712 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
23 See E/CN.4/1128, part B,

resolution 5 (XXVI).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2840 (XXVI) of 18 Deeember 1971 and 3020
(XXVII) of 18 December 1972,
Taking into account the special need ~or internati~nal
action in order to ensure the prosecution and pumshment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity,
Having considered the draft principies of inte.I"?ational co-operation in the dete~tion, arrest, e~trad1t1on
and punishment of persons gu1lty of war cnmes and
crimes against humanity, 24
Declares that the United Nations, in pursuance of
the principies and purposes set forth in the Charter
concerning the promotion of co-operation between peoples and the maintemmce of international peace and
security, proclaims the following principles of int~r?ational co-operation in the detection, arrest, extrad1t1on
and punishment of persoos guilty of war crimes and
crimes against humanity:
l. War crimes and crimes against humanity,
wherever they ,are committed, shall be subject to
investigation and the persons against whom t!tere
is evidence that they have committed such cnmes
shall be subject to tracing, arrest, trial and, if found
guilty, to punishment.
2. Every State has the right to try its own nationals for war crimes or crimes against humanity.
3. States shall co-operate with each other on a
bilateral and multilateral basis with a view to halting and preventing war crirnes and crimes against
hurnanity, and shall take the domestic and international rneasures necessary for that purpose.
4. States shaH assist each other in detecting,
arresting and bringing to tria! peTsons suspected of
having cornmitted such crimes and, if they are found
guilty, in punishing thern.
5. Persons against whom there is evidence that
they have committed war crimes and crirnes against
humanity shrall be subject to tria! and, if found
guilty, to punishment, as a general rule in the countries in which they committed those crimes. In that
connexion, States shall co-operate on questions of
extrnditing such persons.
6. States shaU co-operate with each other in
the collection of information and evidence which
would he,lp to bring to tria! the persons indicated in
paragraph 5 above and shall exchange such inforrnation.
7. In accordance with article 1 of the Declaration on Territorial Asylum of 14 December 1967, 25
States shall not grant asylum to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crirne against
peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity.
8. States shal! not take any legislative or other
measures which may be prejudicial to the international obligations they have assumed in regard to the
detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of
persons guilty of war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
9. In co-operating with a vicw to the detection,
arrest and extradition of persons against whom there
is evidence that they have cornmitted war crimes
and crirnes against humanity and, if found guilty,
their punishment, States shall act in conformity with
the provisions of the Charter of the Unitcd Nations
24See A/9136.
25 Resolution 2312 (XXII).

79

and of the Declaration on Principies of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. 26
2187th plenary meeting
3 December 1973

3134 (XXVIII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its ,resoiution 3057 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 on the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, the General Assembly has emphasized, in the prograrnme for the Deoade,
the need far universal ratification of the International
Convention on the Elirnination of Ali Forros of Racial
Discrimination, 27 as well as the need for giving full
effect to all the provisions of the Convention,
Having considered the repo:rt of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrirnination on the fourth
year of its activities, 28 submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forros of Racial Discrimination,
Noting the decisions of the Committee contained
in chapter X of its report,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing participation of StaLeS Parties to the International <;onve_ntion on the Elimination of Ali Forros of Racial D1scrimination in submitting their reports to the
Committee and by sending representatives to the Committee when it considers their reports;
3. Endorses the Comrnittee's request in its dccision
2 (VIII) of 21 August 1973 concerning specific information to be made available to the Comrnittee by
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committce on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs under articlc 15 of the
Convention, on Trust Territories, N on-Self-Governing
Territories ,and ali other Territories to which General
Assernbly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Deccmber
1960 applies, and draws to the attention of these organs the conclusions and recommendations set out in
the report of the Committee20 concerning inforrnation
submitted by them;
4. Takes note of the Committee's decision 4 (VII)
of 25 April 1973 relating to information supplicd by
the Syrian Arab Republic and, in this connexwn, recalls its endorscment of thi.: Committec's clccision 4
(IV) of 30 August 1971 in ~ection llJ of (icncral
Assemblv resolution '2784 (XXVI) of 6 Dect:·rnbcr
1971; 5. Endorses the request of the Committee cont.."nccl
in its dccision 5 (VII) of 4 May 1973 ccnccm;ng th(;
holding of one of its scssions in 1974 a t Geri !V'a;
26 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.
~. Rcsnlution 2106 A (XX), annex.
28 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, T,venty-e: 6 i11/¡
Session, Supp/ement No. I 8 (A/9018).
~9/bid.,pnr, 115.
