62

General Aaeembly-Foarteenth Session

Convinced that for the purpose of the Scientific Committee's immediate programme of work it is desirable
to provide the Committee with further information on
fall-out, radiation levels and radio-biological questions,
and to supplement this information by a variety of
activities and discussions undertaken by the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and certain non-governmental
organizations,
I
Appro7Jes the recommendations of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
in connexion with the plans and suggested activities
contained in its annual progress report for 1959 and in
annex I thereto ;

II
1. Notes the request of the Committee for further
information and data of the type already contained in
its comprehensive report ;8
2. Requests the Committee, in consultation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and the
World Meteorological Organization, to consider and
study appropriate arrangements for the purpose of
stimulating the flow of such information and data ;
III
Requests the Committee also, in consultation with
the World Health Organization, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to the extent relevant, and other interested organizations, to consider and study appropriate arrangements
for encouraging genetic, biological and other studies,
including those conr:erned with C1', that will elucidate
the effects of radiation exposure on the health of human
populations ;
IV
1. Invites Governments of Member States having
facilities for laboratory analysis to make known to other
Governments the extent to which they are prepared,
at the request of other Governments, to receive and
analyse samples in accordance with the programme of
work of the Committee, and to keep the Committee
currently informed ;
2. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the World Health Organization to consider
and inform the Committee what assistance they might
give in this connexion, making full use of their work
in the field of metrology of radio-nuclides;

V
1. Expresses the hope that all concerned will continue to assist the Committee, co-operate in the consideration of the arrangements contemplated above and
furnish the Committee with all relevant scientific information for collation, study and dissemination;
2. Requests the Committee to submit as soon as practicable a report on its study of such questions to the
1 Ibid.,

Thirteenth. Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/3838).

Secretary-General for publication and dissemination to
all States Members of the United Nations or members
of the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, and for consideration by the General
Assembly at its fifteenth session.
839th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.
1377 (XIV). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1958 to 15 July 1959.•
839th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.
1381 (XIV). Report of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for the purpose of
reviewing the Charter

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 992 (X) of
21 November 1955 and 1136 (XII) of 14 October 1957,
1. Decides to keep in being the Committee on
arrangements for a conference for the purpose of reviewing the Charter and to request the Committee to report,
with recommendations, to the General Assembly not
later than at its sixteenth session ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
work envisaged in paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 992 ( X) .
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.
1442 (XIV). United Nations Emergency Force11

The General Assembly,
Noting from the report of the Secretary-General11
the intention of Lieutenant-General E. L. M. Burns to
relinquish his post as Commander of the United Nations
Emergency Force,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the excellent leadership which General Burns has given to the United
Nations Emergency Force;
2. Approves the appointment, on the existing terms,
of Major-General P. S. Gyani as Commander of the
Force, effective on the date when General Burns
relinquishes command.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
1454 (XIV). Question of Hungary

The General Assemblj•,
Hwing considered the report of the United Nations
Representative on Hungary, 7 Sir Leslie Munro, who
was appointed by General Assembly resolution 1312
4

Ibid., Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/4190).
(XIV) and "Allocation of agenda
items", footnote 6.
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourtenith Sts-sion, Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/4210/ Add.1.
1 Ibid., agenda item 74, document A/4304.
II See also resolution 1441

63

Resolntionll adopted without reference to a CommittM

(XIII) of 12 December 1958 for the purpose of reporting to Member States or to the General Assembly on
significant developments relating to the implementation
of the resolutions of the General Assembly on Hungary,
l. Deplores the continued disregard by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the present Hungarian
regime of the General Assembly resolutions dealing with
the situation in Hungary;

2. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the present authorities in Hungary to co-operate
with the United Nations Representative on Hungary;
3. Requests the United Nations Representative on
Hungary to continue his efforts.

851st plenary meeting,
9 December 1959.
