by the Member Governmen,ts to gi':'e effect to t?e
recommendations of the Economic and SoCial
Council as well as to the recommendations made
by the General Assembly on matters falling within
the Council's competence.

Hundred and second plenary meeting,
31 October 1947.

Gouvernements des Etats Membrcs pour appliquer les recommandations du Conseil economique
et social ainsi que les recommandations faites par
l'Assemblc'.:e gcncrale sur des questions relevant de
la competence du Conseil.
Cent-deuxieme seance pleniere,
le 31 octobre I 947.

120 (Ill. Study of factors bearing upon the
establishment of an economic commission for the Middle East

120 (Ill. Etude des facteurs relatifs a la
creation d'une commission economique pour le Moyen Orient

The General Assembly,
1. Considering the intcre.,t of the United Nations in problems relating to the economic development of all under-developed regions;

L' Assemblee gineralc,
1. Considerant l'intcrct que portent Jes Nations Unies aux problcmes relatifs au developpement economique de toutcs le., regions insuffisamment devcloppees;
2. Prenant acte de la resolution adoptee par le
Conseil economique et social !ors de sa cinquieme
session' et qui demande a la Commission des questions economiques et de l'emploi de proccder a
des ctudes sur Jes problemes gcneraux que pose la
creation de commissions regionales envisagee
comme moyen de favoriser les buts et les dcsseins
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies;
3. Prenant acte avec satisfaction de la decision
prise par le Conseil, lors de la mcme session, d'ctablir une Commission spcciale chargce d'ctudier lcs
factcurs relatifs a la creation d'unc commission
speciale pour l' Amcrique latine 2 ;
4. Prenant acte de l'accueil general favorable
que la Deuxieme Commission a fait a la proposition tendant a la creation d'une commission cconomique pour l'Amerique latine;
5. Reconnaissant que des mesurcs tendant a
realiser la collaboration entre tous les pays du
Mayen Orient pourraient contribuer a y clever,
en mcme temps, le niveau de I' activitc economiq ue
et le niveau de vie, ainsi qu'a renforcer les relations cconomiques que ces pays ont entre cux et
avec Jes autrcs pays du monde, et qu'une ctroite
cooperation avec )'Organisation des Nations U nics
et scs organes subsidiaires aussi bien qu'avec des
organisations n:gionalcs d11 Moyen Orient telles
qtw la Ligue arabc, faciliterait ccs me.~urcs;
G. lnnite le Conseil cconomique et social a
ctudier Jes facteurs rdatifs a la creation d'une commission pour le Moven Orient.
Cent-troisihnr seance plenicrr.
le 3 I octobre 1947.

2. Taking note of the resolution adopted by the
Economic and Social Council during its fifth session' requesting the Economic and Employment
Commission to study the general problems connected with the establishment of regional commissions as a means to promote the aims and
purposes of the United Nations;

3. Taking note with satisfaction of the decision
by the Council at that session to establish an ad
hoe Committee for the purpose of studying the
factors bearing upon the establishment of an economic commission for Latin America;"
4. Taking note of the general favourable reception given to the proprnal for an economic
commission for Latin America by the Second
Committee;
5. Recognizing that co-operative measures
among all the countries of the Middle East can be
of practical assistance in raising both the level of
economic activitv and the standard of life in the
Middle Ea.,t and in strengthening the economic
relations of these countries both among themselves
and with other countries of the world, and that
such measures would he facilitated by close cooperation with the United Nations and its subsidiary organs as well ;is with regional organizations in the .\I iddlc Ea·; ,Ill h as the Arab League;
6. lm•i[ts the I'.conomic and Social Council to
study the fac:nr., bearing upnn the estahfohment
of an economic ,-,immi,sion ior the :\fiddle Ea.sL
flundrc-1 a11,i thi, I /1!, nizr) meeting.
'ii 1),tohl'T 1947,
121 OD. App!icoiion oJ Holy for membership in i'he ln1ernational Civil Aviation
Orgonizafr:.,n

121 (Ill. Demande d'ac!mission a l'Organi-

Thf General Assembly.
Having considrred the application regarding
the admission of Italy lo the International Civil
Aviation Organization. transmitted by that Organization to the General Assembly in accordance
with article II of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Civil Aviation Organization,

1, 'A5sem b{,:e ghi/rafr,
Arant examinl la dcma11de d'admission a ['Organisation de !'aviation civile internationale prcscntcc par !'Italic et transmise par cette organisation i l'Asscmblee gcncrale, conformcmcnt i
!'article II de !'accord intervenu cntre !'Organisation des Nations Unies et l'Organi_~ation ,k
l'm·iation civile internationalc,

1

SPt' Rl·.wlution nrlnptrd hy tllf' l~rnnnml(· and Social
Council dur~ng- its fifth <.;<•-,sion, resolutiti11 7'!. f'V), page 9.

soticn de !'aviation civile internationa!e presentee por l'ltalie

'Voir les RJsnlutinns adoptics f>ar le Conseil

fcor1,1-

rnin11•· t'i wnal J)('ndant s:l rincp,il·mc ~c-.,;ion, n-:.sol:1tion
'7~~r\·
11,1~1·,<l-l(l.
c f /,1·d ri:solution 70 (\ 1 ) , pagT·s 8-9.

Decides to inform the International Civil Aviation Organization that it has no objection to the
admission of Italy to the organization.
Hundred and third plenary meeting,
31 October 1947.

Decide d'informcr !'Organisation d\' l'aviation
civile international.., qu'cllc n'a pa., cl'objertions a
radmission de I' Italic a ladite organisation.

122 (II). Application of Austria for membership in the International Civil Aviation Organization

122 (IIJ. Demande d'admission a !'Organisation de l'•viation civile internationale presentee par I' Autriche

The General Assembly,
Having considered the application regarding
the admission of Austria to the International Civil
Aviation Organization, transmitted by that Organization to the General Assembly in accordance with article II of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Civil Aviation Organization,
Decides to inform the International Civil Aviation Organization that it has no objection to the
admission of Austria to the organization.
Hundred and fourth plenary meeting,
I November 1947.

1!Assemblee generale,
Ayant examine la dcmande d'admission a !'Organisation de !'aviation rivile internationale pr{-sentee par l'Autriche et transmise par cctte organi-sation a l'Assembll{C gcnerale, conformement a
!'article II de !'accord intervenu entre !'Organisation des Nations Unies et !'Organisation de
!'aviation civile intcrnationalc,
Decide d'informer !'Organisation d1· !'aviation
civile internationale qu'ellc n'a pas d'objcctions ,\
!'admission de I' Autrichc a ladite organisation.

Cent-troisicme seance pleniere.
le 31 octobre 1947.

Cent-quatrieme seance pleniere,
le I er novembre I 947.

26
