United Nations

A/RES/59/253

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 92 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/490/Add.2)]

59/253. United Nations University
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
including resolution 57/267 of 20 December 2002,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United Nations University,
as presented by the Rector of the University on 16 November 2004, 1 and the report
of the Secretary-General, 2
Bearing in mind the importance of the intellectual contributions made by the
University for the United Nations system,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the voluntary contributions made by
Governments and other public and private entities in support of the University,
1.
Notes with satisfaction the implementation of the “Strategic Plan, 2000”,
which lays out broad programmatic orientations with special focus on the priority
concerns of the United Nations and the need to bring together theory and practice in
a global perspective, and requests the United Nations University to continue to
attach importance to the priority agendas of the United Nations system;
Highly appreciates the successful steps taken by the University to
2.
promote the work and visibility of the University, including its research and training
centres and programmes, to strengthen interaction with and contributions to the
work of the United Nations system and to create new networks of activity with the
academic communities in host countries, including Japan, and encourages the
University to continue with such efforts;
Expresses particular appreciation of the University’s support to scholars
3.
from developing countries and the countries with economies in transition, especially
young scholars, through its capacity and network development activities;
Notes with interest the inauguration of the new research and training
4.
programme in Bonn, Germany, and encourages the University to continue with
efforts towards creating a critical mass of viable research and training centres and
_______________
1
2

04-49144

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/59/31).
A/59/566.

A/RES/59/253

programmes around the world, focused in particular on meeting the urgent needs
and concerns of developing countries;
5.
Welcomes the adoption and use by the University of computer-mediated
dissemination and learning technologies through the United Nations University
Online Learning initiative, and in particular the establishment of the Global Virtual
University, which facilitates the intensification of activities in the areas of education
and training, and encourages the further strengthening of these activities;
Takes note with satisfaction of the consolidation of the joint initiative by
6.
the University and the United Nations Office at Geneva to convene a yearly research
and policy dialogue that is thematically focused and involves the United Nations
system and other entities engaged in policy research and analysis;
Encourages the University to continue its efforts to implement the
7.
Secretary-General’s suggestion on innovative measures to improve interaction and
communication between the University and other United Nations entities, in
particular by identifying and giving priority to common themes of interest;
Requests the Secretary-General to encourage other bodies of the United
8.
Nations system to utilize more fully the capacity of the University for mobilizing a
worldwide network of applied policy researchers to assist the United Nations,
through research and capacity development, in resolving pressing global problems;
Appreciates the efficiency gains achieved by the University in order to
9.
make optimal use of modest and limited resources, and emphasizes the continuing
need for cost-effectiveness in conducting the activities of the University;
10. Welcomes the University’s increasing efforts to widen and diversify its
financial base, and invites the international community to make voluntary
contributions to the University, in particular to its Endowment Fund, as a means of
consolidating the distinctive identity of the University in the United Nations system
and the international academic community;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
sub-item entitled “United Nations University”.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004

2
