XVI.

RF.SOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE PROPOSALS OF THE
GENERAL COMMITl"EE
this subject, in order to assist governments in de-

26(1) .ESTABLISHMENT oF Two ad hoc

tennining their short tenn and long term agricultura! policy.
Thirty-third plenary meeting, 14 February 1946.

CoMMITTEES

The General Assembly decides to establish two
ad hoc committees as follows:

(a) League of Nations Committee to consider
the possible transfer of certain functions, activi- 2 8 (1) •RECONSTRUCTIOH OF CoUHTRIES MEMties and assets of the League of Nations;
BERS 0F THE UHITED NATIOHS OEVASTATED
(b) Permanent Headquar-ters Committee to
BY WAR
consider the site of the permanent headquarters
Considering:
of the United Nations.'
that the war of aggression waged on the terriEach Member will have the right to be repretories of many Members of the United Nations resented on each of these two Committees.
sulted in the destruction of vast areas of these counEighteenth plenary meeting, 26 /anuary 1946.
tries on-an unprecedented scale;
that these peace-loving nations, which suffered
such an extensive damage, represent nearly onehalf of the total population of the world;
27(1). WORLD SHORTAGE OF CEREALS
that the vast areas representing a big consuming power are virtually eliminated from the normal
The damage caused by war and the dislocation
flow of world trade, so that the whole world econof agricultura) production resulting from the shortomy must be seriously affected;
age and dislocation of labour, the removal of
that the great scale of destruction resulted in
draught animals, the shortage of fertilizers and
most cases in a dangerous lowering in the standard
other circumstances connected with the war have
of living and in the health of the population, in a
caused a serious fall in world production of wheat.
substantial loss of productive capacity and sorneIn addition, a large number of countries, inclw:ling
times in the complete destruction of the normal
sorne of those which are normally the largest p~
economic activities of the respective countries;
ducers of grain, have suffered serious droughts and
that in order to make good the destruction and
have therefore reaped abnormally small crops. The
so to restore the shaken world economy vast
supply of rice is also so short as to threaten a !amamounts of new capital goods must be invested in
ine in certain areas. There is, moreover, a serious
risk of grain production in the coming season being
the destroyed areas;
that in most cases it would be impossible to deal
insufficient to prevent continuing hunger. For
these reasons the world is faced with conditions
with the work of reconstruction with the necessary
which may cause widespread suffering and death
speed and efficiency if the affected countries were
limited in this respect to their interna) resources
and consequently set back ali plans for reconstruction.
and possibilities alone;
that only a full-scale and whole-hearted co-operation of ali the United Nations can bring about
The General Assembly therefore:
the right solution of this grave problem;
l. Urges ali governments and peoples to take
immediate and drastic action, both directly and
the General Ássembly:
through the international organizations concerned,
1. recognizes the problem of full reconstruc~on
to conserve supplies, by securing adequate collecof the countries belonging to Members of the
tion of crops from the producen, by saving food
United Nations which suffered substantial war
and avoiding waste, and to ensure the maximum
damage as a grave and urgent matter which should
production of grain in the coming season;
be given very high priority among post-war problems;
2. Notes that severa! of the United Nations
have recently announced measures to reserve grain
2. decides to discuss generally this matter under
supplies for direct human consumption and to separagraph 17 of its agenda and to transmit it, at
cure increased production;
the second part of the first session of the General
Assembly, for a close examination by the Second
3. Urges ali governments to publish as ful! inCommittee, which shall present to the ~neral Asformation as possible regarding -their own supplies
sembly a report resulting from this examination.
and requirements of cereals and the steps they
have taken or are prepared to take to achieve the
3. asks the Economic and Social Council to
objectives expressed in paragraph I;
place this subject on the agenda of its first meeting,
as an urgent matter in the economic and social
4. Requests the international organizations confield, according to paragraph 10 of the provisional
cerned with food and agriculture to publish ful!
agenda of the fint meeting of the Council, as proinformation in their possession on the world food
posed by the Preparatory Commission.
position and the future outlook, and to intensify
efforts to obtain as ful! information as possible on
Twenty-second plenary meeting, 2 February 1946.
1

0n the proposal of the General Cornmittee, the General
A.sembly, at its thirty-third p!enary meeting held on
Thursday, 14 February 1946, decided to amend the tenru
of refrrence of the Pennanent Headquarters Committee
toread:
"to consider the site of the permanent and temporary headquarten of the United Nations and other
matten directly connected therewith."

29(1). DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING OF THE
GENERAL AsSEMBLY

Urgent problems brought before the General
Assembly at this session are now being considered
by the appropriate organs of the United Natiom

38
