S/2017/744

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on issues of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27) in which the Security
Council requested me to submit to it an annual report on ways to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace
and security in Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (UNOAU). An update is provided in the present report on ongoing
efforts to scale up the partnership between the two organizations and the activities
of UNOAU in that regard since the issuance of the previous report in September
2016 (S/2016/780).

II. Strategic partnership of the United Nations and the
African Union
2.
The increasingly complex and often interconnected conflict situations in
Africa have necessitated closer collaboration and partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union at all levels. The collaboration is underpinned by the
shared values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the C onstitutive
Act of the African Union, as well as by the recognition of the interdependence and
complementarity of the two organizations in addressing peace and security
challenges in Africa. During the reporting period, the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa
reached several important milestones.

United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council
3.
The United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council adopted significant decisions that advanced the strategic
cooperation between the two organizations. In its resolution 2320 (2016), the
Security Council commended the progress made in the United Nations-African
Union partnership and stressed the need to further develop it into a more systematic

17-14299 (E)

010917

*1714299*

S/2017/744

and strategic one adapted to the complex security challenges facing the continent.
Similarly, the Peace and Security Council, in its communiq ués of 29 September and
30 May, commended the progress made and reiterated the need to enhance its
partnership with the United Nations in accordance with the principles of
comparative advantage, division of labour, burden-sharing and consultative
decision-making.
4.
Coherence in the decision-making of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council on issues on the agenda of both organizations remains critical for
achieving greater strategic convergence and impact. Members of the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council will hold their eleventh annual joint
consultative meeting on 7 and 8 September in Addis Ababa. Enhanced dialogue on
decision-making between the two Councils will improve the collective ability to
respond to the many peace and security challenges in Africa. In their previous
consultative meeting, held in New York on 23 May 2016, which marked the tenth
anniversary of the annual consultations, the two Councils stressed the need for
renewed efforts to enhance their partnership so as to ensure greater synergies and
coherence and a more effective response to the challenges facing the African
continent (see S/2017/248, annex).
5.
In the report of the Secretary-General on options for authorization and support
for African Union peace support operations (S/2017/454), I proposed a framework
for decision-making as well as tools for African Union peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council that could further support Member States in
making informed decisions with a view to addressing any given situation and
helping to ensure the coordinated undertaking of mandated tasks by the two bodies.
6.
To further promote collaboration between the two Co uncils, the Committee of
Experts of the African Union Peace and Security Council participated in a training
workshop at United Nations Headquarters from 28 November to 2 December. The
initiative was aimed at developing a deeper understanding of the working methods
and mandate of the Security Council among African Union representatives and
enhancing the working relationship between the two Councils.
7.
The three African members of the Security Council, known as the A3, have
continued to play a critical bridging role, providing briefings every two months to
the Peace and Security Council to promote common African positions and
coordination of the Councils. The fourth high-level seminar on peace and security in
Africa was held in December in Oran, Algeria, with the participation of the A3, the
Peace and Security Council and African Union Commission. The importance of
coordination among the members of the A3 to ensure the effective articulation and
promotion of Africa’s views within the Security Council on issue s of interest to the
continent was highlighted. Several coordination meetings of representatives of the
monthly president of the Security Council and the Chair of the Peace and Security
Council were also held.

United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
8.
The Chairperson of the African Union Commission and I have prioritized the
furthering of our partnership in a systematic, predictable and strategic manner, on
the basis of the principles of mutual respect and comparative advantage. In my first
address to the Assembly of Heads of State and Government at the twenty -eighth
African Union Summit, on 30 January, I committed to a new era of cooperation and
pledged to contribute to changing the narrative about Africa, to work in support of
the African Union’s efforts to promote unity and progress and to establish a higher
platform of cooperation that recognizes Africa’s assets and enormous potential.
2/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

9.
In that spirit, on 19 April the Chairperson and I convened the first annual
United Nations-African Union conference at United Nations Headquarters to
facilitate, at the highest levels of the two organizations, a shared understanding of
the root causes and drivers of conflict and to promote convergence in decision making. To underscore our organizations’ reinvigorated partnership, the Chairperson
and I signed the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which includes four key action areas: preventing
and mediating conflict and sustaining peace; responding to conflict; addressing root
causes; and continuously reviewing and enhancing the partnership. It provides a
comprehensive strategic vision for a stronger partnership as we jointly address
peace and security challenges across the continent. On the basis of the joint
framework, I have kept in close contact with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and the Deputy Secretary-General and relevant Under-SecretariesGeneral continue to consult regularly with African Union commissioners and
envoys. The Deputy Secretary-General’s participation at the twenty-ninth ordinary
session of the African Union Assembly, on 3 and 4 July, further reinforced the
Organization’s strategic dialogue with the Union.
10. With a view to facilitating the implementation of the joint framework, the
Secretariat set up an internal working group for enhanced partnership with the
African Union in the area of peace and security, while the African Union
Commission established a framework implementation task team. The teams, which
held several meetings during the reporting period, will play a key role in
coordinating the implementation of the joint framework, including through
strengthening strategic coherence and operational collaboration and partnership
throughout conflict cycles in Africa.
11. Meanwhile, in the context of the joint framework, my special representatives
and envoys have continued to collaborate with and complement the efforts of
African Union special envoys and representatives, including in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Gambia, Libya, Somalia, South Sudan and
the Sudan. During the period under review, United Nations representatives provided
40 briefings to the Peace and Security Council. Similarly, African Union
commissioners, representatives and envoys briefed the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies on issues on the Council’s agenda. This practice has facilitated
consultation between the two organizations and contributed to greater alignment in
the decisions of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council. Another
concrete step in the strengthening of cooperation at the political level between the
Secretariat and the Commission has been the issuance of joint communiqués on the
situations in, inter alia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mali and the Gambia.
12. In addition, staff from both organizations continued to work collaboratively on
issues of mutual interest. On 13 and 14 December, more than 50 officers of the two
organizations participated in the annual United Nations-African Union consultative
(“desk-to-desk”) meeting on the prevention and management of conflict. The
meeting provided an opportunity to exchange information, coordinate positions and
develop joint implementation strategies. Director-level videoconferences, which
were pivotal for sharing information and promoting common understanding and
action on ongoing conflicts, were held throughout the year.
13. The African Union Commission has sought United Nations assistance to h elp
develop its own mission-support capacity, and as a result the Department of Field
Support has, since September, included Commission personnel in the one -year
senior mission administration and resource training programme, designed to develop
mission-support leadership skills. In addition, the Department and the Commission
initiated a staff-exchange programme, with the first set of exchanges, in the areas of
17-14299

3/16

S/2017/744

human resources and budget and finance, completed in early 2017 and the second
set, in the areas of logistics and information and communications technology,
scheduled to take place in the second half of 2017.

III. Operational partnership of the United Nations and the
African Union
Challenges to peace and security in Africa
14. The African Union and the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms took decisive steps towards unity, peace and prosperity for all people
on the continent. Among other measures to effectively address peace and security
challenges in Africa, the African Union Assembly, at its twenty-eighth ordinary
session, held on 30 and 31 January, endorsed the African Union Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 (Lusaka Master Road
Map), which had been adopted by the Peace and Security Council in November
2016. On the ground, the combined and concerted efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union and international
partners, including the United Nations, helped to avert a conflict in the Gambia
following the refusal of former President Yahya Jammeh to accept the results of the
December 2016 election. The resolution of the crisis in the Gambia represents a
clear example of successful, cost-effective conflict prevention, which is possible
when the regional and subregional bodies have a common understanding with the
United Nations about the crisis and a unified approach to its resolution.
15. In addition, during the period under review, Somalia continued to register
progress in building its federal system and implementing its political road map,
thanks to the concerted efforts of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations.
16. In a number of countries, however, challenges remained. As highlighted by the
Peace and Security Council in a press statement in April 2015, among the key
drivers of conflict on the continent are marginalization, abuse of human rights,
refusal to accept electoral defeat, manipulation of constitutions, mismanagement
and unequal distribution of resources, lack of socioeconomic opportunities and
unemployment, and corruption. The situation is compounded by the negative
impacts of such global phenomena as terrorism and transnational organized crime.
As in other parts of the world, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are violated by some Governments and non-State actors in Africa.
17. The conflict in South Sudan has resulted in immense suffering and the
unprecedented displacement of civilian populations. Political crises in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon and Guinea-Bissau required sustained
diplomatic engagement to prevent further escalation. Governments continued to face
challenges in addressing the threats of terrorism and violent extremism, most
notably in Libya, the Sahel region, the Lake Chad basin and Somalia. It is of grave
concern that terrorist organizations have become highly adaptable, expanding
territory under their control, uprooting communities, enslaving people, in particular
women and children, and committing other heinous crimes. In response to that
challenge, the Peace and Security Council in May declared terro rism to be a serious
threat to peace and security in parts of the continent. Al -Shabaab and Boko Haram
remained active in Somalia and the Lake Chad basin, respectively, and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Daesh) was able to establish a foothold i n northern
Mali and Libya, from which they also posed a security threat to neighbouring
countries.
4/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

18. Despite the ongoing efforts to grapple with piracy, the Gulf of Aden and the
Gulf of Guinea have seen a resurgence of attacks. The implementation of the
Yaoundé process on maritime safety and security has been lukewarm, while the
Charter on Maritime Security and Safety and Development has so far been ratified
by only one country. Meanwhile, in the hinterland, transhumance issues have become
increasingly acute as a result of population pressure as well as unpredictable climate
dynamics. During the reporting period, deadly clashes occurred between cultivators
and pastoralists in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and the Sudan. The situation was exacerbated by the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons, as well as ammunition and
explosives, which took a heavy toll on communities. The illegal exploitation of
natural resources and poaching, particularly in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan, also continued to fuel conflict,
destroying the environment and devastating communities.
19. Contested or delayed elections remained a threat to peace and security. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the postponement of elections in December
created a highly volatile political situation, leading to renewed violence in the country.
In the Republic of the Congo, political tensions persisted following the presidential
elections in March 2016, while opposition presidential candidates remained under
arrest pending trial or had their movements restricted. In Gabon, tensions between the
Government and key opposition parties remained despite the conclusion of a political
dialogue in May 2017. A number of countries started constitutional reform processes
that were divisive and in some cases triggered violence.
20. Furthermore, the dramatic fall in the prices of commodities, in particular oil,
continued to inject an incendiary element into political and social tensions in such
countries as Chad, Gabon, Nigeria and the Republic of the Congo.

Partnership in conflict prevention and peacemaking
21. In this context, shifting the focus from managing to preventing co nflict is my
priority and that of the African Union Commission Chairperson as well. Member
States of both organizations have repeatedly called for renewed efforts to prevent
conflict before its outbreak and to sustain peace, including through the 2030 Agen da
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiatives. Despite some positive developments in this area, much
work remains to be done.
22. During the reporting period, the United Nations and the Afric an Union
continued to strengthen their collaboration in conflict prevention and peacemaking.
Following the provision by the Department of Political Affairs and UNOAU of
technical advice during the design phase, the African Union Commission announced
in September the establishment of a Mediation Support Unit within its Peace and
Security Department. The United Nations continued to engage with the Unit to
determine areas of additional support and capacity requirements, including in the
areas of training, knowledge management and mediation facilitation.
23. With a view to advancing the women, peace and security agenda, on 2 June,
UN-Women, the African Union Commission and Germany launched the African
Women Leaders Network. The launch took place following the H igh-level Women
Leaders Forum for Africa’s Transformation, held at United Nations Headquarters
from 31 May to 2 June. The Network aims to enhance women’s leadership in the
transformation of Africa, with a focus on governance, peace and stability.
24. From 19 to 28 July, a joint United Nations-African Union delegation visited
Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the visit, the Deputy
17-14299

5/16

S/2017/744

Secretary-General, the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
the Under-Secretary-General/Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) and my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict met with senior officials and civil
society groups and helped to raise awareness on gender, including gender equality
and the importance of women’s participation and leadership in electoral and peace
processes.
25. Electoral observation and assistance remained a key area of cooperation with
the African Union. The Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political
Affairs maintained a senior electoral expert in Addis Ababa to support the United
Nations and the African Union on electoral matters. In addition, in June, a
representative of the African Union Commission participated i n a training
programme on preventing and responding to electoral violence, organized in Jordan
by the Division and the United Nations System Staff College. In March, an African
Union representative, along with representatives of other regional organization s,
participated in a workshop in Cairo on electoral needs assessments and the use of
technology in elections organized by the United Nations and the League of Arab
States.
26. From 16 to 19 May, the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS,
along with the European Union, undertook a joint mission to the Gambia to support
security sector reform efforts. From 13 to 19 May, the African Union undertook a
needs assessment mission to the Gambia, at the request of the Peace and Security
Council, to look into ongoing economic reforms and efforts towards national
reconciliation. The fifty-first ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads
of State and Government, held on 4 June, decided to establish the International
Contact Group on the Gambia.
27. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the political and technical
support of the United Nations, the African Union Facilitator for the national
dialogue in the country facilitated efforts that resulted in the signing, on 18 October,
of a political agreement between the ruling majority and part of the opposition.
Ultimately, the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
brokered a comprehensive political agreement on 31 December, with the support of
the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Union and the United Nations.
28. However, notwithstanding the welcoming of the collaboration between the
United Nations and the African Union, concern about the slow progress in the
implementation of the agreement, as well as the escalating violence and the spread
of insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was expressed at a joint
briefing of the Peace and Security Council on 27 March, attended by my Deputy
Special Representative and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission and Head of the African Union Liaison Office in the country.
29. The Office of the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan continued its
effective collaboration with the African Union on peacemaking. This included
working with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on efforts to
implement Security Council resolution 2046 (2012). In January, on the margins of
the African Union Summit, the United Nations convened a joint consultative
meeting with IGAD and the African Union on South Sudan. The Office of the
Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan has worked closely with Alpha
Oumar Konaré, the former President of Mali, in his capacity as the African Union’s
High Representative for South Sudan, to determine ways in which the United
Nations, the African Union and IGAD can resuscitate the South Sudan political
6/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

process, and, where appropriate, support nationally driven efforts such as the
national dialogue that have the potential to create transformative change in a
country beset by violence and profound political divisions.
30. The Chairperson of the African Union Commission visited South Sudan and
reinforced our collaborative efforts, reiterating that the African Union would further
engage IGAD and the United Nations on the deteriorating security situation in the
country. The Security Council reaffirmed the call for trilateral collab oration at its
meeting on South Sudan in March. In cooperation with other entities, the Office of
the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan has actively engaged in the quest
to find a regionally supported political solution following the collapse of the 2015
peace agreement,
31. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union on the crisis in
Libya continued. The United Nations supported the visits to the country by the
African Union’s High Representative for Libya and the ministerial de legation of the
African Union High-level Committee on Libya in May and June. My new Special
Representative for Libya looks forward to further strengthening the close working
relations with regional organizations, including the African Union, amid growing
recognition among international and regional partners of the need for greater
cooperation and coordination in advancing the political process in the country.

Partnership in peacekeeping
32. The current security context on the African continent necessitates creative and
strategic thinking about a range of peace operations so as to enable an adequate
international response to conflict.
33. During the reporting period, the United Nations and the African Union further
strengthened collaboration on Somalia at both the strategic and operational levels.
The Chairperson of African Union Commission and I visited Mogadishu in the early
days of our respective tenures. On 11 May, the Federal Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, the African Union and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland co-chaired the London Somalia Conference at which the parties
endorsed a new partnership for Somalia and a security pact, laying out the mutual
commitments of the Somali Government and international pa rtners. It also
underscored the importance of a conditions-based transition of security from the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to Somali forces. At the operational
level, UNOAU remained actively engaged with the African Union, supporting
AMISOM by providing technical advice for deployment and strategic management.
34. The collaboration between the two organizations has been focused in
particular on AMISOM, with the continuing roll-out of the Civilian Casualty
Tracking Analysis and Response Cell and other measures and mechanisms to
prevent violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian
law. The joint review of AMISOM led to several concrete recommendations to
strengthen those measures, including the human rights due diligence policy. I wish
to emphasize that, in increasingly high-risk environments such as that in Somalia,
progress on this compliance framework is a priority of the United Nations -African
Union partnership.
35. A joint review of AMISOM, which was undertaken in May pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2297 (2016), culminated in recommendations in which
the parties reiterated the importance of a conditions-based transition and
underscored the need to ensure predictable financing for African Union forces. A
transition strategy for the period from 2017 to 2022 was also recommended, and
new accountability measures were introduced with a view to enhancing the capacity
17-14299

7/16

S/2017/744

of AMISOM to ensure civilian protection and compliance with human rights and
international humanitarian law.
36. In the Lake Chad basin region, the United Nations, the African Union and
other international partners supported the efforts of the multinational joint task force
to combat Boko Haram. On 24 February, the support implementation agreement and
the memorandum of understanding between the African Union Commission and the
relevant countries contributing troops to the task force, aimed at streamlining
additional African Union support to the task force, were signed.
37. Pursuant to resolution 2349 (2017), the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel continued to conduct joint visits to countries affected by Boko Haram to
assess the situation and advocate for additional support from the international
community for the efforts of Lake Chad Basin Commission member States. United
Nations humanitarian entities also worked with national authorities to meet the
immediate needs of affected civilians.
38. In Central Africa, the United Nations and the African Union worked closely in
support of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). In cooperation with the African Union, UNOCA, on 15
and 16 December, facilitated a meeting to review the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities of LRA
and its implementation plan and to enhance coordination among bilateral partners,
civil society groups, non-governmental organizations and United Nations entities
working in LRA-affected areas. UNOCA will work with partners in the region,
including the African Union, to revise the regional strategy in the light of the
withdrawal of Ugandan and South Sudanese troops from the African Union regional
task force and the end of the United States Special Forces’ mandate to support the
task force. Furthermore, UNOAU in December supported the Afri can Union in the
planning and revision of the strategic concept of operations of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative, as well as in the drafting of the report of experts on the
meeting of the joint coordination mechanism of the Initiative, held at the mini sterial
level in March. Joint planning and management played an important role in ensuring
the complementarity of efforts on the ground and alignment between the United
Nations and the African Union.
39. In Mali and the Sahel, terrorism and violent extremism continued to pose a
significant threat to peace and security. On 13 April, the Peace and Security Council
endorsed the strategic concept of operations and authorized the deployment of the
joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel States (Burkina Fa so, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger) for an initial period of 12 months and with a strength of
up to 5,000 personnel. On 21 June, the Security Council, in its resolution 2359
(2017), welcomed the deployment of the joint force. It is important that those efforts
complement peace efforts in Mali and be coordinated with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African Union High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Operation Barkhane, led by France, and
related initiatives of such organizations as ECOWAS and those carried out in the
framework of the Nouakchott Process, including those addressing the root causes of
conflict in Mali and the broader Sahel region.
40. In the Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) underwent a joint strategic review, from 5 to 17 March, which brought
important changes to the mission in the light of the improvement of security in
Darfur and political developments with respect to the national dialogue in the Sudan.
Subsequently, the Peace and Security Council, in a communiqué of 12 June, and the
Security Council, in its resolution 2363 (2017) of 29 June, agreed that UNAMID
8/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

should implement a two-pronged approach focusing, in the Jebel Marra, on
peacekeeping, military protection, clearance of explosive remnants of war and
emergency relief and, in other areas of Darfur, on a peacebuilding -oriented approach
aimed at stabilizing the situation by supporting the police and helping to build rule
of law institutions while continuing to protect civilians and mediating intercommunal
conflict. Within this framework, by June 2018, the mission will have reduced its
military component by 44 per cent and its police component by 27 per cent.
41. At the same time, the United Nations worked closely with the African Union
and the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms to strengthen the
operational readiness of the African Standby Force. For the continent, the
operationalization of the Force is a positive development that provides significant
opportunities. In January 2016, the African Union Specialized Technical Committee
on Defence, Safety and Security declared the full operational capability of the
Force, and in October the African Union Commission developed the Maputo
strategic five-year workplan (2016-2020) to support efforts to address the remaining
challenges. Since then, collaboration between the two bodies has focused on the
further strengthening of strategic guidance, military, police and civilian capabilities
and mission support systems in line with the Maputo workplan. From 31 July to
2 August, a team from the African Union Commission visited the SA DC secretariat
to verify, confirm and validate the operational readiness of the SADC Standby
Force. The United Nations participated as an observer.
42. There has also been commendable progress in the cooperation of the two
bodies on international human rights law and international humanitarian law in
peace support operations. In July 2016, African Heads of State and Government
agreed to develop a comprehensive human rights and code of conduct compliance
framework as part of the effort to reinvigorate the A frican Union Peace Fund.
Subsequent to that decision, UNOAU and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) worked closely with the African Union
Commission to develop strategic guidance to strengthen adherence to internatio nal
human rights law and international humanitarian law. UNOAU and OHCHR also
continued to support the strengthening of human rights mechanisms in ongoing
missions through training, planning, monitoring and reporting.

Partnership in peacebuilding and the rule of law
43. The African Union is an important partner of the United Nations in
peacebuilding and the rule of law, and as such is uniquely positioned to generate
consensus on continental policies and foster regional and national ownership.
Despite numerous challenges with regard to peacebuilding efforts, Africa has
witnessed incremental progress in promoting security and stability.
44. During the reporting period, the Peacebuilding Fund continued to support 18
countries in Africa. It quickly delivered flexible funding to help prevent relapses
into conflict and sustain peace, including in Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone, all of which are on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, until February, the Peacebuilding Fund
provided direct financial support to the African Union Commission to help sustain
the deployment of human rights observers to Burundi, marking the first time the
Fund has provided support through a regional organization. In October, the Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support visited the African Union Commission to explore ways to
further enhance cooperation, in the context of the African Union post -conflict
reconstruction and development policy framework adopted in 2006, as well as the
African Solidarity Initiative.
17-14299

9/16

S/2017/744

45. Meanwhile, the African Union and the United Nations cooperated closely in
the key areas of rule of law and security institutions towards the implementation of
African Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020. On disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the United Nations,
through UNOAU and the World Bank, supported the African Union in the
development of the second phase of its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme aimed at enhancing knowledge management and training
standards. During the reporting period, the United Nations contributed to the
development of seven African Union disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
operational guidance notes, on children, detention, women, national fram eworks,
reintegration, countering violent extremism, and foreign fighters. The United
Nations also contributed to the African Union’s project on managing and accounting
for illicit small arms and light weapons. Furthermore, in coordination with the
European Union, the United Nations, through a capacity-building programme,
supported the African Union Commission in the implementation of a security sector
reform policy. At the operational level, joint assessments were conducted in the
Gambia and Guinea-Bissau.
46. The United Nations and the African Union strengthened their partnership in
mine action through the adoption, in June, of a memorandum of understanding by
the African Union Commission and the Mine Action Service of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In this context, UNOAU, in cooperation with the Mine
Action Service, provided technical guidance and support for the implementation of
the African Union Mine Action and Explosive Remnants of War Strategic
Framework for 2014-2017 and for the development of a joint African Union-United
Nations safety handbook on landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices for use by African Union peace support operations.
47. United Nations and African Union police continued their cooperation with a
focus on police planning, guidance, tackling of serious and organized crime, and
conduct and discipline. UNOAU provided technical support for the development of
the African Union policy on international policing, which was ratified at the second
Conference of the African Union Police Strategic Support Group, held from
28 November to 2 December in Addis Ababa. The Group is mandated to harmonize
police action across all African Union peace support operations. On 20 April,
UNOAU facilitated the first consultative meeting of seven countries contributing
police to AMISOM, held in Addis Ababa. The meeting served as a forum for the
exchange of views on institutional capacity-building efforts for the Somali police
force and the integration in police units of quotas for women and gender
mainstreaming.

IV. Financing of African Union peace support operations
48. The necessity of sustained, predictable and flexible funding mechanisms to
support African Union peace support operations has been discussed by the
legislative bodies of the two organizations for more than a decade. The issue has
become more critical in the past two years, following the conclusions of the 2015
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the decrease in voluntary
contributions by the European Union to AMISOM, which have led to a 20 per cent
reduction in troop stipends.
49. Since taking office, I, along with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, have consistently stressed the need to ensure that African Union peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council secure sustainable and
predictable funding. The African Union has taken important steps to that end since

10/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

2015, including through the commitment that its member States finance 25 per cent
of its peace support operations, as well as the decision to introduce a 0.2 per cent
levy on eligible imports to finance the African Union Peace Fund.
50. I welcome the significant work undertaken collaboratively by our two
organizations on this critical issue, as well as the reports of the Chairperson of the
Commission on the African Union Peace Fund and on the relevant prov isions of
Security Council resolution 2320 (2016) on United Nations assessed contributions
for African Union-led peace operations authorized by the Council. I take particular
note of the African Union’s priorities for strengthening the overall effectiveness,
management and oversight of peace support operations, which include securing
predictable financing within the framework of the Peace Fund, strengthening
planning and management capacities, strengthening the partnership with the United
Nations and establishing a robust accountability and compliance framework.
51. Partners such as the United Nations can also help to shoulder the financial
burden, and in my recent report on options for authorization and s upport for African
Union peace support operations (S/2017/454), I presented some options by which
United Nations assessed contributions can be used to support such operations.
52. The report also includes proposals for institutionalized approaches to joint
planning and mandating of African Union peace support operations. Different
situations will require different planning, financing and support arrangements, but
these should be underpinned by jointly agreed principles and decision-making
processes. Those processes are intended to complement ongoing efforts within the
African Union Commission to establish and strengthen internal accountability
mechanisms.
53. On 30 May, during its consideration of the report of the African Union
Commission Chairperson on the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution
2320 (2016), the Peace and Security Council reiterated its commitment to the
partnership with the United Nations, reaffirmed the principle of African ownership
and appealed to its member States to expedite the payment of their annual
contributions to the Peace Fund, while calling for a resolution establishing the
principle that peace support operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union should benefit from United Nations assessed contributions, with decisions on
specific missions to be taken on a case-by-case basis. Members of the Security
Council, on 15 June and 19 July, highlighted the need to cont inue the joint work
towards supporting Member States in finding a common approach to the perennial
issue of securing predictable and sustainable financial support for African Union
operations, including on the basis of the proposals of the African Union Hi gh
Representative for the Peace Fund, who addressed the Council.

V. Partnership with regional organizations and arrangements
Regional economic communities and regional mechanisms
54. It is increasingly important to strengthen the partnership betwee n the United
Nations, the African Union and the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms in order to effectively confront peace and security challenges in Africa.
African subregional organizations are important partners in a number of areas,
including good offices, support for peace negotiations, ceasefire agreements and
regional intervention forces. They play a critical role in helping to facilitate
complex and fragile peace processes by fostering political will. They are partners of
the United Nations on countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism,
regional policing strategies and addressing migration, as well as on the development
17-14299

11/16

S/2017/744

and the implementation of regional action plans to advance the women, peace and
security agenda.
55. During the past year, regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms have played an important role in conflict prevention and mediation. For
example, ECOWAS has continued to lead good offices efforts and mediation
support in the Gambia and Guinea-Bissau. The East African Community continued
to lead international interventions in Burundi, while ECCAS led in the Central
African Republic. SADC took active measures to ensure that the results of the early
elections held in Lesotho in June would be accepted by all stakeholders. High-level
engagement to monitor the situation during the electoral campaign, on the part of
the SADC Lesotho facilitator, the Deputy President of South Africa and the SADC
Oversight Committee on Lesotho, contributed to a peaceful and fair electoral
outcome.
56. IGAD played a key role in the conflict-resolution process in South Sudan and
made a significant contribution to the formation of federal states in Somalia.
Furthermore, in March, the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government
adopted the Nairobi Declaration on Durable Solutions for Somali Refugees and
Reintegration of Returnees in Somalia, which contained commitments on protection
and measures to create an environment conducive to the voluntary return and
reintegration of Somali refugees, supported by the international community.
57. Likewise, in Central and West Africa, regional coalitions of the willing
continued to be indispensable in confronting violent extremism, as demonstrated in
the leading role played by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin in
addressing the challenges posed by Boko Haram, the efforts of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of LRA and the renewed attempts by the
members of the Group of Five for the Sahel States to grapple with violent
extremism in northern Mali and the broader Sahel.

Other regional organizations and arrangements
58. Cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and other regional
organizations continues to be a priority. The effectiveness of the United Nations
rests in large measure on our cooperation with those organizations. Pooling
resources on the basis of the principle of comparative advantage and jointly
pursuing a common approach has proven both necessary and efficient.
59. The situation in Libya provides one example of the increasing level of
cooperation among regional organizations. The United Nations, the African Union
and the League of Arab States, on 25 October, inaugurated a group known as the
Troika with the objective of enhancing cooperation and coordination to encourage
national reconciliation and the implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement.
On 18 March, the Troika welcomed the participation of the European Union in the
forum, which was thenceforth known as the Quartet. On 23 May, the Quartet
reiterated its collective commitment to advancing the United Nations -facilitated
political process towards resolving the crisis in Libya. The ongoing engagement
increased confidence among the four organizations, allowing them to harmonize
their positions and to utilize their comparative advantage with a view to working
together to further a common agenda.
60. The numerous cases of simultaneous United Nations, African Union and
European Union engagements in Africa demonstrate that the three organizations are
able to contribute the necessary skills and find solutions to crises and post -conflict
situations based on the principles of comparative advantage, added value and
burden-sharing. On 5 July, on the margins of the African Union Summit, my Special
12/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

Representative to the African Union attended a meeting of executives and senior
officials of the African Union, regional economic communities, regional
mechanisms and the European Union on peace and security. The meeting was
focused on strengthening political and strategic dialogue and on mobilizing
international support to that end, with a view to identifying recommendations for
consideration by the Africa-European Union Summit, to be held in Abidjan in
November. The establishment of a collaborative platform on peace and security in
Africa bringing together the United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union to strengthen political and strategic dialogue was mentioned as a possible
outcome of the upcoming Summit.

VI. United Nations Office to the African Union
Strengthening the strategic and operational partnership
61. During the reporting period, UNOAU continued to work closely with the
African Union to strengthen complementarity and unity of action. The Office is a
key conduit for enhancing strategic and operational partnership with the African
Union, providing substantive and technical support and facilitating convergence in
decision-making, including between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council. The Office provided 29 briefings to the Peace and Security
Council and facilitated 8 briefings by senior United Nations representatives to
promote a common understanding on conflict situations and to develop
collaborative approaches. Furthermore, since the previous report, UNOAU has
provided five country-specific or thematic briefings for representatives of States
members of the Security Council resident in Addis Ababa. The Office played a vital
role in developing the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework on Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security and in the preparations for the first United
Nations-African Union annual conference, the regular meetings of the joint task
force and desk-to-desk meetings. UNOAU supported the preparations for and the
conduct of the joint African Union-United Nations review of AMISOM. In addition,
UNOAU provided secretariat and logistical support for visits by the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission to Addis Ababa.
62. UNOAU also supported the strengthening of the institutional capacity of the
African Union to plan and manage its peace support operations, from policy
development to force preparation. The initial work in aligning policies standards
and practices will form the basis for strengthened cooperation between the two
organizations in peace support operations and mission transitions. UNOAU will
continue to play an important role in coordinating United Nations support for the
implementation of the Maputo strategic five -year workplan (2016-2020) to
strengthen the African Standby Force, manage conflicts on the continent and
strengthen coordination and information-sharing between the United Nations and
the African Union.

Restructuring the Office to meet the growing demands of
the partnership
63. In its resolution 71/270, the General Assembly approved the proposal of the
Secretary-General to restructure UNOAU so as to strengthen strategic coherence
with the African Union and the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms throughout the conflict cycle. In its resolution 2320 (2016), the
Security Council recognized that further realignment might be necessary as a result
of the assessment of United Nations-African Union cooperation, including the
17-14299

13/16

S/2017/744

structure and resource capacity of UNOAU, to meet the growing demands of the
partnership.
64. The new structure, which took effect on 1 January, enables UNOAU to
contribute more effectively to efforts aimed at achieving greater political
convergence and operational cohesion between the United Nations, the African
Union and its partners on peace and security in Africa. The Office integrates two
pillars: the Political Affairs Section and the Institutional and Operational
Partnership Service. They jointly report to a newly established Deputy Head of
Office. A new Office of the Chief of Staff oversees the integrated and coherent
functioning of UNOAU across all areas. I intend to carry out an assessment of
UNOAU, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2320 (2016), that will
comprehensively evaluate the growing needs of the United Nations-African Union
partnership and the capacity of UNOAU to meet the demands placed on it.

VII. Observations and recommendations
65. Stronger partnership with the African Union and the regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms will enable the United Nations to respond
early, swiftly, coherently and decisively to prevent conflict and effectively address
challenges to peace and security. I welcome progress on the partnership made
during the reporting period. The signing of the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the start of the
operationalization of the African Union Peace Fund and the adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 2320 (2016) represent solid steps towards further
elevating our platform of cooperation in Africa. I commend the Chairperson of
African Union Commission for his leadership and commitment in that regard, and
once again reiterate my intention to continue working to further strengthen the
partnership.
66. Since taking office, I have emphasized my intention to work more proactively
on conflict prevention. The Chairperson of the African Union Commission has
expressed the same intention. In the joint framework, both organizations committed
to early engagement, to sharing early warning information and analysis with a view
to reaching a common understanding of emerging or ongoing conflicts and, through
consultative decision-making, to developing collaborative approaches. The
Secretariat will work to strengthen its coordination with the African Union to
achieve this, including through closer collaboration among special representatives
and envoys. It is imperative that the progress achieved in recent years with respect
to consultation and collaboration between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council be consolidated.
67. I look forward to working with the African Union to continue to enhance our
partnerships with Africa’s regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms. They are at the forefront of our efforts to achieve peace and security
on the continent, and they are the driving force for achieving Africa’s development
objectives. The only way that the international co mmunity can address conflicts on
the continent is in unity with the countries of the region, with the ability to serve
together and according to the same universal principles. My special representatives
and envoys in the African subregions will work closely with UNOAU to facilitate
greater information-sharing and joint action among the United Nations, the African
Union and the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms,
particularly on the causes and drivers of conflict. The deeper and more consi stent
the collaboration, the greater the certainty of achieving the goals of the 2030
Agenda and Agenda 2063.

14/16

17-14299

S/2017/744

68. The increase in regional peacekeeping and peace support operations confirms
that the demand in Africa today exceeds what the United Nations, the African Union
or any other regional or subregional organization by itself can meet. While new
strategic thinking on the diversity of peace operations is needed to ensure that the
international community is able to respond adequately to conflict situati ons, the
high demand confirms that peacekeeping remains indispensable, not only as a
versatile tool, but also as a highly cost-effective instrument. From Somalia to Mali,
from Darfur to the Central African Republic, we have accumulated a considerable
degree of expertise and some unique capabilities. I pay tribute to African
peacekeepers, many of whom have paid the ultimate price for contributing to the
goals of the Charter of the United Nations.
69. While we are witnessing some encouraging signs of progress, our operations
can succeed only if the African Union and regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms continue to help create political space for political solutions to
take root. The joint framework will enable us to sustain a strengthened, dy namic
dialogue in order to make structural improvements to our common response efforts,
based on shared assessments, joint planning exercises and concerted decisions. It is
important to enhance efforts to achieve a unified political vision, as well as to a gree
on what it takes to implement it.
70. Enhancing African capacities in the area of peace and security requires
adequate, timely and predictable financing for African Union peace support
operations. During the reporting period, African Union member Stat es have taken
important steps towards greater self-reliance and burden-sharing. I applaud this
progress and the African Union’s continuing commitment to covering 25 per cent of
the cost of its peace support operations, as well as the significant work under taken
by the two organizations on the report on the joint review of available mechanisms
to finance and support African Union peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council (A/71/410-S/2016/809), the report of the Secretary-General on
options for authorization and support for African Union peace support operations
(S/2017/454) and the report of the African Union on the relevant provisions of
Council resolution 2320 (2016) on United Nations assessed contributions for
African Union-led peace operations authorized by the Council.
71. I recognize that the implementation of African Union decisions on the
financing of the Union and its Peace Fund will require strong leadership and
commitment. However, the continued support and encouragement of the Security
Council, particularly on the issue of predictable and sustainable financing of peace
support operations authorized by the Council, is needed to help translate words into
action. Such support would reinforce the Council’s primary responsibility, under the
Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance of international peace and
security, while also recognizing the important role of regional organizations
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
72. Effective African capacity for peacekeeping is increasingly important, both in
the context of our collective response to international peace and security challenges
and for stability on the African continent. The determination of the African Union
and African countries is real and encouraging, including with regard to the further
development of accountability frameworks. Our reports have highlighted the
importance of compliance and oversight of African Union peace support operations
through robust and effective human rights mechanisms and a conduct and discipline
framework. The United Nations will continue to work closely with the African
Union to build predictable approaches to the partnership, including on the planning
of peace operations, as well as on issues related to budget and finance, audit and
accountability, human rights compliance, and conduct and discipline, with a view to
strengthening complementarity of efforts.
17-14299

15/16

S/2017/744

73. In furthering this spirit of cooperation and recognizing the principle of
comparative advantage, the United Nations is committed to looking at response
mechanisms in a more integrated fashion and working towards an interlocking
system of capabilities that is flexible, working across and between regions,
particularly through the African Standby Force and its rapid deployment capability.
It is in the interest of the United Nations to continue to support the enhancement of
African Union capacities in conflict prevention and management but not to defer
responsibility for conflict in Africa, aiming at strengthening the collective security
system. Close cooperation among the United Nations, the African Union and other
key partners, such as the European Union, is critical for achieving those objectives.
To that end, I look forward to exploring the possibility of establishing trilateral
collaborative mechanisms.
74. I am committed to strengthening our cooperation and partnership on the basis
of the priorities and needs of the people of Africa. We shall continue to work
together to create the conditions necessary for the African continent to fully meet
the aspirations of its people, especially its youth.
75. As outlined herein, UNOAU continues to play a pivotal role as the first port of
entry to the United Nations for the African Union in our growing partnership. The
day-to-day engagements between UNOAU and African Union offici als are the
building blocks in our efforts to share views and analyses, seek common ground on
issues of concern and undertake joint action to address them. UNOAU plays an
important role, one that I will continue to review and strengthen in line with the
demands of the partnership.
76. Africa’s needs remain significant, but so are the contributions that Africa has
made to further unity, peace and progress for all people on the continent. We need to
fully integrate African success stories into our United Nati ons narrative. I
acknowledge and value with humility the contribution and sacrifice made by so
many African countries to the United Nations around the world and to peace
operations in Africa. I would like to pay tribute to the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, for his leadership and his commitment
to the management reform process. I also wish to express my appreciation to the
African Union, its member States and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms for their continued cooperation with the United Nations in
efforts to address challenges to peace and security in Africa. I also wish to express
my appreciation to my Special Representative to the African Union, as well as the
staff of UNOAU and that of all United Nations and African Union entities serving to
advance peace, security and development in the region.

16/16

17-14299
