VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Strongly condemns the expansionist activities of Is­
rael in the Middle East and the continual bombing of Pal­
estinian civilians, which constitute a serious obstacle to the
realization of the self-determination and independence of
the Palestinian people;
22. Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon in June 1982, which endangers stability, peace and
security in the region, and reiterates its support for the efforts
undertaken to implement the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular those demanding the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanese
territory to internationally recognized boundaries and re­
spect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon;
23. Urges all States, competent organizations of the
United Nations system, specialized agencies and other in­
ternational organizations to extend their support to the Pal­
estinian people through its sole and legitimate representative,
the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to re­
gain its right to self-determination and independence in ac­
cordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
24. Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full re­
spect for their fundamental individual rights and the obser­
vance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 19 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
25. Recommends that the Security Council should make
urgent appeals for clemency to the South African authorities
in order that the lives of the three African National Congress
freedom fighters sentenced to death on 6 August 1982 may
be saved in accordance with General Assembly resolution
37/1 of 1 October 1982;
26. Demands the immediate release of children detained
in Namibian and South African prisons;
27. Reiterates its appreciation for the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial rule continue
to receive from Governments, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial
increase in this assistance;
28. Urges all States, specialized agencies and compe­
tent organizations of the United Nations system to do their
utmost to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples
under colonial, foreign and racist domination in their just
struggle for self-determination and independence;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to give the widest
possible publicity to the struggle being waged by oppressed
peoples for the realization of their self-determination and
national independence;
30. Decides to consider this item again at its thirty­
eighth session on the basis of the reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations have been requested to submit
concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial ter­
ritories and peoples.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982
19 Resolution 217 A (III).

37/44.

179

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination: General recommenda­
tion VI

The General Assembly,
Taking note of decision 1 (XXV) of 15 March 1982 of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
entitled ''General recommendation VI'' , 20
Acknowledging the burden which reporting obligations
under international instruments places upon States parties,
especially those with limited technical and administrative
resources,
Convinced, none the less, that the value of international
conventions relies upon the full and conscientious imple­
mentation of the obligations undertaken upon ratification or
accession,
Noting with concern that many periodic reports due under
article 9 of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination21 are outstanding and
that in some cases initial reports are several years overdue,
1. Appeals to all States parties to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis­
crimination to fulfil their obligations under article 9 of the
Convention and to submit their reports within the appro­
priate time;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the views
and observations of States parties to the Convention on the
causes of the situation described in general recommendation
VI of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrim­
ination and to submit an analysis of the replies received in
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session,
together with such suggestions as he might wish to make
with a view to improving the situation;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing his
report, to consider the situation described in general rec­
ommendation VI of the Committee in the overall framework
of reporting obligations that Member States have under the
various human rights instruments in order to be able to take
into account similar and related problems which may have
arisen in compliance with such obligations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit his
report, together with the records of the General Assembly's
consideration thereof, to the ninth meeting of the States
parties to the Convention, to be held in 1984.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/45.

Status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225 (XXIX)
of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11 of 7 November 1977,
33/101 of 16 December 1978, 34/26 of 15 November 1979,
35/38 of 25 November 1980 and 36/11 of 28 October I 98 I,
Welcoming the increase in the number of declarations
made under article 14 of the Convention,
20 See Official Records of the General A,·sembly, Thirty-seventh Se,·sion.
Supplement No. 18 (A/37/18), chap. IX.
21 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 22
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention or
acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation of its provisions are necessary for the real­
ization of the objectives of the Decade for Action to Com­
bat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests States that have not yet become parties to
the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to con­
sider the possibility of making the declaration provided for
in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to submit
to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the sta­
tus of the Convention, in accordance with Assembly reso­
lution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/46. Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/12 of 28 October 1981 on the

report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis­
crimination and 37/45 of 3 December 1982 on the status of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, 21 as well as its other relevant
resolutions on the implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, 23
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-fifth
and twenty-sixth sessions, 24 submitted under article 9, para­
graph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Emphasizing the importance for the success of the strug­
gle against all practices of racial discrimination, including
vestiges and manifestations of racist ideologies wherever
they exist, that all Member States be guided in their internal
and foreign policy by the basic provisions of the Convention,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Welcoming the continued co-operation of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination with the com­
petent specialized agencies, especially the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation, and with other United
Nations bodies,
Noting the decisions adopted and recommendations made
by the Committee at its twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on
its twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions;
2. Commends the Committee for its contribution to the
elimination of all forms of discrimination based on race.
22
23

A/37/148.
Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.

24
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. /8 (A/37/18).

colour, descent or national or ethnic origin, wherever it
exists;
3. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia as the most abhorrent form of racial
discrimination and urges all Member States to adopt effec­
tive political, economic and other measures in order to se­
cure the elimination of that policy and to achieve full
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies;
4. Calls upon the United Nations bodies concerned to
ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant in­
formation on all the Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies and
urges the administering Powers to co-operate with these
bodies by providing all necessary information in order to
enable the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities
under article 15 of the International Convention on the Elim­
ination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
5. Commends the Committee for its continuous endeav­
ours towards the elimination of apartheid, racism and racial
discrimination in southern Africa and the implementation
of United Nations resolutions relating to the liberation and
independence of Namibia;
6. Takes note with satisfaction of the efforts of the Com­
mittee aimed at securing the prosperity of national or ethnic
minorities and indigenous populations through the imple­
mentation of the principles and provisions of the Convention;
7. Expresses grave concern at the Israeli policy of de­
fiance of the basic principles and objectives of the Conven­
tion, as reflected in the report of the Committee, and calls
for the respect and preservation of the national and cultural
identity of the Palestinian people;
8. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at the
elimination of all forms of discrimination against migrant
workers and their families, the promotion of their rights on
a non-discriminatory basis and the achievement of their full
equality and of the possibility to preserve their cultural
characteristics;
9. Commends the States parties to the Convention on
the measures taken to ensure within their jurisdiction the
availability of appropriate recourse procedures for the vic­
tims of racial discrimination;
10. Calls upon all Member States to adopt effective
legislative, socio-economic and other necessary measures
in order to ensure the elimination or prevention of discrim­
ination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin;
11. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention to
protect fully, by the adoption of relevant legislative and
other measures, the rights of national or ethnic minorities,
as well as the rights of indigenous populations;
12. Reiterates its invitation to the States parties to the
Convention to furnish the Committee, in accordance with
its general guidelines, with information on the implemen­
tation of the provisions of the Convention, including infor­
mation on the demographic composition of their population
and on their relations with the racist regime of South Africa;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the Committee's
contribution to the work of the Preparatory Sub-Committee
for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and to the regional seminars held in
implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
14. Welcomes the decision of the Committee to con­
tribute to the Second World Conference by preparing a study
