UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

21 DECEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

Inclusion

(S/Agenda/2410)
.., ,.....,

, . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . s

1

,.....

I

., ,..,,,

of Arabic among the official and working
Council:
((1) Note by the Secretary-General
(S/14372);

. . ,...

q . . . . . . . . . ,.......

languages

of the Security

(b) Letter dated 17 December 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15532) . . . , , . , . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.24 10

,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Si.. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resol~rrior~s and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2410th MEETING
Weld in New York on Tuesday, 21 December 1982, at 12 noon.
Pw.sidcnt:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

(Poland).

P~.(~.sonf:The representatives of the following States:
China. France. Guyana, Ireland, Japan. Jordan,
Panama. Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda. Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2410)

I.

Adoption

2.

Inclusion of Arabic among the official and working
languages of the Security Council:
((11 Note by the Secretary-General (S/14372):
(h) Letter dated 17 December 1982 from the Permanent Representative ofdordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15532)

of the agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

Inclusion
of Arabic among the official and working
languages of the Security Council:
(a) Note by the Secretary-General (S/14372);
(b) Letter dated 17 December 1982from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15532)
I. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in response to the request made by the representative
of Jordan in his letter of 17 December [S//5532]. The
Council also has before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral [S//4372] in which attention is drawn to General Assembly resolution 35/219 of 17 December
IL)XO. in which the Council was requested to include
Arabic among its official and working languages.
I should like also to draw attention to document
S/ 1.5531, which contains the text of a draft resolution
sponsored by Jordan.

which have taken
it is my
understanding
that the Council is ready to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote and that I may declare
the draft resolution contained in document S/ I553 I
2.

In the light of consultations

place with regard to this draft resolution,

adopted by consensus, If I hear no objection,
proceed accordingly.
I declare the draft resolution
,... resolution
’ 528 (1982).
?I;

I shall

adopted by consensus

4. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The Council’s consensus decision to include Arabic among the official
and working languages of the Security Council is a
mileslone in the evolution of the principle of cultural
universality. unity and diversity which is one of the
United Nations’ most cherished goals in its efforts
to bring about greater integration,
friendship and
amity among all nations and distinct areas of civilization,
5. The decision of the Council and the evidence of
the friendly spirit in which it was arrived at unanimously will bc received with profound appreciation
throughout the Arab world and far beyond. On behalf
of Jordan and all the Arab countries which have
striven so diligently over the past decades to achieve
this cherished objective. I should like to express
dcepcst appreciation, for its fulfilment. thanks to the
favourable and friendly response of the Council and
its members. The President of the Council. Mr. Natorf
of friendly Poland, deserves particular commendation
for the expeditious manner in which he has handled
who
the sub.ject. as does the Secretary-General,
directed the various executive organs of the United
Nations some time ago to prepare the functional
aspects of the implementation
of this decision in
anticipation
of its being adopted, which happily has
been the case.
6. As the representative of Jordan and of the Group
of Arab States in the Security Council. I personally
feel privileged to have been associated with the consummation of this historic process and to be present
on this occasion.
7. The PRESIDENT:
I take it that the Council has
now concluded its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
8. Mr. de PINIES (Spain) (i,7tr~/p~r,tr~tio/7.frwmSptrr7is/~): I simply wish to express the hope that the peace
of the world will not be disturbed. especially in the
coming days of holiday.
9. On the assumption that the Council will not meet
again this year, my delegation wishes to thank all those

that have been with us in the past two years-including
the representatives
of the five countries that left us
at the beginning of the year-and
to state before the
Council that Spain believes that through its conduct
hcrc it has fulfilled the responsibilities
assigned to it
by the General Assembly when it was elected to this
important post.
IO. The Security Council. the principal organ of the
United Nations. is a unique body. In my view. it is
quite distinct from the Ccneral Assembly or any of the
other main bodies. This is the second time my country
has been a member of this Council. It is true that its
actions have often been frustrated. as the SecretaryGcnctnl has pointed out in his report.’ Perhaps greatet
USCof the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations could allow it to operate more effectively. We
continue to believe that the Council is an organ in
which disputes should he discussed and settled and
that perhaps greater use of preventive rather than
curative action might make it more effective,

ber-s every success in discharging the serious responsibilities they bear. I would also add congratulations
to those that have been elected by the General Assembly this yeal- to replace those of us whose mandates
are ending. I wish everyone a very Merry Christmas
and a Happy New Year.
12. The PRESIDENT:
I am in a slightly difficult
situation because. as President of the Council. I cannot be as optimistic as the representative of Spain and
assume that we shall have no more meetings before the
end of this month and this yeal-. I shall take the opportunity today to bid farewell unofficially to those that
are leaving the Council, and if we have occasion to
meet again I shall repeat it officially.

I I. In any event. I wish to express to all members
the grntitudc of my delegation. my country and my
Government for the trust placed in us, I wish all mem-

Litho

in Unilcd

Nations.

New

York

00300

88-60989-October

1989--?.oso
