S/PV.7802

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7802nd meeting

Monday, 7 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndiaye/Mr. Ciss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulata
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ybáñez
Mr. Klimkin/Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr.Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace operations facing asymmetrical threats
Letter dated 27 October 2016 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/927)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-36375 (E)
*1636375*

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace operations facing asymmetrical threats
Letter dated 27 October 2016 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/927)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Lithuania, Maldives, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Michaëlle
Jean, Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis, Director of the
Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Joao
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Tanou
Koné, Permanent Observer of the Economic Community
of West African States to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
2/77

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

07/11/2016

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/927, which contains a letter dated
27 October 2016 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Senegal addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Government of Senegal for organizing this timely and
important meeting.
Today, our peace operations increasingly face
asymmetric threats from violent extremists and
terrorist groups. The casualty figures in Mali are a
stark and tragic reflection of that. It is a sad fact that
our peacekeepers are now being specifically targeted
by violent extremists and terrorists. Yesterday again,
our peacekeepers in Mali came under attack. One of
them died, seven others were wounded, and two Malian
civilians were also killed by the unknown assailants.
The Secretary-General condemns this vicious acts,
underlining that such attacks targeting United Nations
peacekeepers may constitute war crimes under
international law.
If United Nations peace operations are to be able
to work safely and carry out their mandates in today’s
complex conflicts, they must develop strategies to face
these new conditions. The fundamental question is
how they can do so. Today’s discussion could be very
helpful in answering that question, and we thank you,
Sir, for this initiative.
We should first recall that the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations emphasized that
United Nations troops should not undertake military
counter-terrorism operations. One conclusion could be
that peacekeeping operations should not be mandated
to militarily defeat violent extremist and terrorist
groups. However, terrorists and violent extremists are a
reality in many contemporary conflicts — a reality that
has to be dealt with. These destructive and dangerous
forces make conflicts even more intractable. They
thrive on impunity and governance failures. They
exploit deep-rooted grievances. These factors in turn
are fertile ground for violent extremism and terrorism
to grow further.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

This is the context in which the United Nations
often must operate. In response, our action and footprint
have to be more nimble and comprehensive, and we
need more flexible support arrangements. We will need
more sophisticated and more predictable uniformed
capabilities to strengthen mobility, responsiveness and
a deeper understanding of the operating environment.
Developing our intelligence and analysis capacity
will be critical in that pursuit. We will also need to
adjust how we conduct our core tasks, including our
good offices, our capacity-building, our community
engagement and stabilization measures — all the tools
that are available to the United Nations.
Further, the political objectives of our peacekeeping
operations need to be clearly defined and communicated.
We must find new and creative ways of achieving
political goals in situations where some parties are
not speaking partners or willing participants, and we
must devise strategies to build coalitions and support
around political objectives at the local, national and
regional levels.
I see three priorities for preparing our operations to
face asymmetric threats.
First and primarily, we must do all we can to
ensure the safety and security of our personnel. This
means greater situational awareness, analysis and force
protection measures. We are already doing that in Mali,
but we need to do more. We must, for instance, utilize
new technologies and deploy uniformed units with
built-in, robust self-protection tools.
Secondly, we must adapt how we deliver our
mandates. The fact that the United Nations is a potential
target should encourage us to think more deeply about
how we are to operate in this new, more dangerous and
unpredictable environment. Support for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts should be grounded in a nuanced
understanding of who the different parties are, how
they are resourced and who their allies are. That varies
from case to case. An overgeneralized approach can
be counterproductive and possibly expose the United
Nations to more risk. In such environments we should
also think beyond a security-focused approach. The
entirety of the tools at the disposal of the United Nations
should be considered, including sanctions regimes,
normative instruments, capacity-building, stabilization
and development aid. We must build State capacity that
is accountable, legitimate and respects human rights

S/PV.7802

and the rule of law, so as to avoid perpetuating drivers
of conflict and extremism in the first place.
Thirdly, we must fully take into account how
and when the United Nations can support national
and regional efforts to prevent violent extremism and
terrorism. In his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, the Secretary-General indicated the need
to integrate the prevention of violent extremism in
peace operations, both in terms of mandates and the
relevant activities of the United Nations country
teams. The General Assembly has called on Member
States to implement the recommendations of the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism as they apply
to the national context. When requested, the United
Nations is ready to support such efforts at the national
level. We are providing technical assistance in areas
such as criminal justice, border controls, kidnapping
for ransom, dealing with foreign terrorist fighters and
the financing of terrorism. We are also supporting
youth engagement and skills development. And we are
encouraging Member States to exchange information
among themselves, as well as expertise and resources,
in order to strengthen international cooperation on
countering terrorism. One important tool to provide
all-United Nations strategic assistance is the integrated
assistance for countering terrorism initiative for the
Group of Five for the Sahel, mandated by the Council
in 2014.
I would like to conclude with a final reflection. The
United Nations is an Organization of States, but it is
also an Organization of normative values. We work for
the peoples of the world. Our mandate is built around
inclusion, not exclusion. Over the past few years,
Member States came together in an impressive display
of unity to develop a blueprint for peace, sustainable
development and dignity for all on a healthy planet. The
2030 Agenda recognizes that all our challenges and
all our opportunities are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing. Another important tool in our hands, on
which I would like to congratulate Member States, are
the identical resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262). This innovative concept opens up
several avenues towards a comprehensive response to
many of the threats we face in today’s world. If — and it
is a big “if” — we implement the 2030 Agenda and use
the full potential of the sustaining peace resolutions the
Council and Assembly have adopted, discussions like

16-363753/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

the one we are having today will hopefully be much less
urgent and much less necessary than they are today.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Jean.
Ms. Jean (spoke in French): We were cruelly
confronted by the news of the two attacks that took
place in quick succession yesterday and the day before
in Mali, which claimed the life of a French soldier in a
mine explosion and that of a Togolese peacekeeper in
an ambush that also injured seven other persons, three
of them critically. We are gathered here aware of the
ultimate sacrifice made by men and women deployed
in the field in the service of peace. We here are driven
by the same determination and urgency and the same
ideal enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations Charter in 1945, namely,
“to maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace”.
Through those words, the Security Council’s road
map — our road map— can be more clearly traced.
I would like to commend you, Mr. President — Foreign
Minister Mankeur Ndiaye — and your country, Senegal,
which currently holds the presidency of the Security
Council as well as the chairmanship of the Summit of La
Francophonie, for taking the initiative to convene this
high-level debate, which is so crucial for the conduct
of peacekeeping operations in the face of what have
been called unprecedented asymmetrical threats. This
initiative also reflects Senegal’s very active role at the
helm of the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, and more generally its major, and
appreciated, commitment to peacekeeping operations,
including those deployed in francophone countries. I
would also like, through you, Mr. President, to thank
Senegal for the trust it places in the International
Organization of La Francophonie (IOF), as reflected in
its invitation for me to participate here today. This is a
historic moment for us.
I am here today as the Secretary-General of La
Francophonie, an international organization made up
of 80 States and Governments from five continents.
The francophone world today accounts for half of all
United Nations peacekeeping operations throughout the
4/77

07/11/2016

world. Fifty-five member States and observers of our
organization are engaged in peacekeeping operations
today — indicating that we too have recognized the
urgent need to adapt peacekeeping operations in terms
of their mandates and resources in the face of the new
threats confronting them.
We in the IOF can see those threats every day: in
Mali, Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, and even in the endof-mandate operations in Côte d’Ivoire. The threats are
permanent. They have an impact both on peacekeepers
and the mandate of peacekeeping operations as well
as when it comes to protecting civilians and securing
territory, boundaries and personnel.
We are shocked by recurrent attacks against
peacekeepers in Mali, which we condemn in the
strongest terms. And, as we know, bordering countries
are not spared. We saw recently how the army of the
Niger fell victim to an attack by criminal militias on
6 October, when 22 soldiers who were providing security
at a site for Malian refugees in the Tahoua region, which
borders Mali, were killed in broad daylight.
The President of the Niger, still in shock when I
called him, did not fail to tell me what the subregion
wanted, that is, that in carrying out its mandate,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) act more
tactically and robustly and in a more concerted and
coordinated manner with the affected countries in order
to use force in the spirit of Article I of the Charter, which
I mentioned earlier, so as to prevent and remove threats
to the peace and to suppress all acts of aggression. As
La Francophonie is always quick to recall, this is about
our absolute responsibility to protect, by all means,
populations exposed to danger.
We often find ourselves helpless in the face of
the deadly attacks perpetrated by these criminal
groups, which use every cruel and cowardly means
to destabilize already weak countries. To defeat these
criminal groups, whose goal is to control routes and
passages so as to facilitate trafficking in drugs, arms
and human beings, we must foil their plans and counter
their actions by means of more collective and thus
more effective efforts. We can do this only if we work
together in the context of a joint effort that involves
the international community together with the States
concerned and those of the subregion. We need also to
strengthen the capacity of said States to act and fully
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

participate in defending their territory and protecting
their peoples.
I have repeatedly conveyed to the international
community, and to the Security Council in particular, the
pressing appeals of the countries in the Lake Chad Basin
region for additional resources, in the form of technical
and logistical support, for the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the fight to put an end to the deadly attacks
by Boko Haram against isolated, extremely vulnerable
communities. Yes, efforts have been made, and I wish
to commend them. Here I am thinking in particular of
the more modern, sophisticated equipment provided to
the troops; the priority given to intelligence-gathering;
and the strengthening in recent months of the mandate
of certain operations, including MINUSMA, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, so that they
can better protect civilians and withstand the attacks of
armed groups. But we see also how difficult it has been
to implement resolution 2295 (2016).
All of these difficulties and shortcomings, and
sometimes even dysfunctions, of which we are fully
aware, are a source of serious concern for the IOF,
because for 20 years we have been actively and concretely
cooperating with our international partners, primarily
the United Nations, in crisis prevention and conflict
prevention and resolution, and supporting countries
as they seek to consolidate peace and democracy. The
French-speaking space has become a kind of laboratory
for peacekeeping operations. Given our presence on
the ground at all stages of the continuum of peace,
our widely acknowledged experience and expertise in
fragile political, security and socioeconomic contexts,
we welcome the high priority given to crisis prevention
and peacebuilding in the framework of the global
peacekeeping reform undertaken by the United Nations
in 2015.
It is in that same spirit that we call for the
continuation, and even the strengthening, of the
civilian dimension of peacekeeping operations, which
represents a pivotal element of stabilization in countries
emerging from crisis and in transition situations. This is
part and parcel of the preventive approaches promoted
by the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.

S/PV.7802

I believe that we are all on the same page. A security
approach is necessary but not sufficient. As I said at the
international conference convened by the IOF in June
on countering terrorism and the prevention of violent
extremism, we must also respond to the determined
attacks against us with our own determination to strike
back, using all of our weapons of mass construction:
education, training for all, job creation and investment
in economic initiatives for women and for youth, so as
to bring about sustainable, equitable development. We
also have to create a deep-rooted culture of democracy
and peace and strengthen rule-of-law institutions as
well as respect for rights and freedoms.
Ensuring such freedoms is a joint endeavour. I wish
to stress also the importance of respecting freedom
of speech and freedom of the press, which are key to
a climate of peace. I have just been informed by the
highest authorities of Radio France Internationale
of the jamming of its FM signal as well as that of
Radio Okapi, the United Nations radio station in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is just one
example. Such incidents are worrisome and must be
avoided so as to preserve freedom of the press and of
speech. The IOF’s approach to its work in all the areas I
have just mentioned involves shared responsibility.
Turning to the security dimension, we support
unreservedly the Council’s desire to make peacekeeping
operations safer and more robust and increase their
level of performance. On the basis of the conclusions
of the June IOF conference, to which my dear friend
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde made a valuable contribution,
I wish also to underscore the need to strengthen
cooperation in terms of intelligence-gathering, because
it is clear that while peacekeeping operations cannot be
anti-terrorist actors as they currently stand, they can
and must be provided the resources to better face the
new threats they face and contribute, at various levels,
to minimizing them.
To that end, Blue Helmets must be better equipped,
better prepared and better trained, and the IOF is
contributing to that endeavour. Our experience in the
French-speaking world has shown us that it is vital that
personnel deployed on the ground be able to gather
information, hear witness statements and communicate
in French with the local authorities and population.
They must also have a solid grasp of the historical,
political, socioeconomic and cultural realities. The
operations’ security and ability to perform are at stake,
in particular as concerns the civilian dimension. This is

16-363755/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

particularly important at a time when terrorist strategies
are based on the capacity of these criminal groups to
infiltrate and melt into local populations. Also at stake
is dialogue and the climate of confidence that must be
established. Let us not underestimate this dimension.
I reiterate here the call I made at the Paris ministerial
conference on peacekeeping operations in Frenchspeaking environments a few days ago: that every
effort must be made to strengthen the use of French
within the Secretariat and in theatres of operation in
French-speaking countries. We therefore call for greater
participation by the States members of the IOF and for
the greater recruitment of French-speaking personnel
in peacekeeping operations. We also support a greater
expansion of United Nations recruitment activities to
French-speaking populations. Here I would pay tribute
to Mr. Atul Khare and Mr. Hervé Ladsous for the very
close cooperation that the IOF has been enjoying with
the Department of Field Support and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which has allowed us to
achieve encouraging results. For example, 99 per cent
of MINUSCA police are French-speaking.
A great deal needs to be done. That is why we have
developed a French teaching method for non-Frenchspeaking defence and security forces, in cooperation
with the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Experience has shown also that in certain Member
States it is vital to better train and prepare deployed
personnel and Blue Helmets so as to enable them to
more effectively address the new threats facing them.
That is why we regularly support francophone training
centres for peacekeeping operations. That is also why,
as my dear colleague Hervé Ladsous is well aware, we
have a network of French-speaking military, police and
civilian capacities through our Francophone Expertise
and Training Network for Peace Operations, which
acts as the umbrella organization for francophone
training centres and provides information, in French,
on peacekeeping, mobilizing for that purpose a sizeable
community of experts.
Experience has shown that it is vital to increase
security in the environments in which peacekeeping
operations are deployed. That is the goal of the
assistance we provide to our member States to help
them build their capacity to fight terrorism, as
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde well knows, given that the IOF
is cooperating with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to promote the ratification by national Governments
of universal, regional and subregional instruments to
6/77

07/11/2016

counter terrorism and crime. We are also strengthening
the capacities of specialized francophone judges and
prosecutors.
All the crises, conflicts and new threats that we have
to face, wherever they are, concern all of us without
exception, and call for a concerted and coordinated
approach on our part for which we pool our capacities,
experience, resources and means, whether that is in the
context of our cooperation with the United Nations,
our bilateral, multilateral, regional or subregional
cooperation, or our cooperation with institutional
stakeholders and civil society. The Council should
rest assured that the OIF will continue to promote that
essential integrated approach with all its partners,
including the United Nations, and that it can and should
count on us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Jean
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I welcome today’s
debate in the Council, designed to promote effective
action against the challenges that peacekeeping
operations are dealing with in the form of asymmetric
threats. One of those challenges, as the Council is aware,
is the ties that exist between terrorists and criminal
networks in many parts of the world. In Afghanistan,
drug traffickers pay the Taliban for protection. In the
Middle East, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
profits from trading and illicit trafficking in cultural
goods and oil and from kidnappings for ransom.
Criminals in West Africa pay terrorists’ travel expenses
in order to secure routes used for human trafficking
and for smuggling migrants, arms, drugs and tobacco
through the Sahel and the Sahara to Europe. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram directs a network of highly profitable
criminal activities, while in Somalia, Al-Shabaab has
received tens of millions of dollars from illegal exports
of charcoal and piracy. Because of this, peacekeeping
missions dealing with terrorists and violent extremists
can find themselves in dangerous situations.
I commend the Secretary-General for his
establishment in late October of the High-level Action
Group on Preventing Violent Extremism, which
has been working on a plan of action to counter that
threat. Based on that approach, the Working Group
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) has identified 12 recommendations for
implementation by the United Nations, with the goal
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

of preventing violent extremism, sharing best practices
and supporting Member States’ efforts.
The efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) are aimed at implementing
several capacity-building projects designed to improve
criminal justice systems and promote the rule of law.
There are 20 projects within the framework of the CTITF
plan for preventing violent extremism that UNODC is
working on with its partners, and a large number of
those are related to strengthening good governance
and the rule of law. UNODC efforts seek to strengthen
criminal justice preventive measures, including
preventing radicalization and prison violence; reinforce
approaches based on maintaining human rights and
the rule of law in combating terrorism; prevent the
recruitment of terrorists, especially foreign terrorist
fighters, including through the Internet; support
policies and programmes for victims of terrorism; and
help to develop national and regional action plans for
preventing violent extremism.
Many of those efforts are happening in Africa,
particularly in the Sahel and countries in West,
North and East Africa. UNODC is partnering with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
in order to deal more effectively with such threats.
All UNODC activity in Africa is supported by our
field office network, working according to priorities,
established by Member States and African regional
organizations, that are central to the three new regional
programmes launched this year for West Africa, North
Africa, the Middle East and East Africa. In West Africa,
our regional programme is aligned with the action plan
of the Economic Community of West African States
and the priorities of the countries in the region. In that
context, our Sahel programme is helping to strengthen
national criminal justice systems’ capacity to combat
drug- and arms-smuggling, organized crime, terrorism,
money laundering and corruption, and represents
UNODC’s contribution to the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. In that regard, we
are cooperating closely with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the
Group of Five for the Sahel. We are also working with
the UNOWAS Department of Political Affairs, DPKO
and INTERPOL, our partners in the implementation
of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which has led in
particular to the creation of anti-transnational-crime
units that have enabled major drug seizures and their
effective prosecution.

S/PV.7802

UNODC and its partners will continue to combat
the threats of terrorism, violent extremism and all the
challenges surrounding them. We will continue to
support peacekeeping operations and Member States
and to promote equitable criminal justice systems and
the rule of law in the context of peaceful and inclusive
societies, in support of Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Laborde.
Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): The terrorist
threat currently appears in at least three different
forms — first, through the organizations on the
Council’s list that control territory, as in Syria, Iraq,
Somalia, Libya, Nigeria and Mali; secondly, by making
a deadly reality of a violent ideology that inspires
terrorist attacks around the world; and lastly, as a
real threat to vulnerable States and to global peace
and security, as was put very well by the Deputy
Secretary-General, whom I thank for his extremely
clear comments in that regard and for his presence here
today. As regards the third form of the threat, terrorist
groups take every opportunity afforded by local and
regional conflicts that weaken State structures and the
rule of law — and, by extension, human rights — to
expand their terrorist activities, including by taking
control of vast territories.
The conflicts I just referred to are specifically found
in the geographical areas where the vast majority of
United Nations peacekeeping missions are deployed. In
fact, it could be estimated that two thirds of the officers
and soldiers participating in peacekeeping operations
currently operate in the areas affected by terrorism. In
such circumstances, it should be noted that it is not only
the citizens of the countries concerned who are affected
by asymmetric threats, but, unfortunately, United
Nations personnel as well. The attacks of yesterday
and the day before, and those perpetrated in October in
Mali, are just some of the most recent examples.
As long as terrorists and their organizations
continue to spread fear and horror by such attacks, the
residents of those countries and United Nations staff
and compounds will be among their targets. The close
relationship of local or regional conflicts with terrorism.
violent extremism and — I thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for mentioning

16-363757/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

it — organized crime is today an unprecedented threat
to international peace and security. Let us never forget
those three components: terrorism, violent extremism
and organized crime. That relationship puts United
Nations peacekeeping missions in a situation of new
and growing vulnerability.
The Security Council set up the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in a very
interesting manner as a special political mission tasked
with addressing specific terrorism-related threats
to peace and security. That element brings a special
perspective to our debate. CTED and the peacekeeping
operations are partners in the Security Council, and
their respective mandates, while completely different,
are mutually reinforcing. I insist on the fact that their
mandates are distinct because it could be dangerous to
conflate them.
Under the guidance of the Committee, the main
task of CTED is to conduct independent assessments
of Member States’ capacity to fight terrorism, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), which remains
valid, although it was adopted after the 2001 attacks in
New York. Subsequent Council resolutions on counterterrorism — such as resolution 1624 (2005), which
addresses the prohibition of incitement to commit
terrorist acts, as well as acts of terrorism motivated by
intolerance or extremism, or, more recently, resolution
2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters and the fight
against violent extremism — are clear illustrations of
the links and the working capacities.
On the one hand, we are perfectly aware that the two
mandates — one that focuses on peacekeeping and the
other on the fight against terrorism — are not similar,
but they are complementary. Ultimately, that approach
of complementarity will improve the protection
of civilians in the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. On the other hand, it is clear
that the United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions are deployed on the ground.
I refer to the special political missions, whose leader
is here with us today — Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs — because that
element should not be neglected in today’s debate.
Therefore, both types of operations — peacekeeping
operations and special political missions — are on the
front line and thus must strengthen the institutional
capacity of the forces of order, including border
control, which is a major problem in lawless areas.
8/77

07/11/2016

They must also strengthen criminal justice capacities
so as to bolster the rule of law, as the Secretary General
of the International Organization of la Francophonie
mentioned, and the authorities and services that are
essential to combating terrorism and organized crime
and, equally, to promoting institutional development.
Thus, given their vast experience in fragile countries,
where State structures are challenged, peacekeeping
operations and special political missions are in a unique
position to assist such countries in strengthening their
operational capacity under the rule of law. In addition,
they can provide special support, day by day, to the
States most affected by terrorism.
For more than a decade now, CTED has been
building a set of best practices in the fight against
terrorism, according to the principles of the rule of law.
Those best practices, which have been adopted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, have been identified by
a consistent methodology and ongoing dialogue with
Member States and with more than 50 international and
regional organizations, particularly the International
Organization of la Francophonie. The Secretary General
of that organization mentioned that I participated in its
meeting in June, and I will gladly talk about this issue
at its next summit, which will be held in a few days.
The United Nations system is also at the centre
of the issue, particularly the Council and its CounterTerrorism Committee, whose political leadership must
be commended. We need that leadership in our actions,
including this year under the chairmanship of the
Ambassador of Egypt, who is present here today and
with whome have a very close relationship. I thank the
Ambassador for his chairmanship and the way in which
he steers our work with all the political guidance that
is required.
These best practices are based on specific Security
Council resolutions and — we too often forget — the
19 international legal counter-terrorism instruments.
That is the international cooperation in criminal
matters. We should never forget that because it is the
basis on which work on the rule of law is conducted
at the global level. If we want the rule of law to be our
priority, then let us speed up the systems of international
cooperation in criminal matters. CTED, in conjunction
with UNODC, is quite ready to assist the Council in
that regard. Thanks to such cooperation, we were able
to integrate the principles of the rule of law and the
elements required for the protection of human rights in
our work.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Moreover, CTED has conducted more than 100
evaluation visits in the Member States, including
follow-up visits. Following those visits, we provided
recommendations and identified best practices, which
have been approved by all parties concerned and by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Committee
and its Executive Directorate have a Security Council
mandate to assist States to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. I must mention the coordination efforts
carried out by the Secretary-General’s Task Force
headed by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman. I will speak about that
issue a bit later.
Robust information-sharing already exists, but
we must do more for the mutual reinforcement of the
two mandates, to assess operational capacity and best
practices, on one hand, and peacekeeping operations,
on the other. This is what the Deputy SecretaryGeneral referred to when he spoke of the One United
Nations approach. It means that coordination and
information-sharing with other United Nations
counter-terrorism organizations, including in the office
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
represented here by its Chair, Mr. Feltman, and the
team itself. That team encompasses all the entities that
comprise the Task Force, particularly the UNODC,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
that assists the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, which is chaired by
our colleague from New Zealand. Such bodies must all
work together to support peacekeeping operations.
I must not forget the guiding principles on foreign
terrorist fighters adopted in Madrid. I thank the Spanish
Secretary of State, who organized that meeting last year
very well. The meeting provided key reference points
for enhancing institutional cooperation, including on
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The Deputy Secretary-General spoke of the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. I am also pleased to refer to the high-level
action group on that topic, which is chaired by the
Secretary-General and held its first meeting last week.
I should also mention our excellent cooperation with
the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Our
regular and comprehensive exchange of information
with that Office has led to a fruitful integration of

S/PV.7802

our collective knowledge and has been reflected in
activities of importance to both sides — the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and CTED — and ensures
that we implement a common strategy in our work.
In conclusion, allow me to contribute to this debate
by suggesting to the Council three points of reflection
in the framework of the larger debate on peace and
security and asymmetric threats.
First, CTED can continue to offer our expertise
in the realm of counter-terrorism, particularly in our
assessments of the needs and capacities of States to deal
with counter-terrorism. We share good practices, as
well as our recommendations with respect to technical
assistance, so that the United Nations can work together
in the realm of peacekeeping operations.
Secondly. in following our recommendations
ountries and missions require increased technical
assistance because the recommendations may be
sound but they need to be implemented on the ground.
I would wish to see a more significant approach to
security, criminal justice, international cooperation,
particularly through the effective implementation of the
aforementioned international instruments, including
those relating directly or indirectly to the fight against
terrorism, as well as through the promotion of best
practices, in order to strengthen the capacity of States
and regions. That is a clear need. Perhaps we are
pushing against an open door, but it needs to be said.
Thirdly, how can we ensure such capacitybuilding through our peacekeeping operations, if
they request it? We need close coordination and
better exchange of information among the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate, the Special Envoys
and Representatives of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, without
forgetting the cooperation bodies, such as the Center
on Global Counterterrorism Cooperation, and the
specialized organizations, particularly those on the
ground, such as the International Organization of
la Francophonie, represented here by its SecretaryGeneral, and the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Council, the European Union, and so on. We must work

16-363759/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

in a coordinated way so that, at the end of the day, we
can ensure that we work together with other bodies
through bilateral assistance. That is because bilateral
assistance, which is so important in the areas that we are
discussing, must be executed in a coordinated manner.
I cannot close without thanking you, Mr. President,
both as the representative and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal and you personally, for having
convened this debate and enabling the consistency and
coherence of our actions in all areas of our work. We
will continue to bear in mind what Albert Camus said in
his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize in literature,
namely, that we know very well that we will not go far
with respect to the hopes of our societies but at least we
will conserve our societies and our values. That is what
we must continue to do together while focusing on the
common values of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Laborde for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Boutellis. Mr. Boutellis:
Let me first thank everyone on behalf of the International
Peace Institute (IPI) for the opportunity to present
the results of some of the research and convening
work that our think tank has done over the past year
on challenges facing peace operations operating in
countries confronting asymmetric threats, including
terrorist attacks.
Think tanks like ours help policymakers make
informed decisions on emerging issues by offering
practical, research-based ideas and by stimulating
debates on how best to operationalize those ideas.
The IPI report, which serves as a basis for this
briefing, entitled Waging Peace: United Nations
Peace Operations Confronting Terrorism and Violent
Extremism, which I co-authoured with Naureen
Chowdhury Fink, was produced by IPI and the Global
Centre on Cooperative Security and is the result of
extensive conversations with United Nations officials,
representatives of Member States and practitioners, as
well as field research carried out over the past year.
Of the 11 countries most affected by terrorism and
other asymmetric threats globally, seven currently host
United Nations peace operations, which range from
small special political missions to larger peacekeeping
operations. The deployment of peace operations in
countries where there may be little or no peace to keep
and where terrorist attacks are part of the landscape of
threats, adds to the complexity of the challenges facing
10/77

07/11/2016

the United Nations system, Member States and national
and local partners.
To date, the discourse among experts and
policymakers on peace operations operating in
asymmetric-threat environments has focused narrowly
on two key issues. First, it has focused on whether
peacekeeping operations can undertake kinetic counterterrorism operations. On that, the 2015 High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the followup report of the Secretary-General concluded that
United Nations peace operations are not the appropriate
tool for military counter-terrorism operations (see
S/2015/446).
Secondly, it has also focused on the range of
capabilities and the posture required to protect civilians
in complex security environments and to improve the
safety and security of United Nations personnel on the
ground. Establishing missions in such environments
has costs, both human and financial, that we must bear
in mind. While it is indeed essential for the United
Nations to adapt its mission presence and activities
when operating in such environments, the practical
question before us is how to adapt while upholding the
spirit and letter of the doctrinal principles that have
governed United Nations peacekeeping thus far. It is
clear that retreating behind secure compounds, known as
bunkerization, is not the solution to the dilemma. There
has, however, been comparatively little exploration
of the broader political and practical challenges,
opportunities and risks facing United Nations peace
operations in such complex environments. That has
created a gap between the policy debate here in New
York and the realities confronting United Nations staff
on the ground.
The three major United Nations peace and security
reviews in 2015 all highlighted the need for United
Nations peace operations to adapt to the changing
nature of conflicts. They also emphasized the primacy
of political solutions for preventing and ending
conflicts and for sustaining peace. That emphasis on
prevention came up in the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and during the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Both underscore the limitations of securitized
approaches alone, approaches that focus on symptoms
rather than causes and advocate for greater investment
in preventive multi-stakeholder strategies. That is the
added value of the United Nations. Therefore, the IPI
report seeks to expand the scope of the discussions
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

beyond whether peace operations can adapt to
asymmetric threat environments to how they can
better implement their mandates and support national
Governments and local communities in the face of
terrorism and violent extremism.
That raises a number of key questions relating to
whether, where, when and how preventive approaches
could and should be integrated into the mandates of
peace operations and how to capacitate United Nations
field missions as a consequence. Can it be done in a
context of limited resources and expertise without
impairing their impartiality or complicating relations
with host countries? Can it be done while ensuring the
safety and security of staff? And critically, how should
the issue of fragmented policy development at United
Nations Headquarters and the resulting lack of clear
guidance and resources for field missions be addressed?
Allow me to highlight a few key recommendations
the report puts forward for how peace operations
could adopt more cohesive and strategic approaches
to addressing the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, which shape a number of asymmetrical
threat environments.
First, United Nations peace operations need to
develop a more nuanced understanding, not only of
terrorist groups, but also of the drivers and grievances
leading to radicalization and violence, as well as of
local capacities for peace and resilience. This will
require better and more real-time information and
analysis, including regional analytical frameworks in
some contexts.
Secondly, greater coherence and clearer policy
guidance on these issues are needed. This requires
continued United Nations system-wide discussions
not only between United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies and peace operations teams, of course, but also
among Member States and across the three pillars of
the Organization’s work. In this regard, mandates and
structures should not be an obstacle to either United
Nations system-wide collaboration or to adopting
more strategic approaches to addressing the drivers
of asymmetrical threats without securitizing those
mandates.
Thirdly, it is important that United Nations peace
operations preserve and expand the space for dialogue
with all parties to a conflict. Security Council sanctions
do not legally bar United Nations actors from talking to
listed armed groups and their leaders, and there should

S/PV.7802

not be an a priori branding of who is a legitimate or
illegitimate interlocutor without a balanced analysis
of who they are and whether dialogues or alternative
strategies may bear fruit.
Fourthly, United Nations peace operations should
have honest conversations with host Governments about
what the United Nations does not do to fight against
asymmetrical threats, including terrorism, and where
the United Nations can add value and support Member
States’ priorities in preventing terrorism, including
in the areas the rule of law, security institutions and
human rights, and in advising on national strategy
development, including on which national counterterrorism measures can be counterproductive. Peace
operations should also encourage host nations to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of violent
extremism, including by promoting better governance
and State-citizen relations.
Fifthly and finally, while more empirical evidence
is needed to fully understand the impact and potential
of preventive initiatives, peace operations could
already start mainstreaming some of these initiatives
as part of context-specific integrated mission strategies
for preventing and sustaining a piece. While doing so,
it should adopt a do-no-harm approach and exercise
caution in the use of labels.
In conclusion, the added value of the United
Nations in helping to address asymmetrical threats
is not to deliver a decisive military response, but to
support and strengthen preventive multi-stakeholder
approaches to sustaining peace. This timely thematic
debate will hopefully help the Organization develop
a more strategic and integrated approach to waging
and sustaining peace, rather than only protecting
an instrument to better manage the symptoms of
asymmetrical threats. I submit that the continued
relevance of the United Nations should be judged by
the former not the latter.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
thank Mr. Arthur Boutellis for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad.
This morning’s debate is perhaps one of the most
important discussions the Security Council has ever
had. Indeed, one year after the submission of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) and the subsequent report of

16-3637511/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Secretary-General (S/2015/682), it is time for us to
grapple with one of the most complex challenges that
peacekeeping missions still face: asymmetrical threats.
This phenomenon, which threatens the lives of civilians
and undermines the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations from Africa to the Middle East, deserves
particular focus and attention, in particular on the part
of the Security Council.
It is against this backdrop that the President of
the Republic of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Macky
Sall, has taken the initiative of convening this highlevel debate in order to strategically reflect on peace
operations facing asymmetrical threats in order
to consider the need to adapt the tools on which the
Organization’s peace and security architecture rests.
I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and the Director of the Brian Urquhart Center
for Peace Operations for their relevant briefings, which
speak volumes about the severity of the phenomenon
we are considering today and the options we have in
countering that threat.
We must agree that the international security order
has completely changed in today’s world with the
proliferation of violent internal conflicts, as a result
of the emergence of large numbers of non-State actors,
including terrorist groups. This is especially true when
we see the worrying trend of conflicts and the emergence
of new cross-cutting and asymmetrical threats, ranging
from terrorism to transnational organized crime, which
continues to mark the current environment.
From northern Mali to Afghanistan, through the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and the Middle East, criminal groups regularly
target United Nations staff and civilian populations,
in particular those most vulnerable: women and
children. The examples of this in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan are symptomatic of serious
and repeated abuses against civilians and peacekeeping
forces.
12/77

07/11/2016

According the report of the Secretary-General on
Mali (S/2016/819), the number of attacks on the Malian
Defence and Security Forces and MINUSMA increased
significantly in the period under review. The Malian
Defence and Security Forces were attacked 39 times,
MINUSMA was attacked 27 times and a company that
works for MINUSMA was attacked once; whereas
during the previous period, there were 9 attacks on
the Malian Defence and Security Forces and 15 on
MINUSMA. A total of 34 peacekeepers were killed and
190 were injured between January 2015 and November
2016 in Mali and, on 13 August 2016 alone, 50 civilians
were killed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Just the day before yesterday, attacks against a
MINUSMA convoy north of the town of Douentza led
to the deaths of two peacekeepers and the injury of
seven, three of whom are in serious condition. These
attacks and the modus operandi of these terrorist
groups underscore the insecurity in which United
Nations troops operate. Carrying out a peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mission in such circumstances has
become a perilous exercise, as evidenced by the heavy
price paid by peacekeepers in MINUSMA, which
has become one of the most dangerous and deadly
operations ever.
The gravity of the situation is such that it affects
the very effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and undermines their credibility. In that
regard, we have several options before us. We could
maintain the status quo and ignore the threats and
their devastating consequences. We could refuse to
get involved when terrorist movements are present and
thereby give up on our main objective of maintaining
peace and security. Our final option is to try to adapt
peacekeeping operations so that they can better respond
to the threats posed by the emergence of asymmetrical
threats and terrorism.
It is the firmly held belief of the Government of
the Republic of Senegal that the current and future
success of peacekeeping operations in fulfilling their
mandates will depend largely on their ability to adapt to
the changing environments in which they are deployed.
Any other course of action would divert us further
from our primary goal of maintaining international
peace and security. We should not satisfy ourselves
with simply taking note of the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are not in a position to carry
out counter-terrorist military operations, as noted quite
rightly in the report of the High-level Independent
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Panel on Peace Operations. In addition, we must also
think of other ways and means to equip our missions
with the necessary capacity to effectively respond to
the threats, which are today an indisputable fact of life.
My country, Senegal, which is the seventh-largest
troop contributor in the world, the third-largest in
Africa and the largest in West Africa, believes that in the
context of adapting peacekeeping missions to the new
and asymmetrical circumstances, there are two major
areas of action on which we must focus our attention
and mobilize our efforts. It is first and foremost a
matter of equipping peackeeping operations with the
capacities necessary to carrying out their mandate both
safely and effectively. This requires an objective review
of the reality and daily lives of staff deployed in these
theatres areas of operations.
In this respect, it would be advisable to review
and readjust operational concepts for peacekeeping
operations, tailored to the contexts within which they
operate in order to endow them with more robust
mandates. In that respect, resolution 2295 (2016), on
the mandate of MINUSMA, is a welcome step forward
towards the consideration of this need.
However, in order to have a better impact on the
ground, we must strengthen our missions in terms of
equipment and operational capacity, making greater use
of modern technology. In fact, better access to detection
technology, programmes to mitigate threats linked to
improvised explosive devices, intelligence-gathering
and resilience improvement through the development
of improved mobility and medical support capacities
could allow peacekeeping operations to function more
safely and effectively.
In any case, the experiences of MINUSMA, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MINUSCA,
which now rely on military capacities and modern
technologies, have demonstrated that the responsible
use of these tools has a multiplier effect on effectiveness.
In this connection, we pay tribute to the ongoing efforts
of the Secretary-General to reinforce that component of
peacekeeping operations. We welcome the discussions
under way for the development of a political framework
for intelligence-gathering in the aforementioned
peacekeeping operations.
The second major axis of action relates to innovative
interinstitutional collaboration in the fight against
asymmetric threats. Relevant organizations involved

S/PV.7802

in the fight against terrorism must therefore support
peacekeeping operations by sharing their expertise
and experience in terms of prevention and in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. In order
to optimize the contribution of these institutions, it
would undoubtedly be beneficial to ensure that they are
closely engaged in the planning stage of missions. The
strengthening of such interinstitutional cooperation
must therefore involve a wider-scale synergy and
coordination among the competent entities of the United
Nations, including through dialogue and the exchange
of information, especially during the conception and
planning stages of missions.
It would also be beneficial to develop a
strengthened cooperation among peacekeeping
operations and counter-terrorism institutions, troopand police-contributing countries and host States
in developing an innovative collaborative strategy
that could serve to mitigate the vulnerability of our
missions to asymmetric threats. It is clear that, through
collaboration and the sharing of efforts, experiences
and expertise, we will be able to better understand
these threats and thereby develop coherent, holistic and
global strategies and approaches in order to provide an
effective response.
As I conclude my statement, I stress that the
strengthening of the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations not only requires but demands an
unwavering and constant political commensurate with
the impact of asymmetric threats. That is the full scope
of this open debate, convened by Senegal, as a sign of
our commitment to peace and security in Africa and
throughout the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to other members of the Council,
starting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Before I address the subject
at hand, I wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
families and loved ones of the victims of yesterday’s
terrorist attack in Mali, as well as to the Governments
and the peoples of Mali, Togo and France. This heinous
act makes today’s meetings even more pressing,
so I shall start by thanking you, Sir, for convening
this important debate and by commending Senegal
for its outstanding contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping endeavours, both in the field as one of

16-3637513/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

the major troop- and police-contributing countries and
here in the Council as the current Chair of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
my national capacity, I would like to add the following
comments.
Ukraine attaches great importance to United
Nations peacekeeping, and considers it to be one of the
core tasks of the Organization and an important tool
for ensuring peace and long-term stability. Ukraine
is one of the leading European troop-contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and is
proud to be a part of this important endeavour of the
Organization. Despite the ongoing aggression launched
by Russia against Ukraine, we will continue our active
participation in United Nations peacekeeping activity.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
proven to be a highly adaptive instrument and have
contributed much to the resolution of conflicts. This
year, the Council and the General Assembly have already
considered various aspects of United Nations activities
in upholding and sustaining peace. We welcome several
important decisions adopted within the United Nations
regarding peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
Simultaneous resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) have
become a significant step forward in the implementation
of a conflict-prevention approach. The conclusions
and ambitious recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations have provided
a new perspective to the nature and challenges of
PKOs. The conferences in London and Paris on the
implementation of the 2015 Peacekeeping Summit
outcome were a logical continuation of this process. We
see our deliberations today as yet another step towards
taking forward the United Nations peacekeeping review
process outcome.
As is rightly pointed out in the concept paper
(S/2016/927, annex) before us, today United Nations
missions face enormous and often asymmetrical
challenges, including direct attacks by terrorist
groups. We commend the efforts of the Secretariat and
contributing States in enhancing the preparedness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to face these
14/77

07/11/2016

threats. However, a lot more has to be done. In this
regard, I would like to highlight the following points.
First, as an active troop- and police-contributing
country, Ukraine attaches great importance to the issue
of adequate force generation, which remains a challenge
for United Nations peace operations. Ukraine strongly
intends to extend the geography of its Blue Helmets’
participation in United Nations missions. Following
the 2015 high-level Summit, Ukraine has submitted its
respective pledge to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System.
Secondly, we support the need for a better integration
of modern technology and intelligence capabilities into
peace operations. We call on peacekeeping operation
host countries to give due consideration to this
certainly positive practical step aimed at enhancing the
efficiency of peacekeeping activities.
At the same time, all the United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding review outcomes that
I have mentioned focus on a people-centred approach.
Therefore, thirdly, the protection of civilians is often
decisive for the success and legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
My country is committed to the policy under which
the protection of civilians is an overarching goal of
United Nations peacekeeping. In May, Ukraine joined
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians, a
guideline based on a premise that peacekeepers must
protect civilians from the threat of physical violence,
including terrorist threats.
It is also important that troop-contributing
countries be provided with comprehensive, sufficient
and timely information on the security situation on
the ground. That is crucial if peacekeeping operation
personnel are to be well prepared, including for
making prompt decisions on the use of force in cases
of imminent terrorist threats or threats to the civilian
population. As a matter of principle, every uniformed
peacekeeper who witnesses violence against a civilian
should not hesitate to do everything possible to stop it.
In the same context, let note the importance of
drawing the right lessons from the violence in Juba in
July and the way the Mission in South Sudan responded
to it — especially helpful for preventing similar
situations from occurring in the future, wherever
United Nations peacekeepers are deployed, and for
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7802

maintaining the credibility of, and confidence towards,
the United Nations among the local population.

to respond promptly and efficiently to new challenges
and circumstances.

Fourthly, at the current stage, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are not suited for carrying
out full-fledged counterterrorist measures. Indeed,
counter-terrorist activities are a direct responsibility
of each and every Government. Asymmetrical
terrorist tactics not only threaten the population and
peacekeeping personnel directly, but also target the
critical infrastructure of host countries. In that regard,
States suffering from terrorist activities should be
provided with the necessary advice and expertise to
develop or improve their relevant capabilities and
strategies. Peacekeeping operations should play their
part in that process.

Ukraine has learned lessons from its own
experience of asymmetrical threats — the terrorist
component of the hybrid war waged against Ukraine
is evident. According to reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) on the situation in Ukraine, civilians have
paid the greatest price for this conflict. Since 2014,
OHCHR recorded 9,640 people killed — including up
to 2,000 civilians — and 22,431 injured. The situation
in Ukraine effectively proves that terrorism can be used
as an element of hybrid war against sovereign States.

Another important aspect is the mandates given
to peacekeeping operations. We believe that missions
should be provided with clear, coherent, achievable
and, at the same time, resilient mandates, sufficient to
ensure security and public order, including stopping
the illegal inflow of weapons and mercenaries. Given
that the security situation on the ground could change
swiftly and dramatically, such mandates must include
provisions that enable peacekeeping operations to use
force when there is a direct threat to its personnel or
civilians, including terrorist threats. In that regard,
the role of the Security Council is indispensable. Clear
mandates is a primary precondition for the efficiency of
peace operations.
Peace missions also need means and resources for
the effective monitoring and verification of ceasefires,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons and full disarmament
under the United Nations disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration standards. Sustainable de-escalation
and implementation of other elements of peaceful
settlement and peacebuilding, including holding
elections, are not possible without a robust international
security presence that can ensure and monitor the
implementation of all security-related provisions until
legitimate law-enforcement institutions are established.
We believe that, when drafting missions’ mandates,
we should avoid sticking to the already outdated
approach that deems most modern conflicts internal in
nature. The objective reality is that most of them are,
if not of inter-State, then definitely of cross-border or
hybrid nature. Those changes in the nature of conflicts
necessitate a review of the ability of the United Nations

Last but not least, we believe that the United Nations
should build and enhance its strategic partnership
with regional organizations and work alongside
with them, while sharing its unique experience in
peacekeeping activities. In that regard, we see the
potential for establishing closer United Nations ties
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) that will contribute to the OSCE peace
activities on the ground, especially when missions of
that regional organization are deployed in an insecure
environment. Ukraine also welcomes the initiative to
appoint a United Nations Secretariat liaison on peace
and security in Vienna, which could contribute to
greater cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE on enhancing the latter’s ability to enforce and
keep peace whenever such a need arises.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s
unwavering commitment to the flagship activity of the
United Nations for the years to come.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I want to
thank Minister Ndiaye and Senegal for highlighting
the risks posed by extremists and militia to civilians
and to peacekeepers. I think one can tell by the packed
Chamber that this conversation is overdue, and we
really thank him for leading and putting the issue on
the map. Although the Council today will not hear the
voices of peacekeepers and civilians who are vulnerable
to asymmetric threats, surely, if they were here, they
would thank him as well.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson, Secretary-General Jean of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Under-SecretaryGeneral Fedotov, Assistant Secretary-General Laborde
and Mr. Boutellis for their very informative briefings.

16-3637515/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

This is not an academic debate. Just yesterday,
as others have noted, a mine reportedly killed a
Togolese peacekeeper in and two civilians in Mali.
The United States condemns that attack and we
extend our deepest condolences to the victims and
to the Governments of Mali and Togo. Right now,
peacekeepers in places like Mali, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Golan operate under
the daily threat of asymmetric warfare. The United
States recognizes those peacekeepers for deploying to
some of the world’s least secure States. Their service
is vital to international peace and security, and when
the goals of their missions — supporting political
processes, strengthening State institutions, protecting
civilians — run counter to the goals of non-State armed
groups, peacekeeping operations are vulnerable.
I want to make the case today that peacekeeping
missions must be better prepared to operate where
groups target civilians and peacekeepers. That means
being prepared to use robust force to carry out their
mandates, which includes protecting civilians when
authorized by the Security Council to do so. That requires
not just better equipment and training for peacekeepers
but more systemic reform in how we on the Council and
the United Nations manage peacekeeping operations.
First of all, I would like to comment on the role
of peacekeepers themselves. Some Member States
today will say that United Nations peacekeepers simply
should not be asked to protect civilians from terrorists
or militia. They argue that regional organizations or
other coalitions should shoulder that responsibility. I
want to say that those who make that argument have
a point. Far too often, United Nations peacekeeping
operations do not have the equipment, the training,
the logistics, the intelligence or the leadership needed
to protect themselves, never mind civilians, against
groups prepared to bomb and kill civilians as part of
their fight. But the solution cannot be only to tell the
United Nations to hunker down and wait for someone
else to take care of the problem, because the fact is that
United Nations peacekeepers are sometimes the only
forces present to help civilians in need.
The Security Council deployed peacekeeping
missions with mandates to protect civilians in places
like Mali and the Central African Republican because
countless people needed urgent help, notwithstanding
the important initiative that regional forces had shown
in both of those countries, which themselves took on
16/77

07/11/2016

great risks and faced very difficult circumstances
operating under various flags.
The Council judged that the United Nations was best
placed to organize and deploy a sustained multinational
force with enough capabilities to make a difference.
For now, the reality is that the Council will continue
to deploy United Nations peacekeeping missions to
fragile and insecure environments to protect civilians.
And, as extremist groups increasingly take advantage
of these weak States to find safe havens, peacekeepers
will need to be ready to respond, or their attackers
will feel a growing sense of impunity. To clarify, we,
the United States, do not believe that United Nations
peacekeepers can or should become offensive counterterrorism forces. We know that that is unrealistic. But
the United Nations cannot walk away because there is
a terrorist threat where peacekeepers are deployed. As
an international community, we do not have that option.
United Nations peacekeeping missions should
be fully prepared to protect civilians when terrorists
arrive in a town and start shooting civilians. They
should be prepared to protect themselves when the
United Nations knows that terrorists are preparing to
launch attacks against its own personnel. This is not a
radical idea. The United Nations own guidance already
explicitly provides for it. We in the Council annually
renew mandates for forces that we know are present
where terrorists are present.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) shows how
peacekeeping missions have to adapt. When it was
authorized and deployed, in 2013, MINUSMA was
intended to stabilize the peace in Mali after extremist
groups had seized approximately half of the country’s
territory. Yet the peace process has faltered. There
has not been full implementation, and terrorist groups
like Ansar Dine have continued to act as spoilers and
attack civilians and United Nations troops. In many
parts of Mali, the country’s people are now looking to
MINUSMA to protect them rather than Government
forces. MINUSMA’s troop-contributing countries are
taking enormous risks to support the vital Mission
and they have our eternal gratitude. Mali is the
deadliest peacekeeping operation in the world, with
65 peacekeepers killed by hostile action just since
1 January and 139 peacekeepers killed since 2013.
MINUSMA shows the way in which we are
all falling short in meeting the complex challenge.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Mission has dire gaps in its capabilities, which
undermine its ability to respond to terrorist attacks.
Many contingents do not bring suitably armoured
vehicles to protect against improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and conduct mobile patrols. We Member
States must urgently and durably address the pending
shortage of helicopters, which could mean significant
delays in medical and casualty evacuations. Outmoded
logistics mean that the Mission struggles to deliver
food, water and ammunition across long supply lines to
remote bases. While we greatly appreciate that troopcontributors have improved MINUSMA’s intelligence
capabilities, troops at many of the force’s bases still
do not have the equipment to know which groups are
preparing to attack the Mission, or from where. I know
that the Council members who visited Mali heard this
first-hand from the forces.
This brings me to my second point. The
Secretariat, troop- and police contributing countries
and Governments like mine that train and equip
peacekeepers need to work together to prepare missions
to repel attacks on the United Nations and civilians.
Addressing such gaps starts with deploying troops
that are better equipped and trained to operate in
unstable environments in the first place. That is why
the United States Government is providing counterIED training, contributing logistics capabilities, like
airlift to peace operations, and partnering with the
United Nations to provide better technology for troops
to communicate and use geographical data to improve
decision-making. In that regard, new technologies can
be helpful. For example, unmanned aerial systems
could allow peacekeepers to detect threats earlier and
monitor critical supply lines while keeping troops out
of the firing line. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has used such unmanned systems to help the
Government track armed groups and plan operations
that help protect civilians from imminent attack.
We know that, here at the United Nations, some
continue to be sceptical and worry that this technology
will be too intrusive. Peacekeeping missions, however,
share the information that they gather with host
countries — it is important to stress. We also must
note that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is addressing concerns about the storage and security
of the information collected, which has also generated
concern. Even as we address these concerns together
through more consultation and transparency, we cannot

S/PV.7802

lose sight of the fact that the benefits of unmanned
aerial systems are lifesaving for both civilians and
peacekeepers. We as members of the Council should
encourage the United Nations, troop-contributing
countries and host Governments to deploy these
systems. Our peacekeepers, we know, are often in
impossibly difficult circumstances. The least that we
can do here back in New York is reduce their sense
of blindness. Over the past 15 months, starting with
the first-ever leaders’ summit on United Nations
peacekeeping, Member States have also pledged more
than 55,000 new troops and police officers, including
new medical, aviation and engineering capabilities.
These collective efforts to improve peacekeeping have
generated a new reserve on which the United Nations can
draw to replace units unprepared to execute mandated
tasks. Accordingly, when the United Nations observes
a pattern of underperformance or an egregious failure
to act by peacekeepers, the Secretary-General should
repatriate and replace the contingent.
Looking beyond equipment and training,
the proliferation of asymmetric threats against
peacekeeping operations will also require an evolution
in peacekeeping leadership. In the field, Force
Commanders should be able to expect that every
contingent in a mission will be ready and willing to
respond when a terrorist unexpectedly strikes or
when the opportunity to head off an imminent attack
presents itself. Instead of relying on military responses
to asymmetric threats, missions should, as others have
noted, consider expanding their relationships with local
populations. For example, peacekeeping missions could
broaden outreach to faith leaders, local officials and
other members of civil society, while helping address
suspicions about the United Nations role and giving
peacekeepers better insight into threats on the ground.
Peacekeeping missions should of course be able to draw
upon the counter-terrorism resources within the United
Nations system. We appreciate that Assistant SecretaryGeneral Laborde of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) could join us here. We hope that
CTED can work with other United Nations agencies to
deploy experts in preventing violent extremisms and
assist Force Commanders and Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, on 12 October, militias from the
Séléka coalition reportedly attacked civilians near the
town of Kaga-Bandoro in the Central African Republic.

16-3637517/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

One witness, a 40-year-old woman named Marcelline,
recalled,
“[w]e were in the house when suddenly the Séléka
arrived and set it on fire. They killed my uncle and
stabbed my brother to death”.
Another 48-year-old-resident, named Yongon,
told a journalist that he ran past a body with its head
cut off, as he searched for cover. Looking to escape
the violence, people like Marcelline and Yongon fled
towards the safest place that they could find, a base
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
In that case the peacekeepers responded, firing on the
Séléka until the United Nations had repelled the militia.
This is of course just one case. In far too many others,
United Nations troops did not answer similar calls for
help.
The incident in Kaga-Bandoro shows that
when violence comes, people still desperately look
desperately to the United Nations to help keep them
safe. More important, it shows that when peacekeepers
act, they save lives. We must not let asymmetrical
threats keep peacekeepers from taking such action to
protect the vulnerable.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by thanking you, Mr. Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal, President of the Security Council
for this month, for having organized this open debate
to allow the Council to address the complex subject of
the maintenance of international peace in asymmetrical
situations. I also thank all the briefers — Ms. Jean,
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Laborde and Mr. Boutellis — for their
constructive ideas and suggestions.
I would also like to reiterate Spain’s strong
condemnation of the terrorist attack yesterday on a
unit of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), close to the
town of Douentza, and also the attack on 4 November
in northern Mali. We would like to express our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of Mali, Togo and France, and to the
United Nations.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the delegation of the European
Union. We wish to make the following comments in our
national capacity.
18/77

07/11/2016

Peacekeeping operations are a crucial tool in
achieving international peace and security, and they
prove their worth every day. In recent years, we have
seen important changes in the global security situation
that have compelled us all to adapt. Peacekeeping
operations have also been affected by those changes.
We commend the progress made in implementing
the recommendations for the reform of peacekeeping
operations. However, the increasing complexity of
their functions and of the security contexts in which
new missions are deployed requires that we deepen our
collective thinking about whether they are prepared to
act effectively in the new contexts.
We agree with the observation of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
that peacekeeping operations are not a suitable
instrument for carrying out military counter-terrorist
operations. At the same time, many peacekeeping
operations are now deployed in operative settings
where, in addition to the complexity of the political
processes, there are considerable asymmetric threats and
terrorism. Those are specific problems that cannot be
ignored. We are all responsible for resolving them with
a view to ensuring the protection of the contingents and
making it possible for them to carry out their mandate
effectively. To that end, we must begin by giving those
operations the necessary specific capacities.
Recent experience has shown us that the intelligence
and mobility capacities adapted to such contexts play
a vital role, as do the means and technologies used to
protect the contingents. They provide greater knowledge
and enable us to anticipate threats and maximize
the impact of their work. In that regard, we note the
fundamental role that the All Sources Information
Fusion Unit has played in the proper functioning of
MINUSMA. Similarly, specific training is vital. Spain
has offered, in a timely manner and on request, training
in protection against improvised explosive devices.
The armies of numerous countries, such as Lebanon,
Afghanistan, Colombia and Peru, have benefited.
A clear and precise mandate and rules of engagement
are also necessary. We support the efforts being made
by the Secretariat to modernize, streamline and adapt
the procedures for bidding and force generation. It is a
bottleneck that needs to be addressed immediately. The
existing procedures are designed for a static model of
peacekeeping operation and are applied with difficulty
in highly volatile situations. That is why we commend
the new initiatives of the Secretariat. Similarly, we
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

need to make progress in decentralized management,
delegating more authority to the heads of missions and
giving them greater autonomy.
As we have previously said, the protection of
civilians is an essential and complex task. Its success
is fundamental for the credibility of the operations
themselves and of the international community. We
must focus on effective implementation of the mandates
for the protection of civilians on the ground, which is
made particularly difficult in the new security contexts.
The use of force for self-defence and in defence of
the mandate may require a robust mandate in those
contexts in order to truly protect civilians. That could
occasionally include a proactive, rather than a reactive,
approach when countering serious and imminent
threats. The autonomy of the Security Council to include
the necessary measures in the mandates that apply in
asymmetric contexts, in exceptional cases and always
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of peacekeeping operations,
must be respected. Training of contingents in the work
of protecting civilians is also vital, and it is an area that
we must continue to stress. We must also improve the
assessment mechanisms suited to such tasks.
All this requires a substantive and fluid dialogue
with the troop-contributing countries. Fostering such
dialogue was one of our campaign commitments when
we joined the Security Council in January 2015, and it
has been one of the priorities we have unquestionably
worked for throughout our term.
Developing local capacities to combat terrorist
threats, prevent radicalization or demobilize fighters
is a key element. The United Nations police could
contribute to supporting capacity-building for the
police forces of the host country with a view to them
operating more effectively and with increased security
in contexts where asymmetric threats are present, and
also to developing investigation capacities, such as
forensics.
In addressing asymmetric threats, we cannot limit
ourselves to focusing only on security. It is imperative
that we have a comprehensive focus that goes beyond
peacekeeping operations but should not be alien to them.
Political solutions are a central axis of peacekeeping
operations. Similarly, peacekeeping operations can
exercise their mediation and conflict prevention
capacities, contributing to combating radicalization
and violent extremism that can lead to terrorism.

S/PV.7802

To that end, we must insist on the need to maximize
the capacities of mission personnel to interact with local
communities and stakeholders. I believe that the police
forces under military dicipline, as is the case with the
Spanish Guardia Civil, have a very useful role to play
in that regard. The recent deployment of the Guardia
Civil in the framework of the European missions in
the Central African Republic has been a very positive
and rewarding experience, and it benefited from that
neighbourhood policing capacity to get closer to the
local population.
It must not be forgotten that the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in this
area is also crucial, given the positive role that women
and women’s organizations can play in combating
violent extremism. Likewise, it would behove us to
bolster the coordination of our work in those areas,
including programmes to prevent violent extremism,
which are being undertaken by the various units of the
United Nations in this context. Such coordination could
enhance mission planning.
In the context of the ideas I have just presented,
we hope that the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism will be implemented.
It envisages integrating the prevention of violent
extremism into the relevant activities of peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with their mandates. As I
stated at the outset, we agree that the peacekeeping
operations are not a suitable tool for the military
operations against terrorists, but it is clear — and
I believe the debate is proof of it — that they have
an important role to play in ending the scourge of
terrorism. In such joint efforts, I can assure the Council
that the international community will always have the
active cooperation and the firm commitment of Spain.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Senegalese presidency for holding such an important
debate on the role of peacekeeping operations in
confronting asymmetric threats. The changing security
environment and the changing nature of conflicts
in which United Nations missions are deployed
compel us to continuously review the peacekeeping
operations. Such review would enable the missions to
keep up with the security requirements imposed on the
international community.
The mandates of United Nations missions have
evolved from monitoring peace agreements between

16-3637519/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

international parties to dealing with internal conflicts.
The parties to such conflicts are made up of armed
groups that resort to asymmetric attacks against
civilians and peacekeeping operations and forces.
We must therefore review the ability of peacekeeping
operations to carry out their mandates in the light of
such dangers, and we must also review their existing
capabilities that would enable them to confront those
asymmetric dangers, whose nature and cause we must
seek to understand.
There are some similarities in the methods that
are used by the various armed groups, terrorists and
extremist organizations, such as the use of improvised
explosive devices. However, the desired objectives of
those groups often differ. In most cases, armed groups
are parties to a conflict of a political nature; their
aggressive attacks target uniformed forces, whether
those of the State or those of the United Nations. On the
other hand, operations carried out by terrorist groups or
organizations are considered criminal and motivated by
ideology, and they mainly target civilians. It is therefore
necessary, in addressing such attacks, to use a strategic
and comprehensive approach that includes countering
extremist and terrorist ideologies. With that in mind,
I would like to make the following specific points on
peace operations facing asymmetric threats.
First, peacekeeping operations are not charged
with executing counter-terrorism operations. Their
role in that regard is limited to enhancing the capacity
of States to regain security control, which they do
by supporting reform processes targeted at security
and judicial institutions. They assist in building the
necessary framework needed to promote the rule of law
so as to counter the extremism that leads to terrorism. In
addition, they implement disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, pursuant to the mandate
entrusted to the particular mission.
Secondly, we must enhance the security procedures
of peacekeeping operations and ensure that they are
equipped and prepared to protect personnel against
any danger that might arise. We should also ensure
that United Nations missions have adequate medical
capacities, most importantly the ability to conduct
medical evacuations. Such preparations must be
taken into consideration during the initial stages of
establishing a mandate. We must reinforce training and
security measures in order to address such dangers,
as well as prepare and organize refresher training,
20/77

07/11/2016

including simulations, at the headquarters of United
Nations missions.
Thirdly, confronting armed groups and attacks
and enhancing safety and security measures is not a
pretext for the use of force in an active or aggressive
manner, nor is it a justification for the use of certain
controversial methods that do not enjoy consensus
among Member States in peacekeeping operations,
such as the use of intelligence methods or modern
technology to gather information.
Fourthly, it is important to promote coordination
between the various United Nations agencies and
departments, especially between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as between peacekeeping
operations and United Nations offices around the
world, while also respecting the mandates entrusted to
each entity. Coordinated efforts must therefore rely on
the comparative advantage of each agency, ensuring the
effectiveness of the entire Organization. It is therefore
imperative to design peacekeeping mandates with a
view to contributing to settling the conflict politically
and not just managing it in the absence of a long-term
political horizon.
The added value of peacekeeping operations does
not lie in military action or managing the risks of
conflicts. Instead, it lies in establishing a strategic and
comprehensive approach to addressing the crisis — an
approach that ensures sustained peace. The only way
to ensure that United Nations forces are not targeted
or exposed to asymmetric attacks is to uphold the
neutrality of the United Nations and its peacekeeping
operations, while communicating with the parties
concerned so as to create common ground that can lead
to a peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for convening an open
debate on the timely topic of peace operations facing
asymmetric threats. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are a
key pillar in the maintenance of international peace
and security. As a member of the troop-contributors
committee, Japan contributes personnel, as do many
other Member States. The expectations for United
Nations peacekeeping are high, and its roles and
responsibilities have expanded and diversified over the
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

years. In that context, asymmetric threats have become
one of its major challenges.
Asymmetric threats in the form of physical
attacks against peacekeepers make the implementation
of peacekeeping mandates far more difficult for a
number of peacekeeping missions. One such mission
is the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), where
troops have been a target of attacks by terrorist groups.
Japan co-sponsored resolution 2295 (2016), which
requested MINUSMA to move to a more proactive
and robust posture in carrying out its mandate.
Furthermore, the resolution prioritized the protection
of civilians and the stabilization of areas where
civilians are at risk, including against asymmetric
threats. That includes improved intelligence capacities,
training and equipment to counter explosive devices,
secured logistical supply routes and improved medical
evacuation procedures. The resolution also clarifies the
Mission’s mandate with a view to ensuring the security
of personnel. Japan strongly hopes that those measures
will bring tangible results in improving the Mission’s
security and its capacity to implement its mandate on
the ground.
Japan concurs with the view expressed in the
Secretary-General’s report that United Nations peace
operations are not an appropriate tool for military
counter-terrorism operations (see S/2015/446). The
question, then, is how can we best enable missions to
implement their mandates in complex environments
where asymmetric threats exist? Certainly, the Security
Council should give a sufficiently robust mandate to
peacekeeping missions enabling them to ensure the
security of their personnel. Beyond that, however, how
robust a mission’s mandate should be for the protection
of civilians against asymmetric threats will have to
be studied on a case-by-case basis. It should take into
account the capacity of national security forces and
the presence and capacity of other international forces
complementing the national security forces, in parallel
to the United Nations mandated mission.
In the light of asymmetric threats, enhancing the
capacity of peacekeepers becomes more important than
ever. Insufficient capacity not only undermines the
ability to implement peacekeeping missions’ mandates,
but can also expose them to great risks. Communications
is an area where capacity could be improved. We
are currently supporting the United Nations Signals
Academy in Uganda in order to provide peacekeepers

S/PV.7802

with communications training that will enable them to
better gather and share essential information, which
is necessary for their own security and the effective
implementation of their mandates.
Even more important is the capacity-building of the
countries suffering from internal conflicts. As Foreign
Minister Fumio Kishida pointed out in the July open
debate (see S/PV.7750), the training of domestic police
forces is necessary to eradicate violence and terror. In
complex environments with asymmetrical threats, peace
is not achieved solely through peacekeeping operations
or their military components. In that understanding,
Japan has provided training for more than 20,000 police
officers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo over
the past 12 years, in collaboration with the police
forces of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Japan, together with the international community, will
continue to support institution-building in such sectors
as security, the judiciary and border control.
Furthermore, improved exchange of information
among the relevant institutions, including counterterrorism institutions, could lead to reduced risks for
peacekeepers. We believe that efforts, when combined,
could contribute significantly to the containment of
asymmetrical attacks. The efforts I have described
fit into Japan’s policy of seeking to contribute more
proactively to international peace, in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Japan will continue to be a strong
partner of United Nations peacekeeping operations
through our personnel on the ground and our support
for capacity-building.
In closing, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all field personnel serving in United
Nations peace operations and offer my deepest
condolences to the families of those who have made the
ultimate sacrifices in their lines of duty.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of the
Malaysian delegation, I join earlier speakers in thanking
you, Sir, and the Senegalese presidency for convening
this open debate. The significant number of high-level
participants is a testament to its importance. I also take
this opportunity to acknowledge the commendable
role that Senegal has played and continues to play as a
major troop- and police-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations.

16-3637521/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and all the
briefers for their valuable contributions and insights.
Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
famously said, “The United Nations was not created
to take mankind into paradise, but rather, to save
humanity from hell”. Since that time, the concept of
United Nations peacekeeping, which he pioneered, has
evolved into one of the most important instruments
available to the United Nations to support diplomatic
efforts in maintaining international peace and security.
It is clear that the need for United Nations peacekeeping
remains immensely pressing. In 1990, the total United
Nations peacekeeping deployment stood at roughly
70,000 personnel. Today, that figure stands at slightly
more than 116,000 personnel deployed in 16 active
missions, 9 of which are in Africa and out of which 5
are in francophone countries.
A key turning point in the evolution of traditional
United Nations peacekeeping mandates was the
inclusion of civilian protection elements as the core
mission mandate, first introduced by resolution 1270
(1999), concerning the situation in Sierra Leone. As
rightly noted, an increasing number of peacekeeping
mission, which have the protection of civilians as a core
mission mandate, are currently deployed in complex
geopolitical environments, including those that pose
significant asymmetric threats. The recent surge and
persistence of asymmetric threats against United
Nations peacekeepers complicate already precarious
security situations and threaten to unravel hard-won
gains and progress in the restoration of peace and
stability in concerned countries.
In the face of increasing asymmetric threats, one
approach could be to address such threats with similarly
asymmetrical thinking, focusing on such key areas as
networking, methods and ideologies. Another area of
priority should be to ensure that troops on the ground
are afforded the necessary and appropriate equipment
and training. On the other hand, new technologies that
could contribute to better intelligence and situational
awareness are critical. More opportunities for troopcontributing countries to partner with relevant donor
countries or institutions to equip troops with new,
specialized skills — for example, to detect and disarm
improvised explosive devices — are equally urgent.
Malaysia continues to believe that a holistic
approach is the best solution to containing asymmetric
threats. To that end, we reaffirm our support for and
22/77

07/11/2016

endorsement of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the priorities outlined in the Secretary-General’s
implementation report (S/2015/682). To further
contribute to this debate, Malaysia wishes to make the
following recommendations.
First, the host nation is encouraged to establish a
networking mechanism to allow information-sharing
with peacekeepers. This will assist in planning for
operations as well as in identifying possible threats
prior to the United Nations peacekeeping deployment.
Secondly, the host nation forces should be ready to
work hand in hand with United Nations peacekeeping
operations in addressing the threats. The host nations
force must be prepared from the beginning of the
deployment of peacekeeping operations to assume full
security responsibility for the missions.
Thirdly, the war on asymmetric threats will take
generations to resolve. The host nation should therefore
place greater emphasis on human resource development,
particularly focusing on young people and women. These
groups must be given the opportunity to participate
actively in any peace process and peacebuilding efforts
in order to make the process sustainable.
Fourthly, peacekeeping missions must be adaptable
and responsive to the various lessons learned in
past experiences in order to continue to improve
themselves in responding to new threats, including
asymmetric ones.
As a firm believer in multilateral approaches to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Malaysia has been an active contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping. Since the 1960s, just three years
after achieving independence, Malaysia has to date
participated in more than 30 peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia’s continuing
commitment and support.
In conclusion, let me pay tribute to the tireless and
dedicated efforts of the Blue Helmets serving around
the world. We salute them for their bravery, selfless
service and sacrifices.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Mr. Martins (Angola): Allow me to first
congratulate Senegal on assuming the presidency of the
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council and to commend the Senegalese delegation for
organizing this very timely debate on asymmetric threats
faced by United Nations peacekeeping or peacebuilding
operations — an issue of crucial importance to the
performance and future of peacekeeping missions. I
welcome and thank you, Minister Mankeur Ndiaye, for
presiding over this important debate, and the briefers
for their very insightful remarks.
We acknowledge with great concern the increased
targeting of peacekeeping missions amid asymmetric
conflicts involving Government forces and non-State
armed groups, in particular extremists and terrorist
organizations, and tactics used by them, often in the
form of hostage-taking, suicide bombings and the use
of improvised explosives devices, which are fuelled by
radical extremism, intolerance, hatred or sheer lack
of respect for fundamental human rights. This leads
to an extremely complex and unsafe environment for
United Nations peacekeeping missions to effectively
and successfully implement their mandates in the
protection of civilians and the mission’s integrity, the
promotion of peace solutions and political processes.
The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations made clear reference to the inability of
United Nations peacekeeping missions to engage in
military counter-terrorism operations due to their
inadequacy in responding to this type of assignment.
However, peace missions and operations, which are
usually working in hostile environments, are required
to deliver results, which is why there is the need to
urgently review their capacity to operate safely and
effectively while adjusting their postures to changing
needs. This implies adopting policies dealing with
political challenges arising from complex environments
and preventive efforts to deal with perceived threats.
First and foremost, the preventive efforts to be
adopted by peacekeeping operations should target
violent extremism. Peacekeeping and special political
missions must find political solutions to violent
extremism, be able to talk to all actors and try to identify
the more moderate voices among them on which to rely
in order to eventually move political processes forward.
In his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
the Secretary-General recommends to Member States
that they integrate preventing violent extremism into
relevant activities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in accordance
with their mandates, which calls for troop-contributing

S/PV.7802

countries to train their personnel to deal with these
issues. Despite the principal fact that confrontation is
outside the scope of peace operations, military tools
must not be discarded. Indeed, they must be used if
necessary to counter violent extremism, particularly in
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates.
Another crucial aspect of prevention touches upon the
provision of assistance to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes and security and defence
sector reform in case the peace missions have to develop
exit strategies. Such strategies are possible only when
consistent programmes empowering national armed
defence and security forces are effectively in place
and ready to deliver. In fact, we consider it crucial to
make redoubled efforts and assign adequate resources
to defence and security sector reform, which must be
the object of major attention in peacekeeping mandates.
The countries receiving peacekeeping missions must
gradually adjust their own armed forces’ and security
forces’ capacity to enable them to address the threat of
terrorists and extremists and permit peace missions to
formulate exit strategies.
By 2015, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations had already concluded that the deteriorating
security environment in which peace operations are
deployed, characterized by high-intensity conflict, and
the use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) — the
terrorist weapon of choice — could discourage Member
States from contributing to peace operations due to the
growing risks and threats of the use of such devices. In
the deadly events that we have recently seen in Mali and
in Somalia, such devices have become a major hindrance
to the implementation of peacekeeping mandates and a
major safety issue in the protection of civilians. Angola
supports the establishment of a comprehensive counterIED/asymmetrical-threat approach as a strategy
framework to respond to this deadly threat as such an
approach might help prevent vehicle-borne IED suicide
attacks against United Nations personnel and civilians.
Although United Nations peace missions are not
suited to engage in counter-terrorism, the United Nations
cannot turn its back when faced with asymmetric
threats. It is entitled to respond in order to fulfil its
core mandates of protecting civilians and facilitating
political processes. Some areas for strategic and
operational improvements have been identified, such as
better understanding of the context and the planning
of missions, including through operations with regional
organizations; clear mandates, appropriate postures,

16-3637523/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

adequate resourcing and capacity to operate in hostile
environments, all of which can be achieved through
better cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- contributing countries; special
emphasis on troop-contributing forces and countries and
host nations; appropriate support and predeployment
training; greater and innovative cooperation among
peacekeeping operations and counter-terrorism bodies;
developing intelligence-gathering capacities and
integrating them into mission structures as a crucial
component for the safety of peacekeepers and overall
success of peace operations; and, finally, establishing
an effective connection and relationship with local
populations as a central feature of missions’ mandates.
Angola believes that such a concerted effort
and holistic approach by peacekeeping missions and
peacebuilding agencies, coupled with the support
from host nations, civil society and the international
community at large and by shifting the focus from
military solutions to national political dialogue will
gradually generate solutions to asymmetrical threats.
In conclusion, we insist on the absolute need
to strengthen the capacities of national defence and
security forces as a prerequisite for a sustained and
sustainable solution to the security threats facing these
nations.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Senegal’s initiative in holding today’s
ministerial meeting. We welcome Foreign Minister
Ndiaye as he presides over this meeting. I wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Executive
Director Fedotov, Secretary-General Jean, Executive
Director Laborde and Director Boutellis for their
respective briefings.
At present, the international situation is undergoing
profound changes, and the environment and the tasks
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are facing
are getting increasingly complex. The formulation and
execution of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
are encountering serious challenges. The system of
peacekeeping operations needs to keep up with the
times and be better able to adapt to the changing
situation and actual needs.
Today’s open meeting is most timely. It is hoped that
all parties will take full advantage of it so as to engage in
an in-depth reflection on the situations, tasks and future
developments facing United Nations peacekeeping
24/77

07/11/2016

operations with ideas for further improvement. China
wishes to elaborate on the following points.
First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the three principles
governing peacekeeping operations, namely, the
consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force
except for self-defence and defence of mandates, are
the cornerstones of peacekeeping operations to which
we must commit ourselves. The purpose of deploying
peacekeeping operations is to help host countries
establish and maintain a sustainable environment
of peace so as to create conditions for the political
settlement of disputes. Adequate cooperation on the
part of host country Governments is an important
prerequisite in ensuring that peacekeeping operations
achieve their goals. Conditions vary from one host
country to another and circumstances change constantly.
It is therefore essential to adequately respect the host
country’s sovereignty and, in keeping with changing
circumstances, strengthen communication with the
host country regarding the peacekeeping operation’s
deployment timeline and adjustment of the mandate,
while fully heeding the opinion of the host country.
Once the situation changes and the host country
requests the withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation,
the Secretariat should establish, under the Council’s
political guidance, a specific withdrawal timetable and
avoid an open-ended stay in the host country.
Secondly, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
should be explicit and operable, with a clear focus.
Mandates are the basis and guide for peacekeeping
operations in conducting operations, as well as an
important factor with an impact on the efficacy of an
operation.
In
changing
circumstances,
peacekeeping
missions face a wide array of factors that affect their
performance. When formulating or renewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, it is essential to
comprehensively take into account the priority needs
and prevailing circumstances in host countries and the
ability of troop-contributing countries (TCCs), while
focusing on the central task of the maintenance of peace.
It is essential to ensure that mandates are explicit, clear
and operable, and, in keeping with dynamic demands,
that they continually adjust to the priority tasks and
focus of the work of the various stages.
Missions are there to assist in rebuilding the host
country, and therefore adequate attention should be
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7802

afforded to the host country’s ownership, while focusing
on the host country’s “blood-generating function and
avoiding attempts to be all-encompassing, which will
result only in diverting peacekeeping resources from the
central goal of the maintenance of peace, thus affecting
the overall effects of the peacekeeping operation.

situations, enhance pre-warning capabilities against
security threats and internal information sharing and
ensure that security protection, adequate equipment
and resources are put in place, as well as strengthen
medical rescue and evacuation capabilities in high-risk
emergency environments.

Terrorism is a common threat faced by the
international community. China understands the
desire on the part of some countries that hope that
peacekeeping operations play a greater role in counterterrorism efforts. Peacekeeping missions can indeed
act in accordance with Council mandates and, where
necessary, help host countries strengthen capacitybuilding on counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen logistical
support. The peacekeeping budget for the year 20162017, approved by the General Assembly in June,
amounted to $7.87 billion. As the user and manager of
such a large amount of resources, the Secretariat must
improve its management level and efficiency, optimize
the logistics support mechanism and demonstrate its
responsible attitude towards the entire membership
by ensuring that peacekeeping resources are used
optimally, while eliminating waste.

Thirdly, the Secretariat should proceed from the
overall long-term interests of peacekeeping operations
and comprehensively examine new situations and
new challenges in peacekeeping operations. It should
seriously summarize experiences and lessons learned
and grasp crucial links with a view to systematically
improving peacekeeping operations and strengthening
their efficacy and capacity to deal with complex
situations.
First, it is essential to improve the entire
command system. The Headquarters is charged with the
strategic planning and designing of the peacekeeping
operations system, with a focus on situation analysis
and providing policy guidance to various missions. It
is necessary to avoid replacing macro-management
with micro-interventions. It is essential to focus on
strengthening the contingent command capability of
the various missions and the coordinated action among
the military, police and civilian components of missions
with the aim of forming synergies. That is particularly
important for the overall efficacy and performance of
missions in emergency situations.
Secondly, it is also important to strengthen the
security, early-warning and protection capabilities
of peacekeepers. According to statistics provided by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
year 2015 alone, a total of 129 peacekeepers paid the
ultimate price. In the first eight months of this year,
that number had already reached 69. The safety and
security of peacekeepers must be afforded greater
attention. The Secretariat and special missions should
formulate detailed security and safety guidelines
and, in coordination with TCCs and host countries,
strengthen follow-up and assessment of local security

In areas such as procurement and outsourcing of
services and the formulation of budgets, the related
regulations and systems must be strictly abided by. It is
essential that precious peacekeeping resources be used
with maximum efficiency. Adequate and responsive
predeployment training, as well as necessary equipment
and other resources, will guarantee the implementation
of peacekeeping operation mandates. It is essential to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are afforded the
required training and resources to ensure that they
have the capabilities necessary for the implementation
of their mandates. It is essential to pay attention to
the actual difficulties faced by TCCs from developing
countries and encourage strengthened capacitybuilding on the part of those countries through bilateral
and multilateral cooperation.
Fourthly, it is important to recognize the role of
TCCs. Peacekeeping forces represent the fundamental
guarantee of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
TCCs and police-contributing countries (PCCs) are the
main actors in carrying out peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeepers perform tasks on the front lines, despite
all difficulties and dangers, to assist the United Nations
in discharging its Charter-based responsibilities, while
making important contributions and sacrifices.
The long-term development of United Nations
peacekeeping operations also depends on the efforts
of TCCs and PCCs. TCCs must be accorded the
respect and recognition they deserve, or the longterm development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations will be negatively affected. It is essential
to strengthen communications among the Security

16-3637525/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs, give full play to
the role of the General Assembly’s Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations as the deliberative organ
on peacekeeping policies, and amplify the voice of the
TCCs in peacekeeping affairs.
China has always firmly supported and actively
participated in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have dispatched a total of more than
30,000 peacekeepers. As we speak, more than 2,600 of
them are serving in 11 peacekeeping missions. China
is the largest TCC among the Council’s permanent
members, and the second-largest financial contributor
to the peacekeeping budget. China is comprehensively
implementing the commitments declared by Chinese
leaders to further support United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have achieved important progress in areas
including the generation of standby forces, dispatching
helicopter squadrons and the training of peacekeepers
from various countries and helping African countries
strengthen peacekeeping capacity-building. China
stands ready to work with the vast United Nations
membership in the concerted common effort to further
improve the United Nations peacekeeping system in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by warmly thanking the Senegalese presidency
for convening this meeting on a very important topic
for the Security Council and for the United Nations
in general. I also to thank today’s briefers: Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General of the United
Nations; Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary-General of
the International Organization of La Francophonie;
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr.Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Mr. Arthur
Boutellis, Director of the Brian Urquhart Centre for
Peace Operations.
As we have just heard, the United Nations must
face up to increasingly complex and non-permissive
environments as they engage in actions in the field.
That has been true for some time now for many special
political missions, which operate in particularly
difficult circumstances in terms of security. That has
been the case for over 14 years in Afghanistan, where
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
has supported the restoration of governance and has
done so faced with the threat of the Taliban and other
terrorist groups. And the same can be said for the
26/77

07/11/2016

United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the African
Union Mission to Somalia.
In the framework of peacekeeping operations, the
prevailing need of protecting civilians is increasingly
confronted by asymmetrical threats. That is
particularly the case in Mali, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) must face such threats while
it focuses on the protection of civilians and supports
the peace process. The adoption of a robust posture is
clearly not just desirable, but indispensable. In Security
Council resolution 2295 (2016), the Council conferred
the necessary mandate upon MINUSMA in order to
be able to respond to the threats it faces and to protect
Blue Helmets.
In that regard, I wish to pay tribute once again to
the soldiers of MINUSMA and to all the soldiers of
peacekeeping operations, who perform their duties
in particularly difficult conditions. In particular
today, I am thinking about the Togolese contingent of
MINUSMA, saddened by the death of one Blue Helmet,
the wounding of several of his comrades and the death
of several Malian civilians who died in those attacks. I
extend the condolences of France to the families of the
victims and to the authorities of Togo and Mali.
MINUSMA is not alone in operating in a very
complex theatre, and it can count on the full support
of France. Every day, the Barkhane Force carries out
counter-terrorism operations in Mali, and more widely
in the Sahel to support States in the region. It does so
while simultaneously providing support to MINUSMA
and by working to improve security of the Blue Helmets.
The need to face such asymmetrical threats should
shape our deployment of peacekeeping operations and
also the way in which they function. There is a need to
make efforts along those lines on several fronts.
First, with regard to planning, an in-depth analysis
upstream of deployment would allow us to properly
identify threats and challenges that peacekeeping
operations must respond to. The establishment of the
Strategic Force Generation and Capabilities Planning
Cell, as proposed by the Secretary-General and to which
France provides financial support, should provide us
with a body that is in place to respond to the need for
improved planning.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, building on that, we need to properly
define the mandates and the stance to be adopted by
peacekeeping operations. The Security Council must
give a clear mandate to peacekeeping operations in
terms of the use of force as and when that may be
necessary. The goal is to foster a robust posture that
will allow for a response to threats and also allow the
mandate to be properly implemented while such threats
are grappled with. That has been the step taken by the
Council in terms of MINUSMA, but also in the case of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo where we
mandated an Intervention Brigade.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must be equipped
with appropriate resources, whether those be human
resources or the necessary equipment in order to fulfil
their mandate. Intelligence-gathering and analysis
capacity are vital to anticipate and understand the
threats on the ground. The development of autonomous
intelligence-gathering capacities must contribute along
those lines. We must also strengthening the security
of United Nations staff on the ground, including by
demining. In that regard, I wish to commend action
undertaken by the United Nations Mine Action Service
in many theatres.
Finally, given the urgency of certain situations, it
is important to think about the introduction of reactive
procedures that would equip the contingents with
appropriate matériel.
Having troops who speak the local languages
is also an essential factor, as underscored at the
ministerial conference on peacekeeping in Francophone
environments in Paris. That conference brought
together several French-speaking and non-French
speaking troop-contributing countries to identify
necessary strategies in order to better respond to the
specific threats posed in theatres operation in the
French-speaking world. That was not just an issue of
the language, but also force generation, the provision
of equipment and crisis emergence. I would like to pay
particular tribute to the efforts made by the International
Organization of La Francophonie and the personal
engagement of its Secretary-General to uphold the role
of the Francophone community as a key actor in the
international community, including in international
peace and security.
Responding to all the challenges that lie before
us requires deepening the triangular dialogue on

S/PV.7802

cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. The establishment of a Strategic Force
Generation and Capabilities Planning Cell, a step that
we support, will contribute to that cooperation.
Responding to asymmetrical threats, but also
permanently reducing them, means that we have
to identify the root causes and the mechanisms to
identify early warning signs and to act in response in
advance. That involves thinking about the way in which
the United Nations system, at all levels, takes into
account the threat of violent extremism. In that regard,
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism proposes useful and very relevant
recommendations.
The theatres where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are particularly vulnerable to the threat of
violent extremism, given the political, security and,
indeed, economic and social challenges that loom
over them. That point that has been made repeatedly.
Given the reality with which we are confronted,
we need to better understand that phenomenon and
craft appropriate responses in those theatres, always
upholding human rights. To that end, we would like
to encourage the strengthening of contacts among
peacekeeping operations, United Nations agencies
and th relevant United Nations bodies on combating
violent extremism, especially the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. That dimension must
be taken into account in a more systematic fashion in the
support given to host countries — for example, in the
framework of national programmes on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, or support to security
sector reform. The exchange of good practices should
be encouraged in order to help host countries to better
face that scourge.
Peacekeeping operations have to deal with
increasingly complex contexts and challenges. They
are all the more necessary for protecting civilian
populations and in maintaining international peace
and security. France will continue to participate and
to very actively support United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we will play our full part in the quest
for greater effectiveness and greater relevance of such
operations. That is in fact one of the core goals of the
Organization.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also

16-3637527/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

thank the briefers for their presentations: Mr. Eliasson,
Ms. Jean, Mr. Laborde. Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Boutellis.
There can be no doubt that in recent times
peacekeeping operations find themselves deployed in
increasingly complex theatres, in which armed groups
continue to pursue their criminal objectives through
the use of asymmetrical and terrorist tactics. They
deliberately target civilians and also the staff of United
Nations missions, and they are doing so at an ever
greater rate. Against that backdrop, we pay tribute to
each and everyone of those members of peacekeeping
operations in the United Nations who have lost their lives
as a result of the such attacks. We also acknowledge the
heroic work of the many thousands of contingents who
daily risk their lives to protect civilians in extremely
complex and dangerous environments.
This reality is shared by several United Nations
peacekeeping operations, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, among others, which poses a
great challenge not only to United Nations staff but also
to the implementation of mandates.
As the the concept note prepared by Senegal
(S/2016/927, annex) correctly mentions, the purpose
of this debate is not about mandating peacekeeping
operations to engage in military combat against
terrorism. On the contrary, the objective of this debate
is to address the subject of adapting the presence of
peacekeeping operations to such scenarios, ensuring
that they have the skills needed to operate safely and
that they can fully undertake their mandated tasks,
especially the protection of civilians.
Uruguay understands that it is necessary to make
a clear distinction between two concepts: the first is
protection against asymmetric or terrorist threats
present in the operating environment of peacekeeping
operations; the second is the fight against terrorism,
including
counter-terrorist
offensive
military
operations. In that regard, I reiterate the statement
made in the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations to the effect that “United Nations
troops should not undertake military counterterrorism
operations” (S/2015/446, p. 12) and that
28/77

07/11/2016

“[w]here a parallel force is engaged in offensive
combat operations it is important for United
Nations peacekeeping operations to maintain a
clear division of labour and distinction of roles”
(ibid.).
In the view of my delegation, the proactive
engagement of a peacekeeping operation must not be
manifested in direct actions or attacks in the fight
against terrorism because that way would alter their
nature and purposes. For these reasons, Uruguay does
not believe it appropriate to give any peacekeeping
operation a mandate to engage in military activities
against terrorism or asymmetric threats.
Now, the question arises: If peacekeeping
operations are not suitable to undertake military
activities against terrorism or asymmetric threats,
who or what should do so? First, the State affected
must act through its relevant national institutions.
Secondly, if the State is not able to carry forward the
fight against terrorism, resort may be made to the
use of an instrument supplementary to the presence
of a peacekeeping operation that can combat terrorist
threats or asymmetrical — that is, a multinational force
equipped and trained to fight terrorism, and mandated
by the United Nations, could take charge of that task.
One example of the various tools available to United
Nations peacekeeping operation is the case of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is tasked,
inter alia, with reducing the threat of the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group and other armed opposition groups.
Thirdly, and as I shall note shortly, the peacekeeping
operation itself can play a role in support of development
and the strengthening of the institutional capacities of
the State in preventing terrorism.
It is evident that we must work to improve the
operational capacities of peacekeeping forces, which
would result in increased security for personnel and
greater efficiency in the implementation of the mandate,
particularly the task of protecting civilians. As noted in
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, Uruguay believes it critical for peacekeeping
operations be equipped with the capacity and training
required, which requires better equipment and training
oriented to the tasks to be undertaken. In addition, we
must ensure appropriate operational concepts and rules
of engagement, adjusted to the situation and existing
threats, that allow troops to protect themselves and
fulfil their mandates, exercising effective use of force
adjusted to international humanitarian law.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

In this sense, it is appropriate to thank and
congratulate the Secretariat — in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Integrated
Training Service — for their work to improve the
effectiveness of military operations and the training of
forces through the development of manuals for infantry
battalions and other units. My delegation would suggest
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in
collaboration with Member States, should also develop
tactics and techniques for the use of United Nations
peacekeeping forces against terrorists undertaking
asymmetric actions.
In addition, peacekeeping operations could benefit
directly from increased cooperation with United Nations
agencies engaged against terrorism, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, and other relevant organizations engaged
in the fight against terrorism. Dialogue and exchanges
of information can be very useful, especially during the
stages of planning or reviewing a mission.
Finally, peacekeeping operations can play a
support role in the development and strengthening of
the institutional capacities of the State in preventing
terrorism, especially through security sector and justice
reform. I would cite as one example the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, whose mandate includes
such tasks, including the provision of strategic and
technical advice to the authorities of the Central African
Republic in the design and implementation of a security
sector reform strategy; support for the authorities in the
development and implementation of a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme; and
support for the justice system.
Finally, I reiterate the importance that Uruguay
attaches to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations as the principal body to review questions
related to peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
and where Member States can discuss and move forward
in all aspects addressed in this debate.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and the other briefers for their valuable contributions

S/PV.7802

to the discussion on this issue of vital importance to
the Organization.
Peacekeeping is an essential tool in the United
Nations arsenal of measures to maintain international
peace and security, resolve conflicts and assist in
nation-building in the early post-crisis stage. Today,
however, United Nations peacekeeping operations
operate amid new challenges and asymmetrical threats,
including terrorist attacks on the civilian population
and peacekeepers, organized crime, illegal arms and
drug trafficking, and cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this
is not an exhaustive list, as the situation in countries
of deployment can change rapidly and each theatre of
action has its own characteristics. We should always
be prepared for the possibility that a conflict will
present new challenges. Regarding the recent sad news
from Mali, we would like to offer our sympathies to
the Governments of Mali and Togo and the families of
Malians and a peacekeeper from Togo who fell victim
to the latest attack.
The concept note (S/2016/927, annex) prepared
by the delegation of Senegal rightly notes that the
asymmetric threats to United Nations peacekeeping
operations have not appeared out of nowhere, but are
the result of the changing nature of conflicts. More
and more often, missions are working in environments
where at least one of the parties to the conflict is not a
State, whether we are talking about armed opposition,
illegal armed groups or even terrorists. We also see
cases where, in an area where a traditional confrontation
exists between two sides, a third one emerges that is not
under anyone’s control, as has happened, for example, in
the Golan Heights, which are now controlled by terrorist
and illegal armed groups. Such non-State actors are not
bound by any obligations, including under international
law, and they do not participate — and sometimes
cannot be induced to participate — in the peace process.
Of course, there can be no question that they will take
any responsibility for protecting civilians, and yet the
people living in the territory controlled by such groups
are at the epicentre of the conflict and mingled with the
insurgents, who can use people and infrastructure as
human shields.
As such situations grow and spread, a debate is
going on in the United Nations and the professional
community about what the conceptual foundation for
Blue Helmet operations should be, how they should
approach situations in which it is impossible to
distinguish fighters from civilians, the extent to which

16-3637529/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

they can use force and so forth. After all, United Nations
peacekeeping operations represent the Organization’s
ideals, and any mistake can have tragic consequences
and undermine its credibility. One of the concepts being
discussed is the so-called people-centred approach. We
believe that in such risky conditions, it is vital to ensure
that United Nations peacekeepers act with extreme
caution. It is more important than ever that they stick
to the basic principles of peacekeeping — the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence or to implement the Security
Council’s mandate. Otherwise, in cases where robust
and, especially, preventive responses to asymmetric
threats are sought, peacekeepers may end up becoming
directly involved in a conflict and accused of becoming
a party to it themselves. Needless to say, that is not the
way problems get solved. It can only worsen the risks to
the civilian population and the Blue Helmets themselves
and, incidentally, it can also raise questions about their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.
For example, many Member States and independent
experts who worked on preparing last year’s report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490) have come
to the conclusion that offensive and counter-terrorist
operations run the risk of retaliation and heavier losses
and are therefore unacceptable from the point of view
of United Nations peacekeeping. We agree with that.
Peacekeepers should not do the work of non-core
functions meant for specially trained national or regional
forces. Such activities are entirely consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations when they are conducted
at the invitation of the parties or in accordance with
a Security Council decision. Blue Helmets should be
deployed when they can provide effective assistance
while remaining neutral. The conditions for that should
be carefully defined. It is not acceptable to attempt
to use them to plug holes in situations where no one
else wants to be involved any more. And the problem
cannot be solved with quantitative indicators. At best,
such miscalculations can end up creating increasing
demands for Blue Helmets, and at worst can result in
increasing casualties in their ranks.
We firmly believe that in order to address
asymmetric threats adequately, it is essential to work
on improving peacekeeping processes and cooperation
with host countries. That means, first, strengthening
the security resources available to peacekeepers, and
then their ability to fulfil their mandates effectively.
30/77

07/11/2016

That cannot be done without proper planning when
a mission’s mandate is being developed, including
by setting realistic goals and timelines. That should
be backed up by sufficient funding, equipment and
professional training for peacekeepers and leadership
personnel. A lot of that could be done by the troopcontributing countries.
It is crucial to check their experience in handling
high-tech security tools. As we know, things do not
always go very smoothly in such areas. In that context,
it is essential to discuss contingents’ so-called active
security, that is, the collection and analysis of potential
threats. While that work is unquestionably important
to operational efforts on the ground, it should be done
only with the consent of the host country and in full
respect for its sovereignty. We should be discussing
that sensitive topic not only here in the Security
Council but also with the participation of countries
where peacekeeping operations are deployed, troop
contributors and, of course, the Secretariat, and the
most suitable forum for it is the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly.
One vital component without which the problem
of asymmetric threats cannot be solved is ensuring
effective cooperation with host countries — the national
stakeholders — and building constructive and mutually
respectful relations with them. Governments bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the people’s
safety, including from terrorist attacks, establishing
the political process, providing development and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. The job of
international assistance is to support local and regional
efforts, not replace them. We should be considering
the comprehensive support that countries need in order
to expand their capacity to address the root causes
of crises. That should include establishing a political
process, institution-building, creating development
programmes and training civilian personnel and
security forces.
In conclusion, it is sad to see the Ukrainian
delegation using any means to continue its efforts to
pursue its propagandistic goals in the Security Council.
Such attacks have nothing to do with the subject
of today’s debate and cast doubt on the Ukrainian
delegation’s ability to responsibly fulfil its duties as a
non-permanent member of the Council.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As President of
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Non-Aligned Movement, I have the honour to
speak today on its behalf. We would like to thank the
delegation of Senegal, especially Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, for organizing
today’s important debate. We are also grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director of
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis, Director of the
Brian Urquhart Center for Peacekeeping Operations for
their interventions.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
notes
that
peacekeeping has become the main activity of the
United Nations and highlights the fact that non-aligned
countries currently provide more than 88 per cent of the
peacekeeping troops on the ground, thereby contributing
significantly to the maintenance of international peace
and security under the Organization’s auspices. The
Non-Aligned Movement is deeply concerned about
the large number of deaths of peacekeeping personnel
in recent years, and urges the Secretariat and other
interested parties to make the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeeping staff a top priority.
In view of the deteriorating security situation in many
field missions, the Non-Aligned Movement stresses the
need for the United Nations to adopt effective security
and protection policies for peacekeeping personnel. In
view of the worsening situation in many field missions,
NAM also stresses the need for the United Nations
to develop effective security and protection policies
for peacekeeping personnel, and strongly condemns
the killing and kidnapping of, and selective acts of
aggression against, United Nations peacekeepers as
well as all acts of violence against them.
Aware of the risks inherent in the maintenance of
peace, NAM wishes to convey its deepest respect for
the memory of United Nations peacekeeping personnel
who lost their lives in the service of peace. Their
sacrifice must be lasting testimony to the unparalleled
work that they did for peace and stability.
The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to emphasize
that the establishment of any peacekeeping operation
or the extension of the mandate of such an operation
must be done with strict respect for the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as well

S/PV.7802

as for the principles that it has elaborated to regulate
such operations, which have become basic principles,
mainly, the consent of the parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in cases of self-defence.
These basic principles, which have guided United
Nations peacekeeping operations for five decades
now without any controversy, remain relevant and
must be preserved. We must also preserve respect
for the principles of sovereign equality, political
independence, the territorial integrity of all States and
non-interference in affairs that are essentially part of
the internal jurisdiction of States.
NAM believes that peacekeeping operations should
not be used as an alternative either to deal with the
root causes of conflicts or to manage them. Conflict
management must be based on and implemented
through political, social and development tools in order
to achieve a fluid transition to lasting peace, security
and sustainable development. I must also add that
exit strategies must always be agreed upon at the first
stage of mission planning and must be reviewed on
a periodic basis.
Although
information-gathering,
sometimes
called intelligence, can contribute to the security and
protection of peacekeeping personnel and civilians,
NAM recognizes that there remain valid and legitimate
concerns in this respect. The Movement praises the
commitment of the Secretariat and Member States in
this respect and stresses the need to reach a consensus
among Member States on this very important and delicate
topic in the framework of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations before continuing to develop
a policy framework.
NAM reiterates its position that the General
Assembly has the essential function within the United
Nations system of formulating concepts, policies and
budgetary questions related to peacekeeping. That is
why NAM reiterates that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is the only United Nations
forum that has the mandate of comprehensively
considering the issue of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects, and that the role of the
Committee continues to have great importance in the
process of drawing up strategic recommendations.
Likewise, the Movement stresses the importance of
the full participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in the formulation of policies and in the
decision-making process so as to collaboratively

16-3637531/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

07/11/2016

achieve the effectiveness required for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

operation. Failing that, the mission would become
involved in the conflict and a constant target of attacks.

NAM also highlights the need to establish
effective triangular cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
the Security Council. NAM also firmly supports the
complete reorganization of current modalities for
triangular cooperation in order for this cooperation
to be more results-oriented and more beneficial to all.
We are prepared to undertake cooperation with the
Secretariat and the Security Council to continue to
develop new modes of international cooperation that
would make it possible for both the parties concerned
and United Nations peacekeeping operations to benefit
from renewed and revitalized cooperation.

Likewise, in undertaking their functions,
peacekeeping operations must have clear mandates
approved by the Security Council with regard to the
protection of civilians, avoiding their involvement as a
party to the conflict. In this process, we must ensure that
peacekeeping operations have the necessary logistical
and technical training resources to carry out its complex
tasks. Under no circumstances can the United Nations
use electronic media to gather intelligence signals or to
detect radar or radio-electric waves emitted by the host
State or its neighbours, which would compromise the
confidentiality and security of the communications of
such States. The same applies to any other technology
or similarly invasive method, except when it has the
consent of the State concerned. It goes without saying
that information-gathering through covert actions, the
tapping of communications and the use of informant
networks is unacceptable and cannot take place been
under any circumstances.

In my national capacity, I wish to express our
condolences to the families of the victims of terrorist
attacks that took place on 6 November in Mali, and
our expressions of support and condolence to the
Governments of Mali and Togo, the Blue Helmets and
the French-led international force, which were the
target of violent acts.
Furthermore, Venezuela wishes to stress that
peacekeeping operations were not created to initiate or
relaunch political processes; administer conflicts where
there is no peace; or participate in military operations
against terrorist groups or take on the residual tasks of
anti-terrorist or other offensive operations undertaken
by ad hoc coalitions or by regional or subregional forces
that have withdrawn from the field.
Our delegation believes that the joint report of the
African Union and the United Nations on benchmarks
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia of 30 June 2015 established an
important precedent by determining that the security
situation on the ground was not yet appropriate for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. This parameter must be borne in mind in
assessing the potential deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in the field.
In this vein, we reaffirm the important responsibility
of the Secretariat, in the framework of the sequential
focus, to travel to the field beforehand and undertake an
in-depth analysis of the context of the conflict and the
priorities and intentions of the parties and other relevant
stakeholders in determining whether the security and
political conditions on the ground are appropriate for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
32/77

To conclude, we wish to reaffirm that sustained
peace and the well-being of peoples is achieved through
a political resolution to conflict and dealing with the
root causes. This should be the guiding light of our
efforts in the framework of the United Nations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for having convened this
important debate.
In the light of the time, I am shortening my
statement. I express my thanks to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the other briefers, and I pay tribute to all
United Nations peacekeepers, who do such vital work
in increasingly difficult circumstances.
Since the United Nations first invented
peacekeeping, the nature of conflicts has changed, and
with that change has come a dramatic change to the
risks that peacekeepers face. The threats that they now
face now are more complex and more lethal, ranging
from sophisticated spoilers who use terrorist tactics to
armed groups pursuing criminal objectives. The United
Kingdom agrees with the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are not suited to engage directly in military
counter-terrorism operations. But they do operate in
environments where asymmetric threats are high, so we
cannot turn away from those high-threat environments.
All too often, in fact, they are where the United Nations
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

is most needed. The issue at hand is how we operate
safely and effectively in such environments — how we
get better at understanding and predicting the threats
and how we get better at mitigating those threats.
The High-level Panel concluded that peacekeeping
missions lacked the specific equipment, intelligence,
logistics, capabilities and specialized military
preparation required to engage in military counterterrorism operations. We need to ensure that
peacekeeping operations have enough capability in
each of those areas to operate effectively in highthreat environments and to do what they can to
support broader capacity-building efforts in countering
violent extremism and terrorism. The framework
that we call the three “Ps” — planning, pledges
and performance — which was discussed at the
London peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting in
September, provides a good framework for addressing
those points.
Turning to the first “P”, in challenging environments
strengthened and coherent planning is crucial. The
whole United Nations system needs to come together
so that we have effective horizon-scanning and better
conflict analysis. With greater use of intelligence and
threat assessments and scenario-planning, peacekeeping
missions will be better prepared before they deploy and
will have systems in place to anticipate and react at the
operational and tactical levels once peacekeepers are
on the ground. Such enhanced planning also needs to
take account of parallel forces, where they exist. As
I have said, United Nations peacekeeping missions
should not themselves be mandated to conduct counterterrorism operations directly. But they need to be ready
to work alongside others more suited to address those
threats directly.
Secondly, on pledges, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is leading work through its
strategic force-generation and capabilities planning
cell and the peacekeeping capability readiness system,
which the United Kingdom supports, to increase the
pool of troops and police who are ready to deploy.
Capability gaps exist, and we need to fill them quickly.
We also need to get better at matching the experience
of troop-contributing countries with the areas where
they are deployed. The United Kingdom has offered
its engineering expertise where it is needed in South
Sudan and Somalia, and our medical expertise with
the forthcoming deployment of a field hospital in
South Sudan.

S/PV.7802

The third “P” is performance. Peacekeepers must
arrive properly trained and equipped to carry out their
mandated tasks. That means training to a consistent
standard and, in the context of this debate, emphasizing
the force-protection aspects of working in high-threat
environments. It should also be clear right from the start
what is expected of peacekeepers when they deploy to
an environment. As the Council, we need to get better
at engaging troop- and police-contributing countries
and, in turn, they need to come ready to share their
experience and knowledge.
Finally, there is perhaps a fourth “P” relevant to
today’s debate — the one that the Deputy SecretaryGeneral reminded us of: preventing violent extremism.
No matter how well trained and equipped peacekeepers
may be to cope in high-threat environments, their
preparation will help deal only with the symptoms of
violent extremism. Preventing violent extremism in the
first place will help deal with the causes. The United
Kingdom strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, and we
need to consider what more peacekeeping can do to
support that agenda while integrating the work of the
relevant United Nations bodies and, again, remembering
the importance of capacity-building and working with
host Governments to tackle extremism and terrorism
through security-sector reform, judicial reform and
strengthened rule of law.
Taken together, all those elements can help enable
peacekeeping to rise to the challenge of dealing with
asymmetrical threats.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Like my
colleague from the United Kingdom, I am also going
to shorten my statement. The full version will be
available on the website of the Permanent Mission of
New Zealand.
Let me begin by thanking Senegal for convening
this important discussion, and our briefers for the
information and analysis they have provided us today.
Others have covered the more general challenge
posed to peacekeepers in the dangerous and complex
environments in which many peacekeeping operations
take place. I want to highlight three aspects that we
consider warrant particular attention to try to ensure
that peacekeepers in such environments can operate as
safely and as effectively as possible.

16-3637533/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, it is vital that we provide peace operations
with clear and realistic mandates and that those
mandates be backed by appropriate concepts of
operations, clear rules of engagement and adequate
contingency planning. Peacekeepers must have clarity
about what role they should — and should not — be
playing in addressing the asymmetrical threats present
in their environment. I agree with others who say
that peacekeepers should not be involved in proactive
counter-terrorism or counter-insurgency activities. But
they will be required on occasion to take pre-emptive
steps to address imminent threats and to respond in
situations when United Nations personnel come under
attack. We have witnessed several examples in recent
years, perhaps most dramatically in the Golan Heights
in 2014, of what can happen when peacekeepers do
not have clear guidance on how to respond in such
situations. To ensure their readiness, we also see merit
in missions establishing processes to regularly test and
rehearse such scenarios.
Secondly, where asymmetrical threats are present,
we must ensure that peacekeepers are adequately
trained and equipped, and that missions are provided
with the necessary capabilities. Too often, that does not
happen. We must ensure that United Nations missions
are provided the necessary intelligence, logistics and
force-protection capabilities to ensure the safety and
security of their personnel. The use of intelligence and
surveillance capabilities assumes particular importance
in such environments, and are vital enablers for
peacekeepers in detecting and preventing threats to
both United Nations personnel and the civilians under
their protection. Such capabilities save lives, and we
need to move beyond the politics that currently restrict
their use.
Thirdly, the Security Council needs to provide
more meaningful oversight for those peacekeepers
deployed to environments where asymmetrical
threats are present. That need for more active Council
monitoring and management of situations of risk or
high or emerging risk led New Zealand to support the
establishment of regular situation-awareness briefings.
It is our hope that, by ensuring that Council members
are briefed on emerging threats to peacekeepers and the
civilians they are mandated to protect, those risks can
be more effectively managed.
The work of the Council and the peace operations
it mandates does not exist in a vacuum. In that regard,
it is important that the Security Council coordinate
34/77

07/11/2016

its work with other United Nations and international
entities active in counter-terrorism efforts, to ensure
complementarity of effort and avoid duplication.
Strengthened cooperation among the relevant agencies
to improve the ability of peace operations to function
more effectively is essential.
We also support the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which emphasizes
the need for a holistic approach to address the root causes
of violent extremism effectively. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s intention to integrate
the prevention of violent extremism into the relevant
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
As the nature of peacekeeping evolves, the Council
needs to adapt to new realities. Peacekeepers are
increasingly caught between armed actors and the
civilians they are required to protect. It is important
that the Council continue to adapt to new forms of
conflict, to ensure its peacekeepers carry out their roles
safely and effectively.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Out of respect for the
presidency, other delegations around the table and
the broader membership, I will be very brief and
will not engage in a debate with the delegation of an
aggressor State.
Let me just quickly react to one point usually used
by the Russian delegation, that is, that issues raised by
Ukraine are not relevant to this or that particular agenda
item in a Security Council debate. Asymmetrical or
hybrid threats are exactly what the Russian Federation
presents to the world today, not only to Ukraine. The
agenda item we are discussing today is “Maintenance
of international peace and security”. As my Minister
pointed out in his statement, already more than 10,000
people have been killed in Ukraine, and more than
20,000 persons have been wounded, as a direct result
of the Russian aggression against my country. If that
is not a threat to international peace and security, then
what is?
Finally, let each and every State Member of the
United Nations decide who deserves to serve on the
Council and who does not. Should an aggressor State sit
on the Council, or should the victim of the aggression?
We think that the States Members of the United Nations
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7802

have already provided us with that answer when they
elected Ukraine last year by an overwhelming majority
to serve in the Council for two years, unlike the Russian
Federation, which became a member of the Security
Council in 1991 in an unclear and opaque procedure.

Mr. Tshibanda N’Tungamulongo (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I have heard
your call for brevity, Sir, but request your indulgence,
given that this is a statement from the country that hosts
the largest peacekeeping mission in the world.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

First and foremost, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting of the
Security Council on the important and relevant topic of
“Peace operations — facing asymmetrical threats”, and
to thank you for inviting my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to participate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; the Secretary-General
of the International Organization of La Francophonie,
Ms. Michaëlle Jean; and the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, for being here today and for
their excellent briefings.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to today’s topic, I would like
to draw attention to the fact that many delegations
have referred today to the need for a political track
in settling conflicts to prevent asymmetrical threats.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the Minsk
agreements, which, for almost two years now, have
remained unfulfilled despite the promises of President
Poroshenko of Ukraine. Shelling continues on an almost
daily and various artillery systems firing on populated
areas. Houses and buildings are being destroyed.
People are dying. The truth is reflected in the reports
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Those reports reveal the arbitrary
detentions, kidnappings, torture, sexual violence and
other brazen human rights violations carried out by
Ukraine, both by its security services and by other law
enforcement agencies.
Changing the situation in Donbas is within the
realm of the possible, and achieving solid, sound
peace is a goal for which we should strive, and it is
possible. However, all of that will happen only through
scrupulous compliance with the Minsk agreements. It is
for that reason that we call upon Kyiv to accelerate the
fulfilment of those agreements.
The President (spoke in French): May I remind
speakers to kindly limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Council to
conduct its work in a timely fashion. Delegations with
lengthy statements are asked to circulate written texts
and to deliver an abridged version when speaking in the
Council Chamber. Speakers are also asked to deliver
their statements at a reasonable pace so as to ensure
accurate interpretation. Given the high number of
speakers, our debate will continue through the lunch
hour.
I now call on Mr. Raymond Tshibanda
N’Tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and Francophonie of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The maintenance of international peace and security
is not only central to the mission of the United Nations,
it is also the prerequisite for its success in development
efforts and the advancement of humankind. Regrettably,
the United Nations finds itself working to maintain
peace and security in a world where security threats
are constantly changing and increasingly complex.
The environment that prevailed in 1945, the year of the
Organization’s founding, and the implementation of
peacekeeping operations have undergone fundamental
changes. Over time, the challenges that it must face
have increased in number and become ever-more
diverse. The conflict situations that the Organization is
called upon to manage today are very different from the
ones that it faced at the end of the Second World War.
At that time, conflicts were mainly inter-State
conflicts, which gave rise to ceasefire agreements that
peacekeeping missions were called upon to enforce.
Today’s conflicts are characterized by asymmetrical and
unconventional threats that involve non-State actors,
illicit trafficking in drugs and weapons, war crimes
and crimes against humanity, and are often expressed
in the form of terrorism, violent extremism and crossborder crime, which do not hesitate to use civilians as
human shields, making the environment and working
conditions for peace operations increasingly difficult.
The adversaries that peace operations face today are
lawless men, women and organizations that carry out
merciless acts, with no fear of dying. Their actions pose
a genuine threat to the safety and security of United
Nations staff, as we have witnessed in Mali and in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

16-3637535/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

where the asymmetrical war being waged by the Allied
Democratic Forces-National Army for the Liberation of
Uganda has led to losses among the military and armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In such conditions, the three main principles for
the deployment of peacekeeping operations — namely,
the consent of the conflicting parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force — are increasingly difficult to
maintain. Such principles remain relevant to conflicts
between States, which are subjects of international law
and equal in sovereignty, but are, when dealing with
asymmetric threats, at the very least, anachronistic or
outdated, as if one expected criminals to act in good
faith and be willing to agree to their own neutralization
or elimination. What is worse is that such conflicts
make any serious efforts by peacekeeping operations
to restore or maintain peace unlikely and ineffective.
Peacekeepers are often compelled to justify their
inability to protect civilians or be proactive in defending
missions, which is simply an admission of our own lack
of political will or of our inability to implement the
reforms necessary to remain relevant.
Given the ever-greater number of casualties among
peacekeepers and the civilians to be protected, we must
take urgent and bold steps to uphold the traditional
philosophy of peacekeeping operations. Such measures
are to be developed within the United Nations and at
the level of its Member States, including troop- and
police-contingent contributors. The General Assembly,
the Security Council and United Nations agencies have
a crucial role to play in that regard. The United Nations
must ensure that the peace operations deployed in
conflict areas have mandates with rules of engagement
and the human and material capabilities necessary to
operate effectively, perform their tasks efficiently and
achieve the desired results. To that end, they must be
prepared to consider, if necessary — and this happens
more often than in the past — peace operations and
missions based on Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, with a more robust, even offensive,
mandate and greater operational flexibility that, if
need be, can impose peace and safeguard it under
all circumstances.
The United nations must consider equipping
peacekeeping missions with appropriate logistics and
substantial financial resources, as well as with civilian
and military personnel adapted to each mission. As
36/77

07/11/2016

is the case with all armies, military personnel must
be ready to make the ultimate sacrifice, if necessary,
to fulfil their mandate. Although referred to as
peacekeepers, United Nations peacekeeping forces
must, if necessary, behave like real soldiers and be
perceived as such, rather than as police officers in
military uniform, in order to ensure their credibility,
which is essential. Given that their role in maintaining
peace and international security is irreplaceable, the
United Nations must avoid situations in which civilians
are killed while peacekeeping missions responsible for
protecting them have troops stationed nearby.
With respect to the civilian population, it is difficult
to understand how it happens that they have been
repeatedly attacked and massacred by hostile forces
and that the soldiers and peacekeepers, who are there
to protect them, have been unable to do so, regardless
of the technical and legal reasons involved. In the case
of my country, last August, just as before, the civilian
population — in Béni and throughout the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, specifically in Goma after the
city fell into the hands of the rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) a few years ago — attacked the
installations and facilities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), expressing their
frustration, their inability to understand and their
disapproval regarding the inability of the protectors
to act effectively, given the modus operandi of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. A number
of other peacekeeping missions throughout the world
have experienced similar problems with the local
civilian population.
While we wait for the nature and composition of
peacekeeping missions to change in order to enable
them to carry out military operations aimed at fighting
terrorism and at dealing successfully with asymmetric
wars, there is a need to increase the clout of those
missions by establishing units capable of performing
their tasks and by providing them with the new
generation of force multipliers.
The experience of my country is full of lessons
that can be learned. Indeed, the Intervention Brigade,
created within the framework of MONUSCO pursuant
to resolution 2098 (2013), has made it possible to
significantly increase the deterrent capacity of
the United Nations forces and to inflict a heavy
defeat on the ex-М-23 forces. That has contributed
to strengthening security in the eastern part of the
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Democratic Republic of the Congo and has restored the
credibility of MONUSCO from the point of view of the
civilian population. The same applies to the authorized
use by the Security Council of new technologies, such
as drones or unarmed, unmanned aerial vehicles that
significantly contribute to the collection of information
about the adversary and often strengthen the prevention
and intervention capacities of the Force.
Contrary to the provisions of the resolutions that
authorized those two advances, which stipulated that
the establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade, as
well as the use of drones, was authorized but only on an
exceptional basis and did not constitute a precedent, we
should be realistic and bold enough to consider a change
in the paradigm that would make those tools available
whenever the situation on the ground requires them.
That would be subject, of course, to the agreement of
the country where the Blue Helmets are to be deployed
and of the troop-contributing countries concerned.
Regardless of what improvements can be made to
support peace operations, the increasing complexity
and increasingly high cost of such operations underline
the fact that prevention remains the best option. In that
context, the Organization should, inter alia, bolster its
cooperation with Governments, as well as with regional
and subregional organizations, which play an important
role not only in creating partnerships for conflict
prevention and mediation, but also in establishing crisis
responses that are fast and effective, thanks to their
financially inexpensive nature. Such responses will be
effective because they will be based on the knowledge
of the specificities of the local environment.
The United Nations should continue its support
to the efforts of Member States to establish strong
institutions and strengthen democracy and the rule of
law, so as to support States, not replace them. More
specifically, there is a need to assist in the appropriation
and internalization of a culture of peace and the
universal values of tolerance and respect for others,
rather than the imposition on others of an agenda that
stems from New York. We need to bolster cooperation
and strengthen trust with the host country.
Peacekeeping operations are often deployed at the
invitation of or with the consent of the Government, so
as to facilitate the necessary cooperation between the
national security and defence forces and the forces of
the United Nations. Such operations are charged with
restoring peace, while avoiding getting in the way of

S/PV.7802

national forces and avoiding having such missions be
deployed ad infinitum with no hope of resolution.
The missions must go about their business in
compliance with the laws and institutions of the host
country; they must be seen as fundamentally transient.
They must also take an approach that is firmly focused
on the crisis and the restoration and consolidation of
the host State in its regulatory functions and its abilities
to meet the legitimate aspirations of its people. They
should therefore primarily contribute to the restoration
of State authority and the security of persons and
property, particularly through concerted programmes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as through security-sector reform.
There is a need to draw upon the private sector
and to mobilize civil society as positive forces in the
development of a public conscience and the search
for a better life together, rather than exploit civil
society for nefarious purposes or use civil society to
oppose public authority, whether it is democratically
legitimate or not. All three of the elements that I
have outlined are important in order to maintain a
constructive partnership.
There is a need to deal quickly with situations
requiring international solidarity, especially in harsh
humanitarian crises. That would help to alleviate the
feelings of frustration and injustice or simply the reflex
behaviours that emerge in the search for survival and
often lead to violence. The adoption in September
2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) was an important
step in the efforts of the international community not to
leave anyone behind and to ensure that all inhabitants
of the world live happily and in peace.
It is necessary to respect international
commitments to which States have subscribed in order
to end all support for negative forces, break the supply
chains of those forces and discourage the pillaging
of natural resources, which is often at the root of
today’s conflicts. That is all the more important since,
although inter-State wars have disappeared, some
countries continue to practice them under the cover
of the internal rebellions that they support. In many
cases, the negative forces, whose actions we deplore,
base themselves in neighbouring countries from which
they buy their weapons, ammunition and other tools
necessary for their operations.

16-3637537/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

In order to avoid such situations, the countries
of the Great Lakes region of Africa signed the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region in 2013
in Addis Ababa. We should act in accordance with the
principle of subsidiarity through continued cooperation
with the regions so as to promote the prevention and
resolution of crises, while uncompromisingly enforcing
international law.
I condemn the attacks against peacekeepers
regardless of their motivation. We remain convinced
that providing the soldiers of the United Nations with
the necessary support and equipment will ensure that
they are safe and secure and that they will have the
necessary means to provide security to the civilian
population, which is one of the most significant threats
that we face.
The complexity of the conditions in which
peacekeeping missions operate today requires
enhanced partnerships between all stakeholders,
including regional and subregional organizations, the
entire United Nations family, financial institutions and
international and regional donors and multilateral and
bilateral partners, not to mention the troop-contributing
and police-contributing countries. Only that level of
cooperation will allow us to collectively address the
challenges that we face today and those that we will
face in the coming years.
To conclude, let me express the gratitude of my
country for the commitment of peacekeepers, police
officers and civilian staff, who perform their vital
tasks, often under difficult conditions, working to
implement the demanding mandates that the Security
Council entrusts to them. We salute the memory of
the thousands of men and women who have sacrificed
their lives in the exercise of their functions to the
United Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. I am convinced that the best tribute we
can pay them is to learn the lessons of the past in order
to improve peacekeeping operations and ensure that
they are relevant and effective. That is why today’s
meeting is so important, and I hope it will not remain
a dead letter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to thank
Senegal for organizing this debate. I also thank the
38/77

07/11/2016

Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Jean, Mr. Fedotov,
Mr. Laborde and Mr. Boutellis for their briefings.
Peacekeeping operations should be primarily a
political instrument in support of peace processes, as
highlighted in the report (see S/2015/446) of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Brazil fully agrees with the need and urgency
to combat the scourge of terrorism. Brazil’s own
Constitution enshrines the repudiation of terrorism as
one of the guiding principles of our foreign relations.
Experience has proved that short-sighted policies
and a single-minded focus on the use of force have
often made matters worse. The Sahel continues to
face the consequences of an ill-fated intervention in
Libya, which contributed to the increase in the illegal
trafficking in weapons and to the spread of the activities
of terrorist groups in the region, as the situation in
Mali exemplifies. The multidimensional threats we
face today will be more efficiently countered only if
prevention is prioritized and underlying causes are
taken into consideration.
Although peacekeeping scenarios have changed in
the past decades, we should not be tempted to make
flexible interpretations of the foundational principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and in defence of the mandate. That is of
particular relevance in cases of asymmetrical threats
posed by terrorist networks with an increasingly global
reach. Excessive militarization of the United Nations
response in such cases not only increases the exposure
of Blue Helmets, but it also endangers the security
of the civilian component of the missions. Fulfilling
a mandate to protect civilians from imminent threat,
wherever it comes from, should not be confused with
direct involvement in, or support to, offensive counterterrorism operations.
We regret that the use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and suicide attacks continue to
increase the number of casualties among United
Nations personnel. Asymmetrical threats also limit
the interactions with locals and make it difficult for
peacekeeping missions to carry out critical elements
of the mandate. The United Nations must ensure that
also under these conditions everything will be done for
a safe and secure the implementation of the mandate,
as well as the safety and security of its personnel. In
that regard, it is crucial to establish a comprehensive
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

response to IEDs, thereby maintaining the military and
civilian components fully prepared to accomplish the
mission’s mandate. Many casualties could have been
avoided with the use of mine-resistant vehicles.
Further guidance and support is needed in the
use of certain modalities, including new technology,
intelligence gathering, standby and quick-reaction
capabilities and force enablers. We encourage the
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, chaired by Senegal, to deepen discussions
on how to better implement those innovative projects.
We must do much more to prevent conflicts and
situations that place civilians at risk. We must also
consistently remind parties to armed conflict of their
obligations to uphold international law and to respect
and protect all civilians, including humanitarian
workers. It is equally important that the Council take
a strong stance against the continued channelling of
weapons to zones of conflict, including those affected
by intense non-State activities. The Council should
continue to emphasize the importance of the processes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.
We expect United Nations peacekeeping missions
to remain a cooperative endeavour at the service of
peace, political stability and sustainable development,
with an emphasis on the primacy of politics and on
prevention, as wisely proposed by President José
Ramos-Horta and the High-level Panel he chaired.
In that regard, we should strive to follow up on the
High-level Panel’s recommendation to preserve a
clear distinction between the roles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and non-United Nations
military counter-terrorism operations, rather than blur
the lines between peacekeeping and counter-terrorism
in ways that can worsen even further the plight of
civilians on the ground.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on peacekeeping
operations facing asymmetrical threats. I am grateful
for the very interesting briefings provided earlier today.
Threats and challenges to the United Nations
peacekeeping enterprise are not new. The Congo in
the 1960s, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda in the

S/PV.7802

1990s, Sierra Leone in 2000 and several others since then
precede the current stresses that peacekeeping faces.
What is different now is that the new normal consistently
requires staying and operating in volatile environments
where parties involved are not only using technological
advances in adapting destructive weaponry to their
benefit, but are wedded to transnational ideologies and
linked to transborder networks of crime and terror. Illicit
violent organizations are gaining increasing control
over territory, markets and populations. Although such
phenomena are not limited to peacekeeping missions
alone, they impact peacekeeping in a manner like never
before. All this is new.
At one level, we can focus on the technical fixes
to address such situations. To address these issues, we
can call for the development of doctrinal principles
on the use of offensive capabilities for peacekeeping
missions that operate in asymmetrical and war-fighting
environments. Following this approach, we can adopt
new technology, intelligence gathering, standby and
quick-reaction capabilities, and force enablers and hope
they will do the trick. Notwithstanding the problems
associated with a blurred distinction for the United
Nations when a mission operates in an asymmetrical
environment in parallel with a non-United Nations
force, we can, as a pragmatic way forward, work
with regional and other organizations, especially in
situations that require responses that go beyond the
nation-centric peacekeeping model. In short, we can opt
for further policy and operational guidelines on how to
use versatile force to match diverse threats and levels
of violence and the implementation of force protection
measures as a solution.
Tackling the challenges faced by peacekeeping
today, however, needs more than an up-to-date tool kit.
Peacekeeping operations differ from war fighting and
peace enforcement in the sense that they do not entail the
use of force as a central modus operandi. Peacekeeping
is not about fighting an enemy, and the evolution towards
more robustness has not fundamentally changed this.
The lesson learned from the history of peacekeeping
is that lasting peace is not achieved through military
and technical engagements, but through political
solutions. Peacekeeping is not a strategy in itself,
but rather a strategic tool. It requires collaboration.
Peacekeeping requires a political consensus among
Security Council members, troop contributors and
others on the costs, limits and dangers of operations in
high-risk environments. However, what we see coming

16-3637539/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

out from the Security Council today is not consensus,
but dissensus. Resolution 2304 (2016), which in August
revised the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, is a case in point. It
was adopted with little agreement within the Council
itself, little groundwork with the host Government and
without effective consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries that have to implement it.
The Council needs to revisit the way mandates
are designed. It cannot underestimate the complexity
of bringing about peace. United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in the way they are agreed upon, planned
and implemented, can deliver only limited successes.
The Council should therefore mandate an operation
to do only what the United Nations is structurally
and politically organized to do, rather than provide a
multiplicity of mandates and raising expectations that
cannot be fulfilled, and then absolving itself of all
responsibility. This current approach is not sustainable.
Specifically, the assertive conception of the use
of force should be adopted with the utmost prudence,
and in any case should be ad hoc. This is so because
a military option carried out by United Nations
peacekeepers cannot be a long-term response to what are
fundamentally political problems. It is for the Council
to address these politically rather than militarily.
In essence, the solutions that we seek lie as much in
a better understanding of what is out there as in a more
introspective understanding of what plagues us in here.
This is the philosophical dilemma that the Council, an
organ set up more than 70 years ago and in a world
that was very different, now faces in a fundamentally
changed security landscape.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
thank Senegal for organizing today’s open debate.
The current peacekeeping environment has become
increasingly complex and challenging. United Nations
peacekeepers are now deployed in areas where there is
no peace to keep. Targeted and asymmetrical hostile
acts against United Nations personnel are among the
most imposing threats faced by several peacekeeping
missions. United Nations peacekeepers are expected
to play a role for which they are traditionally not
mandated, much less equipped. It is then unfair to
blame them when they fall short of these expectations.
40/77

07/11/2016

When we speak about dealing with asymmetrical
threats to peacekeeping operations, we must be clear
that we cannot erode the basic character of United
Nations peacekeeping by undertaking counterterrorism or counter-insurgency activities. We must be
guided by the wise recommendations of the report (see
S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations that United Nations missions should
not be mandated to conduct military counter-terrorism
operations, as they are not suited to do so. On the other
hand, the United Nations cannot turn away from conflict
areas where peace is so gravely threatened, indeed
undermined, by actors that recognize no restraints on
their brutal tactics against civilians and peacekeepers.
Nevertheless, mandates need to clearly distinguish
between peace enforcement and peacekeeping.
The evolving nature of conflicts has led to the
redesigning of United Nations peackeeping mandates
beyond the traditional role of truce supervision. As
the bulk of peacekeeping missions are now dealing
with complex internal or intra-State crises, modern
peacekeeping missions are being designed to address
the political, security, humanitarian and development
dimensions of complex crises, and often to ensure the
implementation of comprehensive peace agreements.
The changing nature of threats is challenging the
traditional role of peacekeeping. The presence of rebel
groups, the flow of illicit weapons, planned, deliberate
attacks against peacekeepers, suicide bombings and
improvised explosive devices are some of the presentday threats faced by peacekeepers. This has also served
to expose gaps in technology and capabilities that
need to be filled to maintain the level of excellence
and confidence that United Nations peacekeepers have
enjoyed for so long. In view of that, we would like to
stress the following points.
First, greater clarity is required on how United
Nations peacekeeping operations should function in
asymmetrical threat environments.
Second, asymmetrical threats put peacekeepers in
harm’s way, as they are faced with situations beyond
their capabilities and resources. Therefore, the effective
implementation of their mandate needs adequate and
matching resources.
Third, our deployment decisions have to be based
on consultation, preparation and knowledge of the
situation on the ground. Triangular cooperation is
critical for all three. As principal stakeholders, troop16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

contributing countries must be fully consulted in a
timely manner and have their suggestions taken on
board.
Fourth, the Security Council needs to be more
circumspect when mandating enforcement tasks.
Peacekeepers should neither become a party to the
conflict nor be perceived by the local population
and authorities to be a tool of external intervention.
Increased militarization of some United Nations
stabilization missions could make them riskier — more
dangerous, instead of safer.
Fifth, the use of modern technology consistent
with the principles of peacekeeping should enhance
situational awareness and help ensure the protection of
civilians and the safety of peacekeepers.
Sixth, where mandated, our peacekeepers have
fulfilled, and will continue to fulfil, their responsibilities
to protect civilians. Clearly defined mandates would
make this task much easier.
Seventh, peacekeeping works best when there
is peace to keep and a political process to sustain
it — hence the need for political processes to always
accompany peacekeeping missions.
Last but not least, the basic principles of
peacekeeping remain essential for the success of Untied
Nations peacekeeping. These principles are vital and
indispensable for retaining the broad support, legitimacy
and credibility that United Nations peacekeeping has
come to enjoy over the years.
Finally, let me say that, as a leading troop- and
police-contributing country, Pakistan has contributed
over 150,000 personnel and served in 41 mission in 23
countries since 1960. Our peacekeepers have worked
in diverse and difficult conflict and post-conflict
situations and have served with professionalism and
distinction. One hundred and forty-four Pakistani
peacekeepers have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Blue Helmets are a source of pride, not just for
us and for the United Nations but for other troopcontributing countries as well. Those caught in the
throes of conflict see themselves as guarantors of peace
and the harbingers of stability. Their hands must be
strengthened and their successors appreciated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

S/PV.7802

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to the Senegalese presidency for
convening this open debate. I also thank the briefers
for their inputs.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation, while emphasizing the importance
of the role of the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations, believes that peacekeeping operations
should not be used as an alternative to addressing the
root causes of conflict.
The establishment of any peacekeeping operation
or the extension of a mandate for existing operations
should strictly abide by the puropose and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. I refer to principles
such as the consent of the parties, the non-use of force
except in self-defence, impartiality and respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence
and territorial integrity.
I would also like to underline the unique
and indispensable role of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) as the only
intergovernmental forum mandated by the General
Assembly to comprehensively review the whole question
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. According
to principles and guidelines in the annual report of the
C-34 agreed upon by the General Assembly, all issues
relating to peacekeeping operations, including the
subject of today’s debate, should be taken to the C-34
for deliberation.
In our efforts to overcome the problems emanating
from the complexity and asymmetrical nature of the
threats, the use of technology and intelligence cannot
be ignored. However, it is necessary that the concerns
of Member States, especially the host countries, be
fully taken into account. Furthermore, the legal aspects
of using modern technology and intelligence-gathering
should also be defined in appropriate intergovernmental
processes.
The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host countries, and, where they are
so mandated, peacekeeping operations should aim to
support the national efforts of host countries to protect
their civilians. Therefore, any military intervention by

16-3637541/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

the United Nations or other foreign forces under the
pretext of protecting civilians is not acceptable.
Regional organizations are important partners in
maintaining regional peace and security. The United
Nations can benefit from their cooperation in efforts
to surmount asymmetrical threats and the challenges
that peacekeeping missions face, when necessary,
as complementary means. However, the primary
responsibility rests with the United Nations. The role
of regional organizations in that regard should be in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
United Nations police can play an important role
in establishing order or re-establishing domestic police
services in order to create appropriate conditions for
sustainable peace and development. They should
support host State counterparts in their efforts to
develop community-orientated policing and mentors and
train host-State police officers or provide specialized
personnel for various types of investigations. United
Nations police capacity must be strengthened so as to
provide such useful services.
In conclusion, while paying tribute to the men
and women who serve under the flag of the United
Nations, especially those peacekeepers who lost their
lives in the cause of peace, I would like to express my
Government’s readiness to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping operations logistically and militarily,
by deploying troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Senegal, as President
of the Security Council this month, for organizing this
open debate, and we welcome the country’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye. We are grateful for the briefings by the Deputy
Secretary-General and the other briefers this morning,
which were extremely informative.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
Guatemala thanks the President for the concept
note (S/2016/927, annex) that he has circulated on
peace operations facing asymmetrical threats. We
42/77

07/11/2016

share the views expressed in the concept note that most
crises today can be classified as internal conflicts or
intra-State conflicts, where there are confrontations
between Government forces and non-State armed
groups. As a consequence, security in implementing
operations on the ground has become a lot more
complicated. My delegation is concerned by and greatly
regrets that 34 Blue Helmets were killed and another
190 injured between January 2015 and October 2016.
Improving the protection and security of personnel
in peacekeeping operations should continue to be a
fundamental priority. In that respect, we welcome the
fact that measures are being taken to improve security
analysis on proposed initiatives by making timely
decisions on activities that need to be undertaken and
on how to manage the risks that personnel face on
the ground. That information needs to be shared with
troop-contributing countries in a timely fashion. The
safety of personnel is a non-negotiable requirement that
calls for more attention.
The reviews conducted in 2015 regarding the
work of the Organization in the areas of peace and
security, specifically the recommendations on peace
operations in the report (see S/2015/446) of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations and on
peacebuilding in the Rosenthal report (see S/2015/490),
and on women and peace and security, have underscored
the need for the United Nations to adapt to new situations
and circumstances that have a bearing on conflicts by
investing more in prevention than in containment.
Our delegation aligns itself with the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
given that such operations, in terms of their structure
and characteristics, have not been created to participate
in active military counter-terrorism operations, both
because of their lack of capacity in the field of logistics
and other areas, and above all because it distorts the
doctrine that underlies peace operations. We are willing
to consider emerging circumstances, but not to change
the very meaning of peacekeeping operations without a
broad and informed consensus.
However, we acknowledge the relevance of the
views expressed by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous; we
cannot deny that extremist groups are an emerging
phenomenon. That means that it is necessary to develop
creative approaches to address such armed groups
without compromising the foundational doctrine of the
Organization’s work.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

In his Action Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism, the
Secretary-General made it clear that the phenomenon
affects the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. It undermines peace and international security,
human rights and sustainable development. There is no
country in my region that is immune to those effects.
The reality on the ground is also alarming. Of the 11
countries that are most affected by global terrorism,
seven of them have peace missions with mandates from
the Organization. Regarding the current situation, the
international community has witnessed an increasing
number of confrontations between armed political
groups and militia groups, where crime, terrorism
and violent extremism prevail. In some cases, the
Governments of host countries to peace missions have
encountered numerous challenges in seeking to protect
their population.
Peacekeeping missions are not designed to, or
principally aimed at, combating terrorism. Guatemala
maintains its doubts as to the achievements and the
implications that so-called peacemaking operations
have. We believe that those types of operations distort
the basic function that they pursue, bearing in mind that
peacekeeping operations are not designed or equipped
to impose political solutions through the continuous
use of force.
It is important that the international community
acknowledge that conflict prevention is a shared
responsibility. It must be coordinated among all
stakeholders, namely, the States involved, international
and regional organizations, the specialized agencies
and, of course, civil society organizations, for the
purpose of working to solve the original causes of
the conflict and refine the essential elements of
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, I would like to mention something
else that is no less important. Waiting for conflict
situations to be included on the agenda of the Council
is tantamount to adopting a reactive approach rather
than a preventive one. We need to invest in prevention
so that we do not have to wait for conflicts to break
out in order to adopt the necessary measures. General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council resolution
2282 (2016) were adopted in April and sent out a clear
message: we must break the silos in the Organization,
which is a fundamental requirement if we are to abide
by the three pillars of the Charter of the United Nations,
namely, development, human rights, and peace and
security.

S/PV.7802

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): First of all,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized today’s
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. JeanPaul Laborde and the other briefers for their briefings
on the theme of asymmetrical threats to peacekeeping
operations.
(spoke in English)
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
fully supports the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in
the light of our cooperation related to the upcoming
split mandate in the Security Council. In the Security
Council from 2017 to 2018, Italy and the Netherlands
will continue their sustained efforts to promote more
effective peacekeeping operations, and we encourage
other countries to join us in those efforts.
In presenting my condolences for the victims
of yesterday’s attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), allow me to pay tribute to all those
who lost their lives serving under the United Nations
flag in peace operations. Fifty of them were Italians.
As the first Blue-Helmet contributor among
Western countries, and the eighth overall contributor
to the regular budget and the peacekeeping budget,
Italy considers its peacekeeping partnership with the
United Nations to be a strategic one. Thanks also to
the experience gained in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, Italy believes that it has powerful
tools at its disposal to pursue the goal of adapting our
peacekeeping operations to new and evolving threats.
The recommendations in the report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
and the work carried out in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations can guide us as well.
First, I believe that a truly integrated approach
is necessary, both at the United Nations and on the
ground, in order to ensure that our complex efforts are
holistic yet focused, thereby strengthening the whole
spectrum of United Nations activities in a country. In
that respect, we appreciate the establishment of a unit
to handle police planning in the Secretariat. While
partnerships within the United Nations system and with

16-3637543/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

contributing countries are critical, we believe that the
most crucial partnerships are with local authorities and
communities, which must be fully supported.
Secondly, predeployment training is crucial and
provides the main means for ensuring the thorough and
holistic implementation of mission mandates, thereby
promoting the effective protection of civilians and
ensuring the highest moral and operational standards.
Through programmes offered by the Italian Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Units, Italian Carabinieri
units have to date trained approximately 10,000 units
from nearly 100 countries and 16 international and
regional organizations, using both the English and the
French languages.
Thirdly, more must be done to support regional
organizations, especially in Africa, through training
and assistance, including by pursuing synergies
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Our common capacity-building efforts must expand
beyond traditional peacekeeping goals and be enhanced
so as to be able to provide for essential skills in sectors
such as disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
techniques to counter violent extremism, national
reconciliation and the reform of the security sector. One
valid example of that approach is Italy’s contribution to
the European Gendarmerie Force’s role in MINUSMA’s
Security and Organized Crime Support Unit. That is a
very important effort, given that the Mission in Mali
epitomizes the complexity of the asymmetrical threats
that peacekeeping operations must face and their
consequent response.
Fourthly, as asymmetrical tactics often seek to
deny cultural identities, Italy is on the front line in
ensuring the protection of cultural heritage in crisis
situations. We believe that that is a crucial component
of our peacekeeping commitment, not only with the
necessary goal of protecting human rights but also as
a substantial contribution to conflict-prevention and
reconciliation efforts, and preserving the rights and the
identity of minorities.
Lastly, Italy strongly believes in the need for flexible
mandates and adequate equipment, especially with a
view to ensuring the most appropriate technological
solutions to the specific evolving contexts and threats.
From basic protective gear to the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, which have proved key to saving civilian
lives — as was the case in the deployment of drones in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
44/77

07/11/2016

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — assets and
capabilities need to be integrated in a targeted strategy.
In conclusion, I remind everyone that Italy believes
that our primary focus must continue to be political
solutions to crises. Avoiding conflict is the only
smart and humane choice. We need to engage more in
mediation and prevention, if we are to defeat the causes
underlying the very emergence of asymmetrical threats.
United Nations capabilities in those sectors should
be strengthened, and I confirm Italy’s long-standing
commitment in that respect.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and
my own country, Thailand.
ASEAN wishes to congratulate Senegal on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express its appreciation to that country for
organizing today’s ministerial-level open debate on
the topic of peacekeeping operations and asymmetrical
threats. We thank the briefers for their respective
insightful and informative presentations.
As a region that currently contributes almost 5,000
men and women to 12 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, ASEAN attaches great importance to the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
The phenomenon of asymmetrical threats is indeed
not a new one. However, as rightly pointed out in the
concept note (S/2016/927, annex), the recent trend
in the increasing frequency and magnitude of such
attacks directed against United Nations peacekeepers
is most worrying. Nowhere is that more apparent than
in the cases of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
which have sustained a high number of casualties. We
strongly condemn all attacks directed against United
Nations personnel.
ASEAN emphasizes the role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the
appropriate forum for considering and deciding on
key policy matters pertaining to United Nations
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

peacekeeping. The Special Committee has continuously
underlined the importance of regular and meaningful
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We consider this open debate as part of such
cooperation, and we encourage the Security Council
to take due note of the views expressed by Member
States today. As our contribution to the debate, we wish
to draw the attention of the Council to the following
points.
First, ASEAN reaffirms its long-standing position
that peacekeeping missions must uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as the basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping. Despite the changing context of
peacekeeping, those principles remain indispensable
for the success of all peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, there is a clear convergence of opinion
that United Nations peacekeeping missions should
not engage in counter-terrorism activities. At the
same time, however, we cannot ignore the fact that
asymmetrical threats are now part of the operational
reality in which many peacekeeping missions operate.
We therefore have to prepare for the worst by providing
our peacekeepers with the best possible training and
capabilities, including evolving technologies, so as
to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers
and strengthen their ability to effectively fulfil their
mandates. That requires the collective efforts of the
Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We also call upon host countries to bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks against peacekeepers.
Thirdly, military operations can address the
symptoms of terrorism. However, the use of force
alone will not and cannot stop the spread of terrorism.
ASEAN reiterates the need for a comprehensive
approach to the fight against terrorism. We therefore
support an integrated and balanced implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Peacekeeping missions, where mandated to do so, can
significantly contribute to pillar III of the Strategy,
namely, building States’ capacity to prevent and combat
terrorism through programmatic support in the areas of
the rule of law and security.
Looking at the broader context, asymmetrical
threats are one of many manifestations of modern-day
challenges facing peacekeeping operations. We hope
that this open debate will constitute part of an ongoing

S/PV.7802

dialogue that is critical to improving and strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping through better mission
planning and mandate review. On our part at the
regional level, ASEAN Member States have worked on
uniting our peacekeeping operations and capabilities,
including through the ASEAN Peacekeeping
Centres Network, which serves as a platform for
information-sharing, capacity-building and exchanging
views on new challenges. We therefore remain steadfast
in our commitment to working closely with the United
Nations and its partners towards this end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the 28 European Union
Member States and on behalf of the European Union
(EU) itself. The following countries align themselves
with my statement: the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine.
I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency for
organizing the debate. I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, as well as all the other briefers
for their insightful contributions to today’s discussion
on the challenges posed by asymmetrical threats to the
peace efforts deployed around the world.
Let me reiterate from the very start that the States
members of the European Union remain committed
to peacekeeping — a flagship activity of the United
Nations. We highly value the partnership between
the Secretariat, troop-contributing and host countries
and financial contributors that makes United Nations
peacekeeping unique. Welcoming also the increased
attention given to the role of regional organizations
in peacekeeping, the European Union will continue
to look for ways to enhance our support to United
Nations peacekeeping.
Recognizing the dangerous and complex context in
which peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel
carry out their work, we pay tribute to those who have
lost their lives in the service of the United Nations. The
EU is leading efforts to agree on a resolution concerning
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
the protection of United Nations personnel, and will
continue working in support of that goal.

16-3637545/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

Searching for measures to increase the safety and
security of United Nations personnel on the ground
remains of critical importance, and is made even
more pressing by the significant number of targeted
attacks against peacekeepers. In consideration of the
contemporary and evolving peacekeeping landscape,
peacekeeping missions should deploy with at least the
same technological advantages that most Governments
and enterprises around the world find indispensable to
their operations.
In that context, a better integration of modern
technology and intelligence capabilities into peace
operations should continue to be pursued. We commend
the Secretariat’s efforts towards the wider use of
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations. We
also encourage the development of information and
intelligence capacities in current and future missions.
The use of such resources and technology can help to
improve the situational awareness of troops in real time,
thereby contributing to the implementation of mission
mandates, the protection of civilians and the security of
United Nations personnel on the ground.
We need to maintain an open, transparent and
constructive dialogue on the deployment of particularly
sensitive technologies and use strategies that allow
field missions to enjoy the advantages provided by
modern technologies. The European Union believes
that discussions on those various topics in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping are encouraging and should
continue in a collective effort to find common ground.
At the same time, technology alone cannot bring
about solutions and increased effects. Instead, the
coherent merger of modern technology with relevant
methods at the disposal of well-prepared and trained staff
will be imperative in the pursuit of enhanced operational
output. Adequate training certificates, recommended by
the Secretary-General, are a step in the right direction.
Training, including linguistic training adapted to the
area of deployment and equipping personnel, before
and during deployment — whether military, police or
civilian — on the basis of consolidated standards is also
important to ensuring successful missions.
(spoke in French)
As the Senegalese presidency so rightly underscores
in its concept note for this debate (S/2016/927, annex),
Mali is an interesting case. The strategic objective of
the European Union in Mali remains the promotion
of stability by combining security, development and
46/77

07/11/2016

governance in an integrated and coordinated approach
of its relevant instruments. The objective is to tackle
the deep-rooted causes of insecurity, underdevelopment
and local, regional and national conflicts.
Our two missions that fall within the framework of
the security and common defence policy deployed on
the ground — the European Union Training Mission
for Somalia in Mali and the European Union Capacity
Building Mission in Mali — are part and parcel of that
comprehensive approach. The European Union intends
to enable the Malian authorities to respond directly,
through their own means, to threats on the ground and,
more broadly speaking, to restore sovereignty, security
and stability throughout the country. To that end, the
European Union has undertaken to train the Malian
armed forces, by making available training experts and
strategic advisers within the police, the gendarmerie
and national guard forces, as well as relevant ministries
for security sector reform.
At the level of security, over half of the States
members of the European Union contribute troops
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). As a result,
they also directly work within MINUSMA to better
respond to asymmetrical threats. The outstanding
cooperation between MINUSMA and the European
Union missions clearly illustrates the joint work that is
being carried out to fight against asymmetrical threats.
That cooperation, which is based on the implementation
of their respective mandates, transcends the operational
level to cover the political process as a whole.
The comprehensive approach of the European
Union also includes a development cooperation
component in which we are a key partner for Mali.
The European Union and its member States jointly
contribute close to €1.7 billion for the period 2014 to
2017 in humanitarian aid, amounting to €40 million per
year. Regarding migration, Mali is one of the priority
States for EU action. In the framework of the trust fund
that we have established, €91.5 million have already
been approved and €40 million should be approved by
the end of the month.
The Central African Republic is yet another
example where the European Union works in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the host
country to back the efforts of the Government in
countering the activities of armed groups. On 19 April,
the European Council approved the establishment of
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM RCA), which is to
contribute to security sector reform in the country
and make its national forces capable of responding to
such threats themselves. In extension of the military
advisers mission of the EU, EUTM RCA will modernize
the Central African armed forces to ensure that they
are effective, inclusive and subject to democratic
governance. In that regard, the States members of the
EU responded to the call of the United Nations and
mobilized to provide resources and troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic in order to
allow them to fulfil their mandates.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, countries where peacekeepers
operate are particularly vulnerable to the spread of
violent extremism that may be conducive to terrorism.
The EU has welcomed the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which, inter alia,
recommended that member States integrate preventing
violent extremism into relevant activities of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, in accordance with their mandates.
We also believe that peacekeeping operations
are one way that the United Nations can assist local
authorities in developing and strengthening their
capacities to better face that scourge. It is part of the One
United Nations approach promoted by the SecretaryGeneral, aimed at achieving coherent, coordinated and
integrated tactical assistance to the Member States with
a view to developing and strengthening their capacities,
including in the area of preventing violent extremism.
The European Union encourages further coordination
and exchange between the peacekeeping operations
and other United Nations entities at Headquarters and
in the field.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Koné.
Mr. Koné (spoke in French): On behalf of Mr. Marcel
Alain de Souza, President of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Commission, who
wishes he could have attended this meeting but was
held up in Africa due to prior engagements that are
equally important to our Community’s progress, I
offer our apologies for his absence. I also convey our
thanks for the invitation to participate in this important
debate with the theme of peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7802

facing asymmetric threats. Likewise, I thank all of
the briefers that spoke this morning for the clarity of
their presentations.
ECOWAS takes this opportunity to warmly
congratulate the Senegalese delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for November, just
a few weeks before the international forum in Dakar
on peace and security in Africa — an event that will
enable us to exchange views on commitments in the
region and find some clues as to how to definitively
steer our region away from potential danger. That is why
ECOWAS views that meeting as part of the concrete
implementation of the new vision that all stakeholders
could share in their response to asymmetrical challenges
and threats in peacekeeping operations. ECOWAS
fully backs that vision and intends to play its rightful
role, as it has always done, for peacebuilding and good
governance in our area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
On 26 October, we commemorated the deaths of
201 peacekeepers in 2015 and 2016 — 201 too many. A
growing number of them were victims of asymmetrical
attacks. Just yesterday, two more peacekeepers lost
their lives in Mali. That is why we need to redouble our
efforts to protect our peacekeepers and to ensure the
proper implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), one of
the missions facing the most asymmetrical attacks,
is a good example of how future casualties could be
reduced. We consider three elements as essential.
First of all, we need better reconnaissance and
information gathering. Military reconnaissance is
fundamental to detecting asymmetrical threats at
an early stage and setting the course for appropriate
counter-measures. To make that possible, the military
equipment, training and concept of operation must be
adapted to the given circumstances. That is what we are
trying to achieve right now in the northeast sector of
MINUSMA. Germany, in partnership with neighbouring
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), made a significant
contribution in northern Mali, with a reconnaissance
task force in Gao. That force carries out a wide array

16-3637547/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

of activities related to information-gathering, including
reconnaissance ground forces, human intelligence and
civil military cooperation, as well as air reconnaissance
by tactical and unmanned aerial vehicles with a
range of up to 100 kilometres. In addition, Germany
deployed the unmanned aerial system Heron 1 for
the MINUSMA mission last Tuesday, with a range of
up to 900 kilometres. Its findings will help to reduce
the asymmetrical threat to all TCCs, United Nations
personnel and civilians alike.
Secondly, we also need better protection.
Asymmetrical threats are difficult to detect and
counter. Therefore, protective measures are of key
importance. Germany provides a highly professional
force protection unit that covers the entirety of Camp
Castor in Gao. Special counter-improvised explosive
device personnel support investigations into potential
perpetrators. As a first step, Germany will make
a financial contribution of €2 million towards the
purchase of armoured vehicles, yet much greater efforts
must be made since such vehicles are indispensable to
protect the lives of our peacekeepers in Mali.
Thirdly, we must ensure better medical support.
When United Nations peacekeepers face an asymmetric
attack in the middle of the desert, 100 miles north of
Gao, nothing is more important to their safety than quick
and adequate medical support. In the vast expanses of
northern Mali, that cannot be done without helicopters.
They are of key importance to medical evacuation
and protection. They are also of key importance to the
moral and operational strength of our peacekeepers
on the ground. Germany is currently examining ways
to provide modern medical evacuation and protection
helicopters for MINUSMA in 2017.
Those three elements cannot provide an overall
solution to the challenges of peacekeeping in the face
of asymmetric threats. Yet they represent important
tangible elements for the protection of our peacekeepers
on the ground. For the near future, it is crucial that the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations recommendations concerning asymmetrical
challenges be implemented. We owe it to the men and
women in the field to offer them as much protection as
possible. We can only do that together and Germany is
ready to contribute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
48/77

07/11/2016

Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, but I would like to add some comments in my
national capacity.
First, I thank you very much, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s debate on such an interesting
and important subject for us all, and not only for our
peacekeepers serving in the field. This is our common
duty.
For more than six decades, Poland has been
dedicated to United Nations efforts in maintaining
peace. We are among those States that, as early as 1953,
sent observers to a peacekeeping mission in the Korean
peninsula. Sixty-three years later, we continue to
deploy peacekeeping personnel. With a contribution of
more than 70,000 peacekeepers throughout that period,
Poland has acquired broad, practical experience in
maintaining peace. Through our more recent national
efforts in some of the most demanding conflict
environments, we have also experienced first-hand
confrontations with asymmetrical threats and have had
to deal with that challenge. In that context, we entirely
agree with those speakers who have underscored the
changing nature of modern threats, often arising from
extra-State factors or from totally new phenomena,
such as hybrid warfare.
Expectations with regard to United Nations
peacekeeping, in terms of deliverables, continue
to grow. At the same time, neither United Nations
peacekeeping operations nor special political missions
are designed to counter asymmetric threats. Acts of
violent extremism have resulted in the largest death toll
among peacekeepers and local mission personnel.
I believe that we should address the growing
complexity of the peacekeeping environment before
situations escalate beyond our capacity to react.
Twenty-first century peacekeeping has to draw upon
intelligence capabilities and new technologies in order
to improve the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. Proper training and relevant equipment may
constitute a difference between life and death. Troopcontributing countries, as well as regional organizations,
should take that factor into consideration.
Nevertheless, there are no quick fixes if we want
durable solutions to asymmetrical threats. We need
sound mid- and long-term strategies aimed at addressing
the root causes of conflicts and asymmetrical threats.
On-the-field measures must be preceded with political
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

planning and adjustments, depending on the situation on
the ground. In that connection, the United Nations has
and should play an important role in activities related
to sustaining peace. As the Chair of the High-level
Independent Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(HIPPO), José Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste, rightly put
it:
“The ‘sustaining peace’ concept frees the
peacebuilding enterprise from the short-term
horizons that constrain it, particularly when it
is conducted as part of a peace operation, which
tends to treat the building of peace as a conflict
management tool with few predictable resources
to ensure its sustainability beyond the lifetime of
the mission.”
Against that backdrop, close cooperation in the field
of peace operations among the Security Council, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and other relevant United
Nations constituencies is a must. The United Nations
has a particularly vast and unique experience with
regard to assistance in security sector reforms, as well
as in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. Those are crucial with regard to breaking
a vicious circle of violence. They also contribute to
limiting the threats posed by violent extremism.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that much has
already been done. The HIPPO report (see S/2015/446),
the peacekeeping review and debates like that we
are having today contribute to the recognition of the
challenges faced by peacekeepers. With regard to
combating asymmetrical threats, our success will be
very much contingent upon the coherent and persistent
implementation of existing recommendations by the
United Nations and the international community. We
also hope that the new Secretary-General, António
Guterres, will actively approach this challenge while
keeping in mind that security is the cornerstone of the
peaceful world we all want to live in.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am honoured to make
this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.

S/PV.7802

We thank Senegal for initiating this important
debate. Asymmetrical threats, including those posed
by terrorism and organized crime, are a reality of
contemporary conflicts. The perpetrators of such
violence are spoilers of peace. Of the 11 countries most
affected by terrorism, 7 currently host United Nations
peace operations. The Nordic countries fully subscribe
to the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) in its report (see
S/2015/446) that United Nations missions are not suited
to conduct counter-terrorism operations. However,
where asymmetrical threats are present, United Nations
missions must adapt to deal with those challenges.
Allow me to make five brief points.
First, all missions must be provided with the
necessary capabilities to fulfil their mandate and ensure
the safety of United Nations personnel. The HIPPO
report calls for a comprehensive quality reform in
United Nations operations, including through adequate
medical supplies and support. The Nordic countries are
pleased that the United Nations has initiated important
improvements in that spirit, but much more needs to
be done.
Some innovative developments indicate that we are
heading in the right direction. In the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the Nordic countries, together with other partners,
have pioneered the use of intelligence through the All
Sources Information Fusion Unit (ASIFU). ASIFU helps
the Mission to better monitor potential perpetrators
of asymmetrical violence, thereby strengthening its
ability to prevent and respond to attacks. Based on
that experience, the Nordic countries recommend that
the United Nations further develop its technological
and analytical tools to better understand, prevent and
respond to radicalization and asymmetrical violence.
Secondly,
even
in
challenging
security
environments, United Nations missions must continue
to reach out to local communities. Where necessary,
United Nations missions must be ready to act decisively
and without hesitation to protect civilians.
Thirdly, the United Nations should deepen its
partnership with regional organizations, the African
Union (AU) in particular. The AU has gained rich
experience from dealing with asymmetrical conflict
environments, such as in Somalia. We believe that a
deepened partnership and exchange of best practices

16-3637549/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

would benefit all parties, including in planning and
conducting operations.
Fourthly, we must ensure that all United Nations
personnel operating in complex security environments
have the adequate training and equipment to carry out
their tasks. We must invest in leadership at all levels.
Where necessary, the United Nations should facilitate
and provide assistance to capacity-building and training
towards that end.
My fifth and final point is that we must address
the root causes of conflict and invest more in
prevention, often taking the regional perspective into
account. Priority should be given to stopping illicit
financial flows and the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as to improving development policies,
strengthening fragile States, involving women and
offering young people education and job opportunities.
Together with all relevant stakeholders, within and
outside the United Nations family, we must be willing to
engage for the long haul in order to prepare the ground
for genuine political solutions and to sustain peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): In order to save time, I shall deliver an
abridged version of my statement, which will appear in
full on our Mission website.
In the face of asymmetrical threats, it is clear that
United Nations troopsdo not have the vocation to fight
terrorist organizations. Nevertheless, they must be able
to protect themselves. How can they do that? I would
like to make four points on that subject.
First, we must focus on training. It is absolutely
essential for United Nations forces to be appropriately
trained before deployment. Likewise, appropriate
equipment is absolutely indispensable. I note in that
regard that Belgium will pursue training efforts in the
framework of training-of-trainers courses.
My second remark concerns the need to recognize
the importance of intelligence as a factor in ensuring
the effective deployment of the Blue Helmets. In the
context of a deteriorated situation, it is essential to make
use of improved intelligence concerning the situation
on the ground. The progress made in that area needs to
be taken forward.
50/77

07/11/2016

Thirdly, it is essential to ensure that we enjoy the
support of the local population. We must therefore
create a network of confidence-based relations among
the population. Furthermore, it is of course important
to ensure that the troops deployed have the linguistic
competence to ensure the best interaction possible with
the local population.
My fourth and final point touches on peacekeeping
operation mandates. Clear mandates — sequenced
according to priority, better aligned with the consistent
efforts of the United Nations system on the ground, and
the suject of consultations with the troop-contributing
countries — are absolutely crucial. In that framework,
it would also be interesting to consider the possibility
of redesigning mandates in the light of the global or
regional context of asymmetrical threats.
The three strategic reviews of peacekeeping
operations in 2015 all stressed the importance of conflict
prevention. That finding is even more relevant today.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea congratulates Senegal on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. We also appreciate Senegal’s initiative in
convening this ministerial open debate on peacekeeping
operations facing asymmetrical threats, and thank
Foreign Minister Mankeur Ndiaye for coming to New
York to preside over the debate.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
contributed significantly to the resolution of conflicts
and to the declining number of conflicts over two
decades. The Republic of Korea has long been a troopcontributing country and financial contributor to
that essential function of the United Nations. Today,
however, we are concerned that the changing nature of
conflict and the speed of that change may outpace the
ability of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
respond. The threat of terrorism, for instance, is placing
significant pressure on the peacekeeping system as
a whole.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
observed that
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

“a United Nations peace operation is not designed
or equipped to impose political solutions through
sustained use of force” (S/2015/682, para. 15).
However, the unfortunate reality is that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are increasingly deployed in
violent and asymmetrically threatening environments,
taking on an undue share of the burden. In 2016 alone,
30 peacekeepers were killed in action as a result of
malicious acts. Against such a stark background, let me
offer the following thoughts.
First, given the complexity of the challenges of
delivering on Council mandates in such threatening
environments, we must do more to address the issue
of how to improve provision of field support and use
of force enablers, including helicopters, heavy weapons
and hospitals. It is simply unrealistic to expect good
results from field missions without providing them
with adequate resources to carry out their mandate.
Among the 30 casualties in peacekeeping operations
directly resulting from attacks of an asymmetrical
nature this year, 25 took place within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). MINUSMA is one of
the United Nations peacekeeping missions exposed to
asymmetrical threats, ranging from sporadic attacks
by terrorists to cross-boundary crimes, yet it is
insufficiently equipped and supported.
It may be no coincidence that in MINUSMA, one
out of every two medical clinics has critical equipment
gaps, including everything from integrated trauma care
to intensive care. As a part of the pledge made during the
2015 Leaders’ Summit on peacekeeping, the Republic
of Korea is currently working with the African Union
and the Government of Mali to provide equipment for a
level-2 medical facility in northern Mali. Through that
medical facility, it is our hope that the Government of
Mali can win the hearts and minds of the Malian people
and gain an upper hand in its effort to restore order in
the region.
Secondly, intelligence capabilities and the use of
new technologies can improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. United Nations peacekeeping operations
increasingly deploy a variety of technologies to collect,
communicate and analyse data and information to
support decision-making and coherent operational
responses. Those are part of the efforts to counterbalance the threats from the changing operational
environment.

S/PV.7802

The Republic of Korea, in partnership with
the Department of Field Support and Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, is hosting the Third
International
Partnership
for
Technology
in
Peacekeeping Symposium this week in Seoul, Korea.
The Symposium will provide further insight into the
challenges of the modern peacekeeping environment
and offer opportunities for sharing ideas on ways to
overcome those challenges.
Finally, as highlighted in the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO),
“[p]olitics must drive the design and implementation
of peace operations” (S/2015/446, p. 10).
Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are all part of a continuum in which the transitions are
neither lineal nor strictly sequential. The pursuit of a
political settlement, by maintaining a political space for
United Nations mediation, is particularly important in a
non-permissive environment.
The HIPPO report recognizes that where
asymmetrical threats are present within the operating
environment, United Nations missions must be
provided with the necessary capabilities and training.
The Republic of Korea, as an ardent supporter of that
and other recommendations of the HIPPO and the
Secretary-General, looks forward to continued efforts
to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia congratulates
Senegal on assuming the Security Council presidency
for the month of November and thanks you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Indonesia strongly condemns all acts of violence
against United Nations personnel. Our heartfelt
sympathy is with the bereaved families of fallen
peacekeepers and other mission personnel. We salute
the courage and professionalism of all those United
Nations personnel who have laid down their lives while
performing their duties.
The highly tragic attacks against the personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations

16-3637551/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

07/11/2016

Mission in South Sudan, and the everyday dangers
confronted by many other peacekeeping operations,
show the painful costs in terms of flesh and blood
arising from the inability of States to build peaceful
societies and the exploitation of divisions by non-State
actors for their perverse ends.

ongoing conflicts effectively and preventing emerging
ones. We would therefore support further discourse
aimed at expanding the scope of how peacekeeping
operations can provide adequate support to national
Governments and local communities to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism.

Indonesia underlines the need for the best possible
protection for mission personnel in a manner that
is well coordinated and properly supported by all
stakeholders, and welcomes efforts to further enhance
the discourse in the context of improving the safety and
security of peacekeepers. This process has to begin
with the Security Council, which should ensure that
realities on the ground are clearly known to all on a
continuous basis. When the mandates of peacekeeping
operations are drafted or modified, the Council should
consult regularly with troop- and police- contributing
countries, host Governments and pertinent regional
actors. Leveraging its networks and pertinent actors,
the Council must also try to build communication with
non-State actors involved in a conflict. Not all non-State
actors may have the same motivations and end goals.
This is not an easy task, but every effort must be made
to make them realize the imperative of not harming
civilians and United Nations personnel.

Given the more complex and volatile nature
of conflicts today, United Nations peacekeeping
missions need to be flexible within reasonable
parameters. Indonesia also fully supports the effective
implementation of protection of civilian mandates,
but the mandates must be explicit, with clear rules of
engagement, reinforced with needed equipment and
resources. Peace enforcement should be pursued only as
an exception and on a case-by-case basis, with thorough
consultations with all relevant stakeholders, particularly
troop-contributing countries and host authorities.

As the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations and the Secretary-General have rightly
mentioned, peacekeeping operations are not meant
for and should not engage in counter-terrorism
activities. No stone should be left unturned in
enhancing the situational awareness and response
capabilities of United Nations peacekeepers with
better communication, coordination, predeployment
training and adequate protection equipment. The key
to addressing asymmetrical threats from terrorism is in
the sound implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter Terrorism Strategy and prioritizing conflict
prevention and political solutions, as stressed by the
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and resolution 1325 (2000).
Violent extremism often increases in the same
conditions that lead to a heightened risk of conflict.
While pronouncements have often been made about
giving higher priority to prevention, mediation,
peacemaking and sustaining peace, as laid out
concurrently in General Assembly resolution 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), much is
expected from the United Nations in terms of clearly
advancing a principles-based approach to resolving
52/77

I will not hesitate to repeat before the Council that
it is critical that Blue Helmets not be perceived as a
party to any conflict. Their neutrality and credibility
are of the essence. Any divergence from that principle
threatens not only their safety and security, but also the
safety of population that they are mandated to protect.
The three proven basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping — namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force, except in selfdefence and defence of the mandate — must be upheld.
Since 1957, when Indonesia first contributed
to United Nations peacekeeping, it has accorded
high importance to it. Currently, 2,867 Indonesian
peacekeepers are serving in 10 different missions. We
aim to contribute up to 4,000 of our highly trained and
proficient troops and police by 2019 under Indonesia’s
Roadmap for Vision 4000 Peacekeepers. Council
members will always find Indonesia to be unwavering
and vigorous in its efforts to help achieve global peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Senegalese presidency for
organizing this open debate for the invitation extended
to our Foreign Minister.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

In view of the evolving nature and challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh
remains seized with efforts to continuously update and
strengthen its deployment and operational capabilities
on the ground. The growing frequency and magnitude
of threats posed by various non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, have made our task daunting and
complex. In recent times, our peacekeepers, contingentowned equipment and other capabilities have come
under a number of indiscriminate attacks, particularly
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
In recognition of our valuable contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, our
peacekeepers have withstood those attacks and other
prevailing threats, and continue to serve with a high
degree of professionalism and dedication. Against that
backdrop, we wish to focus on five critical issues.
First, the proliferation of asymmetrical attacks
against peacekeepers underscores the importance
of linking peacekeeping operations with sound and
sustainable political strategies to resolve conflicts.
There is a need to maintain regular engagement and
consultations between host Governments and the
concerned peacekeeping or special political missions
to make peace processes and agreements inclusive and
broad-based. Depending on the context, there may be a
need to explore avenues for dialogue with the various
conflicting parties in order to encourage them to
adhere to the principles and rules of engagement for
the deployment and presence of peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, the Council must attach the highest
priority to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel, including through
regular and meaningful triangular consultation
involving troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat. In order to improve situational
awareness and the threat assessment on the ground, the
enhanced use of technologies needs to be considered
from a pragmatic viewpoint, while addressing questions
relating to national sovereignty, transparency and
confidentiality. Due emphasis should be placed on the
mission’s interface with local communities, traditional
views of human intelligence, and awareness of
applicable investigation and prosecutorial mechanisms.
The crucial role played by joint operations centres,
joint mission analysis centres and other security-related
analysis capabilities needs to be optimized through
regular gap analysis and core capacity-building.

S/PV.7802

Thirdly, the protection of civilians in the face
asymmetrical threats should be given due priority in
line with the concerned mission mandates. In view of
the growing and targeted attacks against civilian and
military aviation capacities and other critical enablers,
their protection and upkeep also deserve urgent
consideration. The development and dissemination of
specific policies, operational guidelines and training
manuals to address pressing issues of concern should
be pursued through regular interface with troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Fourthly, it is evident that peacekeeping missions
are not equipped to engage militarily in counterterrorism operations, and must not be mandated to do
so. There are good practices whereby missions have
effectively contributed to enhancing the capacity of host
Governments in counter-terrorism efforts, including
through support for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security and correction sector refor,m
and promoting human rights due diligence. There may
be potential ways for missions to expand their support
for developing appropriate policies and strategies for
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism,
as well as their underlying drivers, subject to specific
requests by host Governments.
Fifthly, in the context of increased volatility
in security environments, we must ensure that the
adequate provision of defence stores in missions,
as well as increased investment in medical and
casualty evacuation, gets its fair share of attention.
The introduction of risk premiums for troops and
police deployed in difficult environments and the
call for periodic review of the death and disability
compensation rates are steps in the right direction. The
role of the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre,
and the ongoing work on crisis management, should
be properly leveraged, including through appropriate
contingency planning.
In conclusion, the increasing and deepening
asymmetric threats facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations require a whole-of-United-Nations response
in accordance with the respective mandates and
competencies of the organs and entities involved.
We therefore emphasize the importance of further
expanding the scope of this dialogue in relation to
the relevant normative discussions across the system,
including within the framework of the comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace.

16-3637553/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Mr. António (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the African Union Commission, I would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
Republic of Senegal’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. And I would like
to welcome the notable presence in the Council this
morning of Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Senegal, in a reflection of
the unwavering commitment of his country, one of the
Organization’s largest contributors of troops to the
maintenance of peace and international security, and of
its determination to make a substantial contribution to
the work of the Council.
I would also like to thank those ministers who
travelled to New York to be here today, as well as Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis for their briefings.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate our admiration for
the men and women who struggle daily, in extremely
difficult conditions, in order to implement the mandate
entrusted to them, and to pay heartfelt tribute to those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in fulfilling their
mission under the banner of the United Nations.
Today, peacekeeping is evolving in highly complex
and often hostile situations. In dealing with various
asymmetric threats, including the proliferation of
non-State armed groups and rising terrorism and
violent extremism, the conduct of peacekeeping, which
has been through several transformations, is still
struggling to adapt to the increasing complexity of
security environments. Except for a few notable cases,
peacekeeping work is still underpinned by the formal
principles of impartiality, neutrality and the limited
use of force. Today’s debate comes at the right time
for us to identify areas we should think about with the
goal of adapting and modernizing this valuable tool in
order to enable our Organization to tackle the emerging
challenges and fulfil its mission more efficiently.
In that regard, while recognizing the validity
of the statement in the 2015 report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations that “United
Nations peacekeeping missions... are not suited to engage
in military counter-terrorism operations” (S/2015/446,
54/77

07/11/2016

p. 45), we must continue our effort to arrive at the right
balance between preserving important aspects of our
traditional principles, on the one hand, and the growing
need to use force in order to tackle armed groups that
fly in the face of all fundamental rights, on the other.
That effort should also take into account the principle
of complementarity, as provided for in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, and which highlights
the importance of making judicious combined use
both of the universality of the United Nations and the
advantages that regional organizations offer.
Given their proximity to and familiarity with
conflicts occurring in Africa, the African Union (AU)
and its regional mechanisms have shown a renewed
determination to display the necessary leadership and,
together with the United Nations, to contribute to our
collective security, as laid down in the Charter. The
experience of the African Union — which, should it
need emphasizing, has enabled the emergence of an
African model for peace operations — highlights the
need to rethink the cooperation model between the
United Nations and the AU with a view to strengthening
peacekeeping’s effectiveness. Based essentially on the
principle of non-indifference to human suffering, what
distinguishes our model is that it deploys missions
with robust mandates whose main tasks are usually
protecting civilians, neutralizing armed and terrorist
groups and promoting the authority of the State. The
African Union believes in intervening as quickly as
possible in order to save lives, contain violent conflicts
and help stabilize security situations in order to create
the conditions necessary for the United Nations to
deploy its peacekeeping operations at a later stage.
In mandating the deployment since 2003 of more
than 70,000 uniformed personnel and about 1,500
civilians in nine operations, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have shown their determination
to play their part to the full and make a significant
contribution to collective security efforts in Africa.
In that regard, the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union recently decided to take on greater
responsibility for financing its peace operations and
to meet the commitment made in 2015 to finance
25 per cent of the cost of African Union-led peace
support operations.
Those developments reflect the importance of
working to consolidate a strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, based on
the sharing of responsibilities and the resulting costs.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

That vision is particularly legitimate given the fact
that the sustainable financing of peace and security
in Africa is not merely an African priority but an
international strategic imperative, given the complex
and interconnected nature of the threats we are seeing
to peace and security. We therefore hope to be able to
rely on the unanimous support of Security Council
members in enshrining the principle of burdensharing and authorizing funding from the United
Nations budget amounting to 75 per cent of the costs
of operations conducted by the African Union with
the Council’s consent. We hope to see the ongoing
preparations culminate in the Council’s adoption of a
resolution during the Senegal presidency.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): I thank the Senegalese presidency for
organizing today’s important debate.
(spoke in English)
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. In addition, we fully support
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Italy, in the light of our cooperation related to the
upcoming termthat we are splitting with Italy in the
Security Council. During this split term, in 2017 and
2018, the Netherlands, together with Italy, will continue
its sustained efforts for more effective peace operations.
As the representative of Italy stated, we encourage
other countries to join us in that endeavour.
The environment in which our peace operations
have to operate has become more dangerous and
more challenging. Asymmetric threats in particular
abound. Yesterday’s attack on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) convoy was a case in point. We
mourn the people killed, and our thoughts are with the
people wounded.
I would like to address three elements that in our
view are of crucial importance for peace operations
when addressing these new asymmetric threats. They
are: the need for a comprehensive approach; the need
for better-qualified troops; and the need for better
intelligence.
First, let me elaborate on the need for a
comprehensive approach. During the recent visit to

S/PV.7802

the Netherlands by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali, Mr. Diop, the latter stressed that we needed to
address the problem of violent extremism and terrorism
in a more sustainable way. We therefore need to fully
understand and fully address what really drives young,
often moderately religious Malians to resort to joining
terrorist groups. We need to address their hopes, their
ambitions and their fears.
To do so, in our view peace operations need to be
part of a more integrated approach. Peace operations
must be linked to other available instruments for
promoting peace, security and stability. We therefore
need to connect peacekeeping with the political process
and with economic development. The term we in the
Netherlands use is the “3D” approach, combining the
means of diplomacy, defence and development. We must
create economic opportunities for young people who
might be receptive to the ideas of violent extremism. We
must make sure that there is a political perspective, and
we must make sure to prevent and address violence and
to protect civilians. Only an integrated, comprehensive
approach can ensure a lasting impact.
This brings me to my second point: the United
Nations needs better-trained and better-equipped
peacekeeping troops and police forces in order to face
asymmetric threats.
As we have seen in South Sudan, protection of
civilians has become a vital element in a lot of missions.
But the recent report on Juba in South Sudan proves
yet again how important training and equipment are for
missions in order for them to be able to implement their
mandates.
In terms of equipment, let me highlight the issue
of helicopters and vehicles resistant to improvised
explosive devices. These are scarce assets and
expensive capabilities, but they are essential to counter
asymmetric threats. These are also assets that are crucial
to continuing to increase the necessary interaction of
Blue Helmets with the local population.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations is
looking for innovative solutions. In particular, we
welcome the work being done for a long-term rotation
plan for helicopters in MINUSMA, in Mali. Under such
a plan, countries would agree to provide helicopters
for a specific period as part of a longer-term planning
effort. This would make it on the one hand easier for
countries to commit their troops and their assets and on

16-3637555/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

07/11/2016

the other would make it easier for the United Nations to
enter into long-term planning.

convey our heartfelt condolences to the Governments of
Mali and Togo in connection with this tragic loss of life.

Let me turn to my final point: better intelligence.

In our assessment, seven of the current United
Nations peacekeeping operations face a higher
incidence of asymmetric and violent threats that have
resulted in a larger number of fatalities. Today’s hybrid
peacekeeping operations are all the more vulnerable
and therefore urgently require a systematized plan to
reduce the higher risk by adapting existing approaches
or creating new strategies.

In complex and dangerous environments such as
Mali, the gathering, analysis and use of intelligence
is vital, not only for the effective implementation
of the mandate but also for the security of United
Nations personnel. We have worked together with
the United Nations in developing and introducing a
substantial intelligence capacity in MINUSMA, and
this capacity helps the peacekeepers in seeing, hearing
and understanding what is happening around them. It
helps peacekeepers to understand the threats around
them and helps them to address these threats, both
traditional and asymmetric, as early as possible. We
can all see that the concept of intelligence within the
United Nations system is evolving. We believe that it
has to evolve further in view of the asymmetric threats
we discussed today.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner in
further developing the use of intelligence in peace
operations. In short, let us work together in making our
peace operations more intelligent.
In conclusion, it is clear that in the current
environment the United Nations can no longer rely only
on traditional methods to counter asymmetric threats.
We need to innovate, to adjust and to be flexible. We
need to step up to face these new challenges, before
terrorist groups disrupt delicate peace processes,
before more civilians become the victims of terrorists,
before we lose even more peacekeepers. Let us all
work together to make peace operations more effective.
Let us work together to make peacekeepers better
equipped and better trained, and let us work together
to connect peace operations, diplomacy and sustainable
development. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
remain the Security Council’s partner in that ambition.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I commend
the presidency of Senegal for bringing to light the
asymmetrical threats that United Nations peacekeepers
face today, deployed as they are in very hostile
situations where there is no peace to keep. We strongly
condemn the deadly attack yesterday in northern Mali
that claimed the lives of Malian civilians and killed one
peacekeeper from Togo while injuring seven others. We
56/77

The
Secretary-General’s
report
on
the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) noted that United
Nations peace operations are not appropriate tools for
military counter-terrorism operations, and we agree
that the United Nations is not equipped to carry out such
operations. At the same time, it is in asymmetric threat
environments that the United Nations plays a vital role in
protecting civilians and facilitating preventive political
processes. The test is not in delivering a decisive
military response but in supporting and strengthening
preventive multi-stakeholder interventions that avert
instability, promote good governance and sustain peace.
The key to success is thus to address head-on the
drivers of terrorism and violent extremism rather than
merely manage the symptoms. Therefore, a number
of areas for strategic and operational improvements
should be addressed so as to navigate more safely and
effectively in such hazardous environments.
To begin with, it is of key importance to improve
understanding of the political and historical context
in the planning of missions, before deploying troops.
This is all the more necessary in the case of hybrid and
multidimensional missions with numerous components
that are in demand in critical situations. These efforts
have to be accompanied by efforts to offer technical and
programmatic support to institutions in order to build
and consolidate the rule of law and reform the security
sector, in addition to the most important component
of preventive diplomacy. We are ready to share our
valuable experience in that field.
It is essential that peace operations have clear
mandates and be adequately resourced so as to ensure
safety and security. To combat asymmetric threats,
it is essential today to strengthen anti-improvisedexplosive-device training and to stress the greater
provision of anti-mine vehicles.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Missions should have the ability to adequately
monitor what happens in their environments by
deploying intelligence capacities. The introduction of
new technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicles,
used solely for surveillance purposes, situational
awareness and life-saving purposes for both United
Nations personnel and local populations, has shown
beneficial and lasting results.
Kazakhstan is a responsible Member State and one
committed to peacekeeping. It is deploying its military
personnel to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in the Western Sahara and United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire. There are plans to augment its
contribution in the future by deploying its contingent.
My country stands ready to support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in being effective and efficient
in fulfilling their tasks.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks Senegal for convening today’s
important debate on a subject that presents one of
the most pressing challenges for some peacekeeping
operations. In recent years, we have seen how the
constant changes in the challenges to peace and security
compel such operations to discharge their missions in
unstable environments and volatile security conditions
that hinder them from fulfilling their missions, and,
in particular, when they do not possess the logistical
capacity and means to do so. To guarantee their
efficiency, effectiveness and safety on the ground,
such operations must have a clear, specific mandate
from the Security Council in order to be duly equipped
with clear and viable strategies to perform their tasks.
To that end, Mexico believes that the United Nations
should be given all of the tools it needs, such as the
ability to gather further intelligence as needed, in order
to be able to mitigate the challenges posed by the new
international peace and security landscape.
Despite what has just been said and as we have
stated in the competent General Assembly forums, we
reiterate our opposition to peacekeeping operations
becoming counter-terrorism tools. Given their
composition and nature, such operations do have neither
the specific equipment or training needed to conduct
logistics or intelligence operations, nor the specialized
military training for counter-terrorism operations. Any
attempt to drastically modify their mandates would

S/PV.7802

not only damage the core of their operations but also
put their staff and the civilian population that they are
tasked with protecting at risk. In that regard, we agree
with the recommendations contained in the Report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
which states that “[e]xtreme caution should guide the
mandating of enforcement tasks to degrade, neutralize
or defeat a designated enemy” (S/2015/446, p.12),
including terrorist groups or other forms of non-State
actors in the mandates of such operations.
Mexico acknowledges that asymmetrical threats,
including those from terrorist groups jeopardize
the effective use of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and the safety of United Nations staff.
Improving the interaction between the Security Council
and its relevant sanctions committees, the Secretariat
and countries that contribute personnel to peacekeeping
operations, is of critical importance so as to enable
the Council to have clear, accurate information on the
situation on the ground in the countries in which those
operations are deployed. In that regard, we believe that
particular attention should be paid to capacity-building
in peace operations deployed in complex environments
in order to assist with the preventive efforts made by the
host country to address such threats, particularly in the
area of lending support to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for former combatants,
the reform of the security sector and the building and
strengthening of national justice and correctional
facilities.
Similarly, we call for the efforts of the international
community to be focused on developing integrated
responses and initiatives that seek to address the
structural causes of conflicts — which in many
instances, foster the spread of extremist ideologies that
could also lead terrorism — and, in so doing, achieve
sustainable peace. Finally, Mexico takes advantage of
today’s meeting to reiterate the importance of effectively
implementing the results of the peace operations review
processes that took place during the previous sessions
of the General Assembly and of the Council with a view
to having countries plagued by violent, armed conflict
transition to sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

16-3637557/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

for the month of November. Since it joined the Council,
your delegation has worked unceasingly to promote the
topics dear to our continent, including matters relating
to peacekeeping, through its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and we
are grateful to you for that.
I would also like to apologize on behalf of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Morocco, Mr. Mezouar, who is unable to join us
given his function as President of the twenty-second
Conference of the Parties United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which he opened today.
Finally, I would like to thank you for the choice
of theme of today’s meeting, in which we are
particularly interested as a troop-contributing country
as peacekeeping operations now face the challenges
of terrorism, transnational criminal networks and all
genres of trafficking and smuggling. The regrettable
incident that claimed the life of a Togolese Blue Helmet
and injured seven, including civilians, has also been
mentioned during today’s debate. We extend our
sympathy to the people of Mali and Togo.
United Nations peacekeeping has undergone
tremendous change since its creation. From the 1950s
until the end of the last century, traditional peacekeeping
was limited to observing ceasefire agreements and
serving as an interposition force. Furthermore, to date,
military observers are not armed. Nonetheless, given
the changes in the nature and scope of contemporary
challenges, peacekeeping operations have had to adapt
and evolve. In addition, the range of their activities has
expanded and now encompasses several peacebuilding
tasks, such as the capacity-building of host countries,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration support,
security sector reform and the strengthening of the
rule of law, just to name a few areas. Contemporary
traditional peacekeeping missions also face the new
phenomenon of asymmetrical threats, which are a
broad concept, subject to various interpretations.
Therefore, we will limit our statement to the threat of
terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime and
its related activities, which peacekeeping operations,
and in particular, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, must face.
The terrorist threat is real and has a significant
impact on the security and the safety of Blue Helmets and
civilian populations. As a troop-contributing country,
Morocco is concerned about the increasing number
58/77

07/11/2016

of deaths among Blue Helmets and hopes that today’s
debate and discussions under way at the United Nations
will enable us to remedy that unprecedented situation.
Aware of the need to tailor peacekeeping operations
to their current environment, we continue to firmly
support the peacekeeping principles of impartiality,
the consent of parties and the non-use of force, except
in cases of legitimate defence and to uphold mandates.
As highlighted in the concept note (see S/2016/927,
annex), which contains an extract from the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446), the challenge for peacekeeping operations
today is to protect themselves against asymmetrical
threats rather than combat such threats.
The current trend is to develop concepts and
measures that steer us away from the principles of
peacekeeping. Some solutions proposed could have
a significant impact on the ground if they are clearly
implemented and based on consensus to avoid having
peacekeeping operations and our Blue Helmets being
considered belligerents and, by extension, targets. I
will give two examples to illustrate my point.
The first is intelligence-gathering. Peacekeeping
operations have always gathered intelligence and
analysed information. A number of mechanisms exist,
including the Joint Mission Analysis Cell, the Joint
Operations Centre, U-2 surveillance planes, among
others. Mindful of the specific situation of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, an intelligence-gathering unit attached
to the Mission — the All Sources Information Fusion
Unit (ASIFU) — has been deployed. Unfortunately, it
has not had the expected result for a number of reasons,
on which we will not dwell in this debate. However,
the experience did underscore the importance of
clear modalities in this area in order to ensure that a
number of challenges facing ASIFU are met, such as
information-sharing, its ownership and knowledge of
the field. We have had an opportunity to speak to those
challenges repeatedly.
What the United Nations needs is to readapt
existing resources and to make optimimum use of
available information. The simple fact of using the
term “intelligence” can lead to confusion and even
undermine the very image of the Mission, which could
be perceived as a party to the conflict. The same applies
to cooperation with various United Nations entities
committed to the fight against terrorism or institutions,
such as Interpol. It is necessary to clarify the terms of
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

that cooperation and ensure that they conform to the
principles of peacekeeping.
The second point I wish to make concerns the use
of new technologies. We often hear that peacekeeping
cannot meet the challenges of the twenty-first century
with the tools of the twentieth. I believe that we all
agree on that. Where opinions diverge is with respect
to the operationalization of those resources. When one
refers to new technologies, we often think of drones,
which are modern tools that can be very effective in
surveillance and have demonstrated their utility in
certain situations. However, some are reticent regarding
their use as a result of the fact that to date, even though
they have been deployed in three missions, there are
still no clear modalities for their use. Many questions
linked to confidentiality regarding the use of drones or
their scope of application have not yet been addressed.
We therefore take this opportunity to reiterate our call
for discussions on the topic, especially in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which is the
only body that can take decisions in that field. Other
modern technological resources, such as sophisticated
surveillance cameras or protection equipment, could
also be used.

S/PV.7802

study of the field. In that respect, a statement of unit
requirement could be considered in order to ensure
that it take better into account the specificities of the
location of deployment.
Fourthly, we should ensure that predeployment
training is bolstered and adapted to the reality on
the ground.
Fifthly, I stress the importance of ensuring that
the principles of peacekeeping — including neutrality,
impartiality, consent of the parties and the non-use
of force, except in cases of legitimate self-defence
and defence of the mandate— are respected. Certain
mission tasks that transform the military personnel into
targets are not acceptable.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I wish to thank
the Senegalese delegation for organizing this highly
pertinent open debate. As others have said, United
Nations peacekeepers today operate in a much
more challenging environment than at any time in
peacekeeping history and increasingly in areas where
there is no peace to keep. The latest attacks and loss of
life in Mali are yet another reminder of the threats that
peacekeepers face.

This debate is taking place at just the right
time, as discussions on the future of United Nations
peacekeeping are under way. Following the review
process launched by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, we are all called on to consider
the ways in which we can make peacekeeping more
effective and better tailored to new realities. To this end,
allow me to share a few thoughts for our consideration
as part of our debate here today.

In 2015, the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) report (see S/2015/446)
and the report of the Expert Panel on Technology and
Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping spoke
clearly of the need for change at all stages of mission
life. Their recommendations, if realized, would help to
improve missions’ ability to deliver on their mandates
and protect peacekeepers, who continue to lose their
lives in the line of duty.

First, we should improve our understanding of the
threats facing missions by enhancing our preliminary
studies of the theatre of enagement. That process should
not be confused with intelligence-gathering. It will also
facilitate mission planning, and take into account all
specific aspects of the engagement.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to make the following statement in my national capacity.

Secondly we should establish conditions conducive
to promoting contact and communication with local
populations. Indeed, local populations remain the
main source of information. In that framework, it is
important to include languages as part of the criteria
for the selection of contingents, in particular French, a
language that is used in most peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, we should ensure that the troops deployed
have the necessary equipment, based on the preliminary

If situational awareness is missing or flawed,
mandate implementation, including the core protection
of civilians function, will suffer. Force commanders
will be handicapped in their decisions and in their
ability to keep their troops out of harm’s way. As the
Expert Panel points out, aerial data, geospatial and
geographic information and other remotely acquired
data are of critical importance to any peacekeeping
mission and should be available as a matter of course.
The use of technologies in peacekeeping would
improve early warning, enhance the ability to detect,
mitigate, deter and respond to threats of violence

16-3637559/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

against civilians, and protect the lives of peacekeepers
themselves. That is especially pertinent where
peacekeepers face asymmetric threats, which are a
lot harder to predict and pin down without such data.
We regret that the use of such date continues to elicit
strong resistance from some Member States. Global
Positioning System technology in mission vehicles,
night-vision goggles, infrared capabilities and reliable
cellular or satellite communications are needed to better
tackle such threats. Furthermore, medical evacuation
services must be readily available, especially when
peacekeepers are operating in high-risk areas.
Improved technology use should go hand in hand
with enhanced inter-agency information-sharing and
better use of available data-sharing tools. Joint Mission
Analysis Cell, Joint Operations Centre and geographic
information systems stakeholderould be expeditiously
and fully staffed and equipped to do their job. One
should not have to wait for months to fill such positions,
especially where asymmetrical threats are a daily
reality to grapple with.
There is a clear urgency to address the threat of
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) , starting from
pre-deployment training all the way through, to
counter-IED capabilities on the ground, including
ground sensors, jammers, radars, convoy protection
and the use of tactical drones in hazard areas. Troopand police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
should prepare and equip their contingents to operate
in asymmetrical threat environments and adapt their
standard operation procedures accordingly. The
inclusion of counter-IED expert capacity in peace
operations to train and advise TCCs/PCCs, as well as
host nation security forces, is a necessity.
My delegation commends the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in mitigating
IED risks in Mali, Somalia and elsewhere by providing
expert support, training, mentorship and equipment to
the peacekeepers deployed. Exploring and developing
partnerships with other bodies and organizations that
can offer relevant expertise and capacities to tackle
the threat is important. A good example of cooperation
is the route clearance e-learning course developed by
the North American Treaty Organization (NATO) at
the request of UNMAS. We note NATO’s readiness to
identify and develop further training opportunities, as
per UNMAS needs and requests.
60/77

07/11/2016

We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capabilities Readiness System,
which enables a more dynamic process of interaction
between United Nations Headquarters and Member
States for ensuring the readiness and timely deployment
of quality peacekeeping capabilities.
The safety of peacekeepers should be on the
priorities list of the Security Council as it designs or
adjusts peacekeeping mandates. Peacekeepers should
not be left to fend for themselves against asymmetric
threats. Numerous substantive recommendations to
that effect already exist, including those contained
in last year’s HIPPO report and the report on the
use of technologies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. At a time of increasingly scarce resources
and the growing human cost of today’s asymmetrical
threats to peacekeeping, we simply cannot afford to
keep commissioning new reports while ignoring their
recommendations. The time is now to move from the
should-do narrative to what has been done, what more
needs to be done and how best to do it. Civilian victims
and peacekeepers under attack need actions, not words.
Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay
expresses its profound consternation over the recent
attacks to United Nations peacekeeping missions in
South Sudan, Mali, Togo and the Central African
Republic, where civilian, police and military personnel
have fallen victim. We also condemn those attacks,
which violate international law and violate human
rights. We express our condolences to the families and
the Governments of those who lost their lives in the
service of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In an enviornment characterized by new threats
created by emerging asymmetrical and hybrid conflicts
that deepen old insecurities and turn peacekeeping
operations and civilians into targets, addressing
this debate with a practical and strategic approach
is especially relevant. For that reason, my delegation
congratulates Senegal’s presidency of the Security
Council for this initiative.
The Republic of Paraguay actively participates in
nine United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South
Sudan, Afghanistan and the Central African Republic.
We are convinced that peacekeeping operations are
a way of making the purposes and principles in the
Charter of the United Nations a reality. My country
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

is also convinced that peacekeeping operations must
firmly adhere to the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in legitimate self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Peacekeeping operations must not fight terrorism — that
is the task of States where terrorist groups are present.
Nevertheless, peacekeeping operations must be
prepared to face up to terrorism and thereby ensure that
they comply with their mandates.
Paraguay is aware of this situation and attaches
the utmost importance to the selection of the personnel
to be deployed in peacekeeping operations, with
consideration of their merits and skills, and provides
them with specific training, including predeployment
training on the protection of civilians. The training
of troops once they are deployed in host countries
must only be complementary to that received in
their countries of origin. Furthermore, capacity is
crucial — understood as the resources necessary to
carry out a mandate. Therefore, via the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Secretariat must
ensure that updated deployment manuals and accurate
intelligence are provided, in cooperation with States
and regional organizations, so that peacekeeping
operations can effectively comply with their mandates.
That responsibility is particularly important with regard
to the peacekeeping missions deployed under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, the delegation of Paraguay calls on
the delegations of Member States, on troop- and
police-contributing States, on host States, the Security
Council and the Secretariat to continue working
together to ensure the necessary cooperation and adopt
measures so that the contingents of peacekeeping
operations, especially those deployed, as I mentioned
previously, under Chapter VII of the Charter, receive
the proper training, equipment and timely and
appropriate information for the effective fulfilment of
their mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation would
like to congratulate Senegal on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and to expresses its appreciation
for the convening of this important and timely debate on
peacekeeping operations and the asymmetrical threats
facing them. We would also like to thank the Minister

S/PV.7802

for Foreign Affairs of Senegal and Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson or his pertinent remarks.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and wishes to make the
following additional remarks in its national capacity.
In the 70 years since the establishment of the
United Nations, the need for the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
has never been greater. This is manifested by the
proliferation of conflicts and the deployment of more
than 125,000 personnel in 38 United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions.
South Africa holds the view that peacekeepers
should be deployed in support of political or peace
processes, thereby working for the objective of
sustainable peace. We wish to state from the onset
that it remains the primary responsibility of States to
protect civilians within their borders, including against
terrorist threats. As emphasized in the 2015 report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, United Nations missions should
not be mandated to conduct military counter-terrorism
operations, because they are not suited for such actions.
The nature of conflict is evolving and new
asymmetrical threats to global peace and security
continue to emerge, which threaten the peace and
stability of States and regions. Recent acts of terrorism
across the world and against peacekeeping missions
have exposed the callous and heinous nature of
terrorism. South Africa stands firmly with the rest of
the international community in its condemnation of
such attacks and reiterates its stance that terrorism,
in whatever form and from whatever quarter, must
be condemned.
The United Nations is presently deployed in a
multitude of environments where it faces asymmetric
and violent threats, as in Somalia, Libya, Mali, Iraq
and Afghanistan. As the organ entrusted with the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the Security Council must ensure that these operations
are fully resourced and entrusted with the appropriate
mandate in order to respond to the context-specific
environments in which they are deployed.
As a troop-contributing country, South Africa
believes that we have a responsibility to ensure that

16-3637561/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

our troops have the capacity to operate in a secure
environment. In the context of asymmetrical threats
where our troops and United Nations personnel are
vulnerable and the mandate of the peace operation is
threatened, the mission must be sufficiently resourced
and equipped to protect itself and defend its mandate.
Also, if peace processes are obstructed and non-military
protection tools are inadequate, peacekeeping missions
with an explicit mandate to protect civilians must
play their part in the protection of civilians, including
through the use of force, as part of a robust response to
these threats.
Clarity must also be sought with regard to the
concept of stabilization. Numerous missions seem
to struggle in finding a working balance between
stabilization and military tasks, bearing in mind that
stabilization requires additional civilian and police
activities within the ambit of security sector reform.
There is therefore a need for greater understanding
surrounding the context and planning of a peacekeeping
mission before deployment.
Furthermore, in this modern age, we should
make use of all relevant resources, including the use
of technology, in order to enhance the effectiveness
of United Nations peace operations in responding to
asymmetrical threats. The deployment of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a credible example of the success that could be
achieved to address potential threats to a peace mission.
South Africa recognizes that the primary
responsibility for international peace and security
lies with the Security Council. However, at the same
time, it is often regional organizations, such as the
African Union (AU), that are the first responders and
deploy early in order to stabilize conflict situations, as
necessary, thereby enabling the United Nations to deploy
when conditions are more favourable. Concerning,
therefore, is the reluctance of the Council to fully fund
AU-led peace operations that are carried out on behalf
of the international community. In that regard, South
Africa calls for the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions to secure predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for AU peace operations authorized
by the Security Council.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its view that
terrorism and violent extremism cannot be defeated
militarily and cannot be dealt with solely through the
62/77

07/11/2016

use of force or coercive measures. We believe that the
only way for collective efforts to succeed is to address
the root causes through international cooperation.
Promoting political solutions aimed at resolving
conflict and creating the conditions for a better future
for all over the long term will go a long way towards
countering asymmetrical threats.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to begin by expressing
Israel’s immense appreciation to the courageous men
and women of United Nations peacekeeping forces, in
our area and worldwide. They risk their lives to protect
civilians and to maintain stability and security in
hotspots around the world. We applaud their courage
and their willingness to dedicate their lives to the
promotion of peace, and we pray for their safe return
home to their families and loved ones.
I would also like to thank the Senegal and the
President of the Security Council for convening this
important debate.
It has become increasingly urgent in recent years
to deal with this issue. For Israel, asymmetrical threats
are not just a theoretical notion, but a very real and
important issue. Israel has been living with the reality
of such terrorist threats for many years, on all fronts.
As we cope with this unfortunate reality on a daily
basis, so do the United Nations peacekeeping missions
that operate within Israel and in its neighbouring
States — the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The problematic security
environment created by terrorist groups and non-State
actors in the area endangers United Nations personnel
as well as their peacekeeping operations.
UNIFIL plays a key role in upholding resolution
1701 (2006) and helps maintain stability in our conflictfraught region. Operating in southern Lebanon, a
territory that is controlled by a terrorist organization,
requires both courage and commitment. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the troop-contributing
countries for their ongoing support, and UNIFIL Force
Commander Major General Michael Beary of Ireland
for his leadership and efforts to ensure stability in the
region. I would also like to emphasize that Israel is
committed to fully cooperate with UNIFIL and is ready
to collaborate in preparation for the upcoming strategic
review in February.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

While recognizing the important role of UNIFIL,
we must not forget that there is still much work to be
done on this front, as the internationally designated
terror organization Hizbullah, a proxy of Iran, remains
a primary factor of instability and chaos in the region.
In paragraph 8 of resolution 1701 (2006), the Council
called for
“the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon,
so that ... there will be no weapons or authority in
Lebanon other than that of the Lebanese State”.
Unfortunately, as we have stated many times in the past
in the Chamber, the resolution has never beem fully
implemented. In fact, even though there are more than
10,000 UNIFIL peacekeepers on the ground, Hizbullah
increased its arsenal from 7,000 rockets to over 120,000
in the 10 years since the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006) — I repeat, 120,000 rockets.
Hizbullah is embedding its arsenal in the civilian
infrastructure of southern Lebanon, stationing rocket
launchers and storing weapons caches in or adjacent
to schools, hospitals and private homes. We have, in
the past, provided the Council maps that prove that fact
beyond a shadow of a doubt. Yet, regardless of that proof
and the extensive presence of UNIFIL in the area, we do
not see that information reflected in UNIFIL reports.
That error must be corrected. What we do see in the
reports is a worrisome trend of obstructing UNIFIL’s
movement in southern Lebanon. These incidents
prevent UNIFIL from fulfilling its mandate in full. We
expect UNIFIL to report on any and all such incidents
that compromise its ability to properly monitor the area
and to provide a comprehensive account of the situation
on the ground.
Hizbullah has made it clear, in word and deed, that
it not only aspires to attack Israel with rockets from
Lebanese territory, but that it is also actively trying
to carry out attacks within Israeli territory. Just last
month, it came to light that Hizbullah had created
a terror infrastructure in Ghajar village. Hizbullah
operatives recruited individuals from the village who
were involved in drug trafficking and instructed them
to carry out deadly terror attacks in the city of Haifa,
Israel’s third most-populated city, and other potential
locations in the heart of Israel. It is only thanks to the
vigilance of Israeli security forces that those deadly
attacks were prevented and many lives were saved.
Hizbullah poses a threat not only to the people of
Israel and Lebanon but to the stability of the entire

S/PV.7802

region. That organization, founded and supplied by
Iran, has been taking part in the conflicts in Yemen
and Syria, assisting the Al-Assad regime in ruthlessly
slaughtering the Syrian people and prolonging the
devastating war in Yemen.
Hizbullah’s connection to Iran is no longer a
secret — it is actually proud of it and openly speaks
about it. Its leader, Hassan Nasrallah, admitted himself
that
“Hizbullah’s budget, its income, its expenses ...
come from the Islamic Republic of Iran. ... Just
as we receive the rockets that we use to threaten
Israel, we are receiving our money”.
These words constitute not only a violation of Lebanon’s
obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006), but also a violation by Iran of resolution 2231
(2015), which prohibits Iran from transferring arms or
related materials. Lebanon, a United Nations Member
State that claims to be a sovereign and independent
State, cannot be absolved of its responsibility to uphold
those resolutions nor of its duty not to allow a terrorist
organization in its midst.
The United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, which was put in place to ensure the upholding
of the 1974 ceasefire agreement between Syria and
Israel, has experienced the devastating effects of a wartorn country. Following the kidnapping of UNDOF
personnel from the Philippines and Fiji by terrorist
groups in Syria in 2013 and 2014, respectively, and the
inability of the Syrian regime to ensure the safety of
the peacekeepers, the peacekeeping mission was forced
to withdraw from the area of separation. As such,
UNDOF has been operating solely on the Israeli side of
the Golan Heights since September 2014.
Since then, Israel has been supporting and
facilitating the work of UNDOF and will continue
its support in order to allow UNDOF to carry out
its mandate safely and securely. We welcome the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations decision to
begin a gradual return to the area of separation and will
continue to work with UNDOF in order to facilitate
a gradual and coordinated redeployment. Israel
understands that UNDOF requires security guarantees
for the mission’s personnel in the light of the situation
in Syria, and therefore has established temporary
procedures for their crossing between the Alfa and
Bravo sides in order to facilitate their movement.

16-3637563/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

UNDOF plays a crucial role in maintaining
stability along the border, especially given the series
of spillover attacks from Syria to Israel, which have
unfortunately increased over the past year. During
the month of September alone there was a total of six
instances in which rockets launched from Syria landed
next to towns and villages inside Israeli territory, thus
risking the lives of Israeli citizens. Thankfully, thus
far, such rocket attacks have not resulted in casualties.
I would like to reiterate that Israel holds the
Government of Syria responsible for all actions that
take place within Syrian territory, and demands that
the Syrian regime abide by the 1974 Disengagement of
Forces Agreement between Israeli and Syrian Forces.
We will not tolerate any kind of spillover from Syria,
and will take all the necessary measures to protect our
civilians from harm.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Member States that contribute troops in order to
maintain the United Nations presence and activities,
despite the unstable situation in Syria. We also thank
UNDOF Force Commander Major General Jai Shanker
Menon of India for his strong leadership in the light of
the many challenges he faces.
We cannot confront the evil of today with the
equipment and technology of yesterday. In too many
cases, United Nations peacekeepers lack the equipment
and technology to fulfil their mandate and to fully
protect both civilians and themselves. Israel looks
forward to supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations in their important work, and has much to
offer in terms of cutting-edge technology, the protection
of civilians and the protection of peacekeepers. Israel
is working together with the United Nations in the
area of medical assistance to provide first-aid training
to United Nations staff in order to standardize that
important skill set throughout all United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Israel has also recently offered
to assist the United Nations in reducing the ecological
footprint of its peacekeeping operations by introducing
Israeli technology in the areas of renewable energy
and water treatment. We look forward to continuing
to engageme and cooperate with United Nations
peackeeping missions in those areas and others. While
we recognize the important role that peacekeeping
missions play in maintaining international peace and
security, we pray that one day our children will live in
64/77

07/11/2016

a world in which peacekeeping missions will no longer
be needed.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Gambia.
Mr. Tangara (Gambia): As an opening salvo,
I wish to congratulate the Republic of Senegal on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
are confident, Sir, that, given the pivotal role being
played by Senegal in global peace and security and
the renowned international credentials of your Foreign
Minister, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, this debate will go
down in the annals of Security Council deliberations as
one of the most insightful and productive.
Today’s debate on “Peace operations — facing
asymmetrical threats” is timely. The concept of
peacekeeping was launched by the United Nations to
douse the flames of inter- or intra-State conflicts, save
lives and property and facilitate and foster reconciliation
and reconstruction. In line with that vision, the brave
men and women known as the Blue Helmets of the
United Nations are at the front line of conflicts, risking
their lives daily and, at times, paying the ultimate price.
Unfortunately, the theatres of peacekeeping operations
have been radically changed and compromised by
serious challenges involving violent and fatal attacks
on United Nations peacekeeping troops. The situation
is so serious that in certain zones of conflict our
peacekeepers are more preoccupied with protecting
themselves than with implementing their mandate.
Several factors can be identified for the deteriorating
security environment in countries in which there are
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
To start with, many, if not most, of the countries
with peacekeeping operations are plagued with multiple
rebel movements that have carved out fiefdoms, thus
threatening national cohesion. Criminal gangs have
also weighed into the equation by taking advantage of
security lapses to further their criminal enterprises.
The peacekeeping environment is also compounded by
the proliferation of arms, and, in many instances, the
national army, which should handle national security, is
ill-equipped to handle the situation. Another worrying
development is the involvement of terrorist groups in
peacekeeping areas. In Mali, for example, we have
seen how terrorists can wreak havoc on a country
and peacekeepers. It is disheartening to recall how
rampaging terrorists in Mali desecrated mosques and
holy shrines, vandalized historical monuments and set
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

on fire ancient libraries and artifacts. Their attacks
on United Nations peacekeepers have been roundly
condemned, and we again raise our voice to reiterate
our condemnation.
The Gambia wishes to reiterate the call for
collective action against terrorism and criminals who
attack United Nations peacekeepers. Terrorism has
no regard for humankind. Criminals bent on peddling
drugs and profiting from human trafficking and other
nefarious activities will continue to attack United
Nations peacekeepers, who are perceived as obstacles
to their evil enterprises.
(spoke in French)
Although United Nations peacekeepers are not
involved in Nigeria in the fight against Boko Haram, we
all know of the ongoing situation in that country, and we
commend the concerted efforts of the Niger, Nigeria,
Chad and Cameroon in combating that domestic enemy.
It is an enemy that sleeps and eats among us but, given
the slightest opportunity, when our guard is down,
attacks. It is therefore important to work collectively in
the area of information-sharing networks.
(spoke in English)
We therefore call on all countries, especially those
in the subregion, to work on establishing a network of
information-sharing so that we can find the enemy who
lives among us.
All the lapses and atrocities that I have enumerated
are possible because of the existence of porous
borders, which allows the free movement of rebels and
their weapons.
We place a high premium on United Nations
peacekeeping operations because they are an effective
way to save countries from disintegration. It is an
effective way to prevent war and civil strife. Indeed, it
is an effective way to protect the weak and the innocent.
However, despite all their merit, peacekeeping
operations will continue to be under threat unless
concrete actions are taken to revamp their mandate and
bolster their strength to make them not only a deterrent
force, but also a force of potency wherever the need
arises. That is not a call to make our peacekeepers into
counter-terrorism forces. Rather, it is meant to address
the charge that, if peacekeepers cannot protect or defend
themselves, then they cannot be expected to protect and
defend innocent civilians. The Gambia is of the view
that, for peacekeeping operations to be effective and for

S/PV.7802

peacekeepers to be safe, the following factors must be
allowed to prevail.
First, in the planning and deployment of a
peacekeeping force, the Security Council should
consider arming peacekeepers with weapons that can
match the lethal force of rebels, terrorists and criminal
gangs who may attacks civilians or peacekeepers.
Secondly, as a matter of urgency, the Security
Council should set up a military panel composed
of reputable senior experts to review the rules of
engagement in peacekeeping operations and set out the
modalities for the protection of peacekeepers.
Thirdly, the Security Council should also consider
setting up regional rapid deployment forces that can
be mobilized to enter a country in which peacekeepers
may be under siege or in danger.
Fourthly, countries agreeing to a United Nations
peacekeeping force must be made to enter into an
agreement with the United Nations to undertake judicial
reforms to facilitate peace and the rule of law.
The Security Council should also exercise leverage
to get countries in conflict to embrace peace by setting
up peace and reconciliation councils.
There are many other suggestions to be made, but
we believe that this set of proposals is fundamental to
a comprehensive review to address the asymmetrical
threats to peace operations.
In conclusion, no task currently undertaken by the
United Nations is more noble than that of peacekeeping,
and I wish to put on record the appreciation of the
Gambia for the invaluable contribution of Blue Helmets
to world peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by conveying to you, Sir, the regret of His
Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, who, because of conflicts in his schedule,
was not able to be with us this afternoon. Nevertheless,
he has asked me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of Mali on the assumption of your beautiful
country, the Republic of Senegal, to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November, as well
as to welcome the convening of this ministerial-level
debate on the problem of asymmetrical threats to United
Nations peace operations. Before continuing, allow me

16-3637565/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

to commend the Russian delegation for its outstanding
presidency of the Council last month. In the same vein,
I acknowledge and thank those who spoke and shared
their knowledge with us this morning.
On behalf of the Government of Mali, I thank all
those delegations that expressed their compassion and
solidarity with my country following the deadly attacks
of the past several days. I also take this opportunity to
express the heartfelt condolences of the people of Mali
to the Governments of France and Togo for the loss of
their soldiers in Mali. I also acknowledge the mourning
families of my own countrymen.
The timeliness and relevance of this subject are
self-evident, particularly with regard to Mali, which,
as everyone knows, has hosted the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) since 1 July 2013. Yesterday, a
MINUSMA logistical convoy was unfortunately once
again the subject of a new attack from improvised
explosive devices. We deplore that act, which resulted
in three deaths, including a Togolese Blue Helmet and
two Malian civilians, as well as seven wounded. On the
same day, a camp of Malian armed and security forces
was attacked at 2 a.m. by unidentified armed men. On
5 November, a French soldier unfortunately fell in the
field of honour, following the explosion of a mine as his
convoy drove through it.

07/11/2016

attacks and attacks using improvised explosive devices,
followed by a barrage of automatic weapon fire.
The people of Mali are not proud that Mali, once a
haven of peace and stability, has been called the most
dangerous country, particularly for children, by friendly
nations coming to aid us to re-establish peace in our
country. The Government of Mali has therefore not
ceased alerting the United Nations and other partners
about the need to adapt the MINUSMA mandate to its
difficult, dangerous and complex environment. In that
regard, the Government of Mali welcomes the fact that
the Security Council acted to accede to its demand by
adopting resolution 2295 (2016), which gives a more
proactive and robust posture to MINUSMA in the
execution of its mandate. In that regard, I would like
to note that the adaptation of the MINUSMA mandate
to its environment aims first at protecting the Mission
itself, its personnel and its facilities against repeated
attacks carried out by hostile forces, in a way that
allows it then to face other dimensions of its mandate,
including the protection of civilian populations.
It is not, as we have often understood, a matter of
MINUSMA carrying out a counter-terrorism mission.
We know that a peacekeeping mission is not supposed
to carry out counter-terrorism activities. Nevertheless,
it has the duty and the responsibility of taking all
useful measures to protect and to normally carry out
its mandate.

That has been the situation day after day in Mali;
the indiscriminate asymmetric attacks are the daily
reality of the civilian population, the Malian defence
and security forces, the French Operation Barkhane
force and MINUSMA. As the President stated this
morning, the toll in human lives and property from these
indiscriminate asymmetrical attacks are very heavy.
With more than 58 MINUSMA personnel lost between
2015 and 2016, Mali is the country considered the
most dangerous for United Nations personnel. The
French force has lost 18 men since January 2013.
The Malian defence and security forces, as well as
the civilian population, have paid the highest price,
with hundreds dead or wounded. And I cannot fail to
mention the contemptible targeting and desecration of
my country’s historic monuments, which have suffered
substantial damage.

It is worrisome to observe that, five months after
its adoption by the Security Council, the relevant
provisions of resolution 2295 (2016) have yet to come
together. How could we but not be worried at seeing
the alarming lack of equipment, in particular in terms
of armoured vehicles to transport troops and logistical
support, as well as other essential logistical equipment.
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Hervé Ladsous noted as much during his presentation
of the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/819) on
the the situation in Mali (see S/PV.7784) on 6 October.
Along the same lines, the announced withdrawal
of three of the five helicopter units currently in the
theatre of operations and the lack of attack helicopters
constitute serious sources of concern. I would like to
welcome the ray of hope provided by Germany and
Canada in that regard.

Those statistics send shivers down one’s spine.
They cry out to the human conscience, especially as no
one can predict the end of such multiple asymmetrical

The theatre of operations in Mali also requires that
deployed contingents be provided with appropriate
equipment and tailored training, while meeting United

66/77

16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations standards, including on aerial equipment. It
also requires intelligence-sharing and the use of adapted
technology, in particular when it comes to drones and
surveillance cameras.
The Government of Mali is fully aware of its
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
and for securing its national territory. It is also aware
that the fight against terrorism in our country falls first
and foremost to Mali’s defence and security forces and
the relevant competent national institutions — in such
sectors as the judiciary, the financial and intelligence
services and customs. The Government is therefore
working tirelessly every day, with the very appreciated
support from partners, to rebuild and strengthen the
operational capacity of our forces and that of the whole
host of national agencies concerned, with the aim of
enabling them to fulfil their sovereign duties to protect
the civilian population and their property and to secure
the entirety of our national territory. In that regard, I
would like to commend the significant support from
our bilateral and multilateral partners, notably the
European Union through the European Union military
mission to contribute to the training of the Malian
Armed Forces, as well as that of the United Nations.
However, there must be no mistaking that
effectiveness in the fight against terrorism, violent
extremism and all types of trafficking that fuel
organized crime lies in cooperation with neighbouring
countries and in subregional, regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, the Group of Five for the
Sahel is a prime example. Its joint force has been put
together as a tool adapted to the security environment
in the region. However, other important subregional
and regional mechanisms are planned, including the
African Standby Force — the military pillar of the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture — as
well as the Joint Military Staff Committee of the Sahel
Region, charged with coordinating counter-terrorism
military efforts in Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger.
That subregional cooperation dynamic also includes
mixed and joint patrols along the common borders with
neighbouring countries, which also includes the right
of pursuit and intelligence-sharing. It is also quite
important to work together to prevent and combat the
root causes of those criminal activities in our societies,
among them extreme poverty, unemployment especially
among youth, exclusion, marginalization, ignorance
and so on.

S/PV.7802

The Malian people remain eternally grateful to all
friendly nations for the ultimate sacrifices paid by their
children for peace and stability in Mali. We will never
forget these blood sacrifices, and we pay tribute to all
the victims who have fallen on the field of honour in
Mali. Finally, on behalf of the Government of Mali, I
welcome the outstanding work done by MINUSMA in
an environment that I know is especially difficult.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Senegal for convening this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/927, annex) provided
to guide our discussion. We commend the Deputy
Secretary-General for sharing with us his perspectives
on this subject. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of La Francophonie, the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
as well as all the other briefers.
Please convey, Mr. President, to His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye the best wishes of my Foreign
Minister, Mr. Geoffrey Onyeama, who regrets not
being able to attend this meeting.
Since their inception, United Nations peace
operations have been a vital part of the global security
architecture. They serve as an inspiration and source
of hope for victims of conflicts. It is incumbent upon
all concerned to ensure that peace operations remain
relevant now and in the future. This requires the
collective efforts of United Nations States Member
to surmount the existing and emerging challenges,
including the increasing asymmetrical attacks, which
have grown in both complexity and severity. Nigeria
therefore welcomes this important debate focused on
seeking ways to strengthen the capacity of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to curb the increase
in asymmetrical threats, particularly in the context of
implementing civilian-protection mandates.
Although the United Nations has faced terrorist
attacks over the years, transnational terrorist
networks pose a fundamentally different threat than
other non-State armed groups that United Nations
peacekeepers typically face. In addition, their links
with transnational organized crime and their use of
asymmetrical tactics have a substantial operational
impact upon United Nations field missions.

16-3637567/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

//The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali raised concerns about the
need to address the challenges of implementing complex
mandates in operational theaters where transnational
terrorist networks are active. In the coming years, there
is a strong likelihood that the United Nations will be
asked to deploy field missions and increase its presence
in environments characterized as a seat of transnational
terrorist networks. Given the complexity of the
challenges posed by transnational terrorist threats, we
deem it necessary for the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to prioritize actions that will have an
immediate and lasting impact.
Preventive action should mark the trail of essential
measures taken to inhibit transnational terrorist
networks from destabilizing vulnerable States,
including strengthening of political mechanisms
to address grievances, population security and the
re-establishment of State authority. We also underline
the need for an improved understanding of the context
in predeployment mission planning, including through
liaison and cooperation with regional organizations.
Missions should be able to adequately monitor
occurrences in the environment, by deploying
intelligence capacities and ensuring that they are well
integrated in the mission.
In spite of the daunting challenges, United Nations
peace operations have proved to serve as a flexible and
adaptable tool that has evolved over time to respond
to evolving challenges. In that vein, contemporary
United Nations field operations need to continually
adapt to sometimes rapidly changing circumstances
on the ground. As peacekeepers find themselves in
environments where they face increased challenges,
each situation will require its own specialized mix of
skills and experience.
We would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
peacekeepers who lost their lives in the line of duty,
including the civilians in the recent attack in Mali.
We offer our deepest condolences to their families,
friends and Governments. We salute the courage
of peacekeepers, who sometimes find themselves
serving in hostile environments and in extremely
difficult conditions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
congratulating Senegal on assuming the presidency
68/77

07/11/2016

of the Security Council for the month of November.
I also wish to express appreciation to the Senegalese
delegation for organizing this open debate on an issue
of critical importance, particularly for us in Africa.
I wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
International Organization of La Francophonie, as well
as the Executive Directors of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.
This open debate could not be more timely and
relevant in the light of the unprecedented challenges
faced by peacekeepers — whether in Mali, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, South Sudan or Somalia — who are operating
in a very complex and dynamic security terrain.
Asymmetrical threats from non-State actors, including
terrorists, negative forces and other transnational
criminal networks, are not only posing serious risks
to peacekeepers, but also threatening the lives of
innocent civilians.
That is why United Nations peacekeeping needs
to be reformed and adapted to the changing security
environment. In that regard, the review of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO)
has certainly made important recommendations whose
timely implementation will go a long way in making
United Nations peace operations fit for purpose.
Of course, we know that the Panel advised caution
in mandating enforcement tasks to United Nations
peacekeepers, particularly in counter-terrorism
operations. Nevertheless, the number of targeted attacks
against peacekeepers and civilians is on the increase,
and asymmetrical threats are increasingly becoming the
norm rather than the exception for many peacekeepers,
if not all of them. Yesterday’s incident against
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
underscores the fact that responding to this new
challenge is no longer an option, and devising the right
strategic and operational interventions has never been
so critical. In that context, we would like to point out
the following.
First, the need for pragmatic and flexible
interpretation of the basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping cannot be overemphasized. The debate
over traditional peacekeeping versus peace enforcement
is untenable. Peacekeepers cannot be, and should not
remain, indifferent in the face of significant threats to
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

themselves or to the innocent civilians whom they are
supposed to protect.
Secondly, peacekeepers should have a clear
mandate, concept of operation and rules of engagement
based on a thorough analysis of the situation, threat
assessment and planning. That will allow them to have
a robust posture in defending themselves and protecting
civilians in the face of mortal danger. However, having
a clear mandate, concept of operation and rules of
engagement is not enough.
My third point, therefore, is that peacekeepers must
have the necessary training and capabilities, including
force enablers and multipliers, to enable their operation
in an asymmetrical environment.
We know that such things are easier said than done,
and we have no illusion that strategic and operational
challenges will be easily overcome. But in the light of
the seriousness of the matter, it is imperative that those
challenges be addressed as expeditiously as possible.
The problem cannot be ignored or swept under the
carpet. Doing so would leave the commitment to protect
civilians unfulfilled.
Although the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446)
recommended against United Nations peacekeepers
undertaking counter-terrorism operations, it did not rule
out such a possibility by capable regional forces and/or
ad hoc coalitions authorized by the Security Council.
The African Union and its regional mechanisms, for
instance, have shown greater commitment and readiness
to deploy forces in an asymmetrical environment, with
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
being a case in point. No mission symbolizes a greater
need for partnership than AMISON — a mission that
is operating in one of the most hostile environments
on behalf of the international community. AMISOM
peacekeepers face asymmetrical attacks on nearly
a daily basis, yet they are underfunded and in dire
logistical conditions.
Based on the principles of complementarity and a
division of labour, the United Nations should be ready
to share the burden with the AU-led peace support
operations, among others, by providing a financial
and logistical package. In that connection, the relevant
recommendations set out in the HIPPO report are a
step in the right direction; therefore, it is absolutely
necessary that they be translated into concrete action.

S/PV.7802

We are aware, of course, of the ongoing discussion
between the two organizations on enhancing their
strategic partnership, including in peacekeeping,
and look forward to the outcome of the Security
Council debate scheduled for 18 November, under the
Senegalese presidency.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of all,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
welcome Senegal’s initiative, a country with which
Haiti has strong ties, to organize this debate under
into the framework of the necessary consideration
of asymmetrical threats with a direct impact on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
One of the first items that caught our eye when
taking a retrospective look at United Nations efforts
in peacekeeping matters during recent decades is the
magnitude of the tasks carried out in all continents
and all domains pertaining to the maintenance of
peace. The successes, some of which have been
resounding, were many. However, we cannot ignore
the partial successes — what one might even refer to
as failures — due in some cases to gaps and strategic
and operational shortcomings that clearly demand
our attention in terms of the need to deepen our
collective understanding. The successes and failures,
past and present, are replete with lessons to be learned
and must be used to help the Organization, the Security
Council in particular, as well as the States concerned
to better shoulder their responsibilities in peacekeeping
and in the protection of populations.
Today we are witnessing a proliferation of
conflicts of a political, ethnic or religious nature, often
accompanied by violence committed against civilians,
which make peacekeeping operations increasingly
complex. In the vast majority of cases these are
armed conflicts bereft of any international character;
rather they are conflicts of an internal or intra-State
nature. The Secretary-General recalled recently that
over two thirds of United Nations military, police and
civilian personnel deployed throughout the world were
concentrated in places where there was in fact no peace,
and where the deployment of operations takes place in
the absence of clearly identified parties to a conflict, or
of any viable political process. In several cases, troops
deployed by the United Nations face situations of
violence, conflict and so-called asymmetrical threats,

16-3637569/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

which tend to compromise the success of the efforts
invested by the international community.
That increased complexity of peacekeeping
operations, which is unanimously recognized, is also
due to the growing power of non-State entities, such
as the Islamic State, which is a prime illustration of
the new threats to peace. Asymmetrical threats, above
all terrorism, mean higher risks for Blue Helmets,
as reflected by the surge in recent years of attacks
against peacekeeping personnel in different parts of the
world — in Mali, in the Golan Heights, in the Central
African Republic, in Somalia, in Darfur and elsewhere.
Today peacekeepers are called upon to carry out
increasingly greater missions and tasks. In some cases,
the gaps in mandates are in plain sight, and sometimes
call into question, as we have seen in Rwanda or more
recently in South Sudan, the very capacity of the United
Nations to properly respond to asymmetrical threats
that flow from such multidimensional and complex
environments.
That is why it seems to be a timely moment for
the international community to engage in an in-depth
consideration, as we are doing today, to adopt robust
measures to strengthen the capacities and resources
of Blue Helmets and to allow them to operate in
increasingly complex environments and to grapple
with emerging challenges to peacekeeping, above
all asymmetrical threats — whether from terrorism,
organized crime or other sources. It is a matter of
ensuring that peacekeepers are better protected in
discharging their mandates with regard to security
issues, the protection of civilians, the rule of law,
guaranteeing human rights and significantly improving
the capacities of countries emerging from conflict.
The Republic of Haiti has been hosting the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for 12 years
now. Our experience over these years has allowed us
to learn many lessons that can prove beneficial at a
time where there is increasing clamour for what has
become an urgent necessity, namely, redefining United
Nations peacekeeping mandates and developing new,
better tailored tools that allow peacekeeping missions
to improve their effectiveness in a global environment
that is in constant flux.
While welcoming the role played by the Security
Council as part of its fundamental mission of collective
security through peacekeeping operations, allow
me to highlight the invaluable contribution of two
70/77

07/11/2016

Member States of the Organization that once remained
outside peacekeeping operations themselves. I want to
single out Japan and Mexico. Japan is already a major
financial donor to peacekeeping missions, while within
the region and beyond Mexico enjoys a solid reputation
of impartiality that has already proved its worth.
In conclusion, let me set out a few thoughts that my
delegation considers to be essential:
First, peacekeeping is not only a matter of
increasing budgets, but also of taking into account new
requirements, both in terms of security management,
training peacekeepers, their involvement in the
process of establishing the rule of law and sustainable
development.
Secondly, the effectiveness and success of
peacekeeping operations requires, above all, respect
for the key principles defined by the Charter of the
United Nations, including the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-useof force.
Thirdly, my delegation also believes it is crucial
that peacekeepers be by the side of the communities
and civilians they are mandated to protect.
Fourthly, the root causes of conflict, such as
underdevelopment, extreme poverty, marginalization
and exclusion, must be treated as priorities.
Fifthly, the role of police contingents is paramount
when it comes to rebuilding the rule of law, establishing
long-term stability and consolidating democracy.
The protection of civilians mus lie at the heart of our
priorities.
Finally, the onus lies with all Member States to
ensure that peacekeeping tasks correspond better to the
realities of this day and age in the light of the new threats
to peace, especially the so-called asymmetrical threats.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Recurrent intra-State conflicts,
expanded terrorist and extremist networks and the
deliberate targeting of civilians define global security
today. United Nations peacekeepers are facing
unprecedented demands, more complex and dangerous
environments and significant fatalities through
malicious acts.
Seven of the 11 countries most affected by
terrorism host United Nations peacekeeping operations,
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

even though the report (see S/2015/446) of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Secretary-General agreed that United Nations
peacekeeping operations were not designed to
counter terrorism.
Violent and asymmetrical threat environments
should not weaken our resolve to create political space
for peace negotiations and to protect civilians. But we
must also train and equip peacekeepers to operate as
safely and effectively as possible. There is an urgent
need for consistent and relevant training, greater
situational awareness and improved crisis management.
First, with regard to training, we need to ensure
that peacekeepers meet United Nations predeployment
standards and that they are able to respond to the specific
threats they will face. We support the standardization
efforts under way, in particular the deployment of
United Nations military unit manuals and associated
training. Australia is co-chairing the drafting of the
improvised explosive device (IED) threat mitigation
military and police Headquarters handbook, which will
help peacekeepers detect and defeat terrorists’ weapon
of choice.
Secondly, Australia strongly supports the findings
of the Final Report of the Expert Panel on Technology
and Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping,
which recommends the use of technology to improve
situational awareness and protect peacekeepers, in
particular where such technology provides low-burden,
low-cost force protection. Under Australia’s REDWING
programme, for example, a suite of practical counterIED devices that operate in austere environments was
developed. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and
night-vision equipment are also particularly important.
Enhanced intelligence is key to ensuring that
peacekeeping operations are better positioned to prevent
and counter asymmetrical attacks. We also encourage
efforts to improve engagement with local communities,
which builds trust and is an important part of broader
early warning and conflict prevention. Thirdly, while
prevention is key to countering the threat, in the event
of a security crisis, the United Nations needs the
flexibility and resources to boost security and medical
capacities, including quick-reaction forces and medical
evacuation capabilities. A comprehensive policy
on crisis management, including mandatory crisismanagement exercises, is an important step. We also
welcome the development of a medical performance

S/PV.7802

framework for improving standards across health-care
capabilities. The lack of medical evacuation capability
that can operate 24/7 and in all weathers remains a
critical gap.
Fragile States hosting peace operations are
vulnerable to terrorist and violent extremist networks.
We support a more strategic and coherent approach
across the United Nations in its efforts to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism, and acknowledge the
need to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
United Nations counter-terrorism and peacekeeping
bodies. The Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the prevention of violent extremism be integrated into
the relevant activities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with their mandates, merits
further consideration.
In conclusion, peacekeeping is a high-risk venture
at the core of the mission of the United Nations to
maintain peace and security. In asking peacekeepers
to face such risks, we must give them the means to do
their job as safely and effectively as possible.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): We have heard many
speakers today, and I promise I will be brief.
Peacekeepers operate in increasingly complex and
volatile environments, often putting themselves in
harm’s way to protect vulnerable civilian populations.
As many have said today, asymmetrical threats will
continue to be a critical risk to peace operations for
the foreseeable future. Both the United Nations and
personnel-contributing countries must therefore
urgently adapt to such threats. The objective is clearly
not to make peace operations a substitute for counterterrorism initiatives but to ensure that deployed
personnel can carry out their missions as efficiently
and safely as possible.
In order to ensure both the sustainability of
deployed personnel and the successful delivery of
robust mandates, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians, the United Nations must enhance
missions’ preparation, performance and responsiveness
through an integrated and tailored approach. That
approach means developing adequate conceptual
frameworks and providing specialized training as well
as the equipment, intelligence and enabling capabilities
needed to effectively meet asymmetrical threats. The

16-3637571/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations must also strengthen its analytical
capacity in that area.
(spoke in French)
We must also ensure that our approach to
asymmetrical threats is not confined to the security
front. It is vital that the full range of factors that can
lead to violent extremism be addressed through a
comprehensive approach. Canada is always ready
to share relevant lessons learned in dealing with
asymmetrical threats in Afghanistan, and would
welcome the opportunity to gain from the experience
of its various partners present today.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your delegation’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and to express our
confidence in the effectiveness with which you will lead
the Council’s work. My delegation is ready to assist you
in carrying out your task. We are very pleased to be
participating in today’s open debate on the subject of
peace operations facing asymmetrical threats, giving
us an opportunity to discuss this important topic.
The frequency and complexity of the increasingly
murderous acts of violence committed against civilians
and peacekeeping operations personnel by anonymous
combatants who belong to no legal, recognized
institutions have become a real concern at a time when
there has been a sharp increase in violent conflicts.
President Alassane Ouattara drew the international
community’s attention to the issue of terrorism and
asymmetrical threats with his reference, in the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, to the terrorist attack at Grand Bassam in Côte
d’Ivoire, noting that
“[t]he world must mobilize against terrorism and
fight it with the utmost resolve and determination
before it inflicts irreparable damage and trauma on
our countries and societies” (A/71/PV.14, p. 21).
More than ever, the problem of asymmetrical threats
is becoming a major issue for international peace and
security and therefore deserves all the attention that the
United Nations and its Member States can give it. The
asymmetrical war is becoming even more worrying,
since its focus has now expanded beyond traditional
State institutions and is also directed at civilians and
72/77

07/11/2016

peacekeepers. Only yesterday, the media informed us of
the tragic deaths of a Blue Helmet deployed to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and two civilians, along
with seven others seriously wounded, following an
ambush supported by improvised explosive devices.
That act of terror brings the number of peacekeepers
killed in Mali since 1 January to 35, and MINUSMA’s
total losses to nearly 70 in the space of three years. My
delegation takes this opportunity to honour the memory
of the brave soldiers who have sacrificed their lives to
protect United Nations values.
Faced with this kind of complex situation,
peacekeeping operations must adapt to the local
environment. The concept note (S/2016/927, annex)
for today’s debate outlines some of the relevant
measures, which include making peacekeeping
operations’ mandates more robust and strengthening
their operational capacity, along with the capacities
of national institutions and stakeholders; training;
giving support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes and reforming security
sectors.
My country’s 12-year experience of hosting a
peacekeeping operation, the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire, has taught us that in addition to
the aspects I just mentioned, it is vital to stress the
importance for such operations, when it comes to
fulfilling their mandate, of building close and trusting
relationships with the local population. That involves
more thorough training regarding the local context and
a willingness on the part of United Nations forces to
be seen more as a partner for peace and security than
a foreign force whose sole task is to lay down the law
about people’s daily lives. From that viewpoint, focusing
on young people, opinion leaders and local notables
is a very relevant approach. Peacekeeping operations
personnel would also benefit from extensive training in
tactics and in joint actions with forces on the ground.
The planning of peacekeeping operations should be
preceded by an appropriate technical evaluation of the
challenges and forces involved, and regular reviews
should be conducted once the United Nations force is
deployed on the ground.
Dealing effectively with asymmetrical threats
in peacekeeping operations also requires close
collaboration between the United Nations system, local
authorities and non-State actors, and coordination
and synergy are determining factors in that regard.
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Such collaboration should be supported by regular
meetings and information exchanges. Strengthening
the operational capacities of the host country’s security
and defence forces, as well as assistance in educating
young people and cooperation with local media,
from a preventive point of view, can all contribute to
reducing asymmetrical threats. Where measures for
consolidating the local security infrastructure are
concerned, supporting DDR processes and securitysector reform is equally important. In the case of
my country’s successful DDR process and security
sector reform, the authority in charge of disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration benefited from
the assistance of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, particularly where marking and storing
collected weapons were concerned.
As rightly stressed in the concept note, cooperation
between peacekeeping operations and all counterterrorism institutions and organizations is proving to
be critical. In that regard, the Security Council and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in particular
should continue and strengthen their adherence to the
recommendations of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. The host country, for its
part, must strive to resolve the causes that generated
the conflict.
In conclusion, I reiterate my delegation’s gratitude
for the opportunity to consider this issue of extreme
importantce to the entire international community
context, and especially to our region, West Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate. I join others in expressing
our condemnation of condolences over the attack
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.
Turkey greatly values the United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and remains committed to
supporting them. Peacekeeping operations play a vital
role in sustaining political solutions to crises, stabilizing
conflicts, decreasing violence and protecting civilians,
as well as furthering capacity-building. The 16 currently
deployed United Nations missions have a limited
scope compared to the total number of conflicts and
crisis situations on the United Nations agenda. Peace

S/PV.7802

operations are no match for the peace enforcement
measures that can be taken also under Chapter VII.
Special political missions are instrumental in
finding political solutions to crises and preventing
and peacefully resolving conflicts, including through
mediation and sustaining peace as recommended by
the recent review processes.Each of these instruments
and mechanisms is a critical asset at the disposal
of the United Nations, but they must be carefully
designed, planned and executed with respect to their
specific contexts.
Peacekeeping missions should be deployed on the
basis of the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. The observance of peacekeeping
principles —consent of the host country, impartiality
and minimum use of force only for self-defence or
defence of the mandate — is essential. Turkey believes
that these principles do not preclude protection of
civilians, but the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with States in the first
place. Nevertheless, it has become a core component of
many peacekeeping mandates overtime.
Peacekeeping operations need better adaptability
in order to cope with present threats and challenges.
Accordingly, United Nations peacekeepers must be
better trained, equipped and informed. As long as their
safety and security are threatened by asymmetrical
threats and terrorist attacks, peacekeepers should be
able to defend themselves and their mandate. In that
regard, coordination and exchange of information
between United Nations peacekeeping missions
and counter-terrorism bodies can be undertaken
in accordance with their respective and distinct
mandates. To that end, we encourage efforts to enhance
coordination and coherence among the United Nations
counter-terrorism entities in order to better address the
threats of terrorism and violent extremism.
However, the recommendation contained in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations that
“United Nations peacekeeping missions, owing to
their composition and character, are not suited to
engage in military counter-terrorism operations”
(S/2015/446, para. 119)
has to be taken into account before expanding
peacekeeping mandates with counter-terrorism tasks.
In the same direction, integrating prevention of

16-3637573/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

violent extremism into the activities of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as suggested
by the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, should be carefully considered,
with all its implications.
Peacekeeping missions might have comparative
advantages with regard to capacity-building in rule of
law and security sector reform processes that are also
considered part of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Indeed, peacekeepers would do
better service by increasing their capacity-building
activities than by carrying out military counterterrorism and law enforcement tasks.
Turkey considers the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to be the most appropriate
forum to negotiate and develop the necessary framework
for United Nations peacekeeping operations, and values
the consensual work of the Committee. The triangular
cooperation and enhanced consultation among the
Security Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat is the key factor for the
better design, planning and execution of peacekeeping
mandates as well as other features pertaining to the
efficacy of peacekeeping operations.
Before concluding, I pay tribute to all personnel
serving under the United Nations banner — ,particularly
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line
of duty — for their courage and endurance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by
congratulating Senegal on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Minister Nidaye for organizing
this timely debate on dealing with asymmetrical threats
to peacekeeping missions.
Peacekeeping operations are at the core of the
United Nations work and essential to its first and most
fundamental missionof maintaining peace and security
in all regions of the world. Countless lives have been
saved through their work, and countless more have,
through them, been given a chance to live more
peaceful, more hopeful and more fruitful lives.
The critical element of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is the protection of civilians in and from
conflict. Therefore, in order to strengthen its work in
this function, the Security Council, United Nations
74/77

07/11/2016

agencies and relevant State parties must all accord
the protection of civilians commensurate priority in
the process of determining the scope and mandate of
peacekeeping missions. Their collective work must be
guided by a precise and comprehensive framework for
identifying threats to civilians in the respective local
context, adaptive and flexible strategies for responding
to changes in the security environment, and clearly
defined objectives.
Such strategies are made even more essential by
the increasing prevalence of asymmetrical threats.
The existence of asymmetrical threats in a conflict
environment is often the result of a convergence of
social, economic and political factors. Therefore,
while it is essential for peacekeeping missions to be
equipped with the appropriate tools to respond to these
challenges, these must include mechanisms to ensure
peacekeeping missions’ legal, technical and monitoring
aspects, in addition to physical materiel.
Peacekeeping missions must first and foremost be
afforded adequate personnel and staff to implement
their mandate. Likewise, the core goals and unique
aspects of mission mandates should be reflected in their
training courses. The relevant principles of international
humanitarian law, and international law in general,
must become an integral part of national training for
peacekeepers in order to ensure they are respected.
This is necessary if we are to ensure that their efforts
against asymmetrical threats will not only be effective,
but remain consistent with the fundamental principles
of peacekeeping: consent of the parties, impartiality
and non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate.
It is also critical to actively monitor and review the
progress of peacekeepers at the individual level, and
peacekeeping missions at the organizational level, in
order to ensure progress is being made in the fulfillment
of their mandate. In this regard, the Maldives welcomes
the introduction of new indicators to better evaluate the
performance of peacekeeping missions and to enhance
their effectiveness, as recommended in the report of the
Secretary-General.
It is important to ensure that if efforts on the
ground are to be delivered effectively, they be coherent
with the programmes and plans being run by various
agencies. There is also a lot of scope for Member
States, regional organizations and domestic agencies
to coordinate towards better information-sharing and
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

knowledge-sharing. Such collaboration would go far in
making our efforts effective as well.
It is not merely the Maldives’ hope, but our firm
conviction that each and every State Member of the
United Nations should do its utmost to ensure the
fulfillment of its aspirations to peace and security,
as laid out in the Charter of the United Nations, and
thus the success of its peacekeeping operations. This
conviction should only become stronger when faced
with emerging operational challenges. In doing so, we
must hold ourselves to the highest standards, mindful
of this common cause and shared endeavour, to which
we have all committed in the Charter. If we remain
fully cognizant of what we aim to achieve and what this
requires of us, we are convinced that we shall succeed.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the delegation of Senegal for
convening today’s open debate and the briefers for
their presentations.
The Security Council has increasingly deployed
peacekeeping operations in complex environments with
non-State armed groups that use asymmetrical terrorist
tactics against the United Nations, thereby causing a
rising number of casualties among the Organization’s
staff. My country honours those who have given
their lives in the service of peace. We condemn the
murders and other acts of violence committed against
peacekeepers. We stress the need to develop more
effective security measures for peace missions.
There is no doubt that peacekeeping operations
should be endowed with the means required to guarantee
the safety of their staff and equipment, enabling them to
effectively discharge their mandates, and in particular
to ensure the protection of civilians who are also the
targets of asymmetrical threats. Amid such measures
and on the basis of the considerations of both the
Report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and today’s interesting concept note (see
S/2016/927, annex), Argentina considers it important
to highlight the following: first, the specific equipment
and training capabilities needed to defend against
asymmetrical threats and the special financing required
to acquire them; secondly, the development of special
training manuals by the Secretariat in close consultation
with the States Members of the United Nations; thirdly,
a suitable operations concept and clear and specific

S/PV.7802

rules of engagement for operational environments
with asymmetrical threats; fourthly, a mandate that
includes elements needed for capacity-building and
peacebuilding in host countries, in particular assistance
in rebuilding their national security institutions,
especially in the areas of the rule of law and security
sector reform, in line with the new goal of sustaining
peace; fifthly, the use of new technologies, including
unmanned aerial vehicles, in order to maximize
operational knowledge of the situation, without
prejudice to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations or to the principles of peacekeeping; sixthly,
the strengthening of institutional cooperation and the
sharing of information among United Nations counterterrorism entities, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and
peacekeeping operations, using the tools that the
Organization already possesses.
As highlighted in the interesting concept note
drafted by Senegal, it is one thing to give peacekeepers
the tools with which to protect themselves and civilians
against asymmetrical threats and quite another to have
them engaged in counter-terrorism efforts in areas
where peacekeeping missions are deployed. In that
regard, Argentina reiterates its position, which is in line
with that outlined in the Report of the High-level Panel
on Peace Operations, which states that peacekeeping
operations were not designed, trained or equipped to
impose political solutions through the sustained use of
force of an offensive nature. Peacekeeping operations
are therefore not an appropriate instrument for
conducting military counter-terrorism operations.
We understand that there are more effective counterterrorism tools which, at the same time, enable the
principles of peacekeeping operations to be safeguarded
and to serve as guidelines for peace operations
processes, above and beyond their peacekeeping
mandates. In that way, the essence of such mandates
are not distorted by the introduction of elements that
impose peace and are foreign to peacekeeping. In that
regard and in conclusion, Argentina is ready to engage
in discussion on such tools, not only in the Security
Council but also in the wider forum of the General
Assembly and, in particular, in the Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

16-3637575/77

S/PV.7802

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to pay
tribute to the good relations that exist between Syria,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and other peace operations. We would like to
reiterate the Government’s commitment to supporting
the mission with all possible tools.
As everyone knows, peacekeeping operations in
any region should be for a brief transitional period.
However, and unfortunately, in the Middle East that
period is often measured in decades. That is because of
Israel’s continued occupation of Arab territory, posing a
challenge to the resolutions of international legitimacy,
and its ongoing aggressive policies that threaten the
region’s peace and security. In that regard, I recall that
the Israeli occupation of Arab territory is the reason for
United Nations peace operations missions in the region,
which is a burden on the United Nations budget and
human resources.
My delegation would like to express its deep concern
about the security threats and attacks on peacekeepers.
My delegation would like to stress that such attacks
are the major challenges posed to peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I note the statement made
by the representative of Israel and wish to offer some
comments. He stated that troops kidnapped security
personnel in the Golan, which proves that Israel is
supporting terrorist groups. The terrorist group,
Al-Nusrah Front, kidnapped and expelled UNDOF
elements from the region. That terrorist organization,
which is on the international terrorist organizations list
and has paid visits to the Israeli Prime Minister and to
those in hospital, has received all forms of support from
Israel, within the framework of UNDOF. Israel allows
the tanks of the terrorist groups, including Al-Nusrah,
to target innocent people in Al-Qunaytirah, which is
very close to the border in Jaulan. I have with me a
photo of Mira Zidane, who was two-and-a-half years
old when she was killed by Al-Nusrah missiles close to
the border while she was at home.
Israeli support of the terrorist group Al-Nusrah
is very well known on that border region and
documented in UNDOF reports. According to the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
21 May to 29 August,
“Further south, United Nations personnel at
observation post 54 on 1 and 29 June observed
76/77

07/11/2016

Israel Defense Forces vehicles moving from the
Alpha side to the ceasefire line where Israel Defense
Forces personnel disembarked the vehicles and
unloaded items immediately east of the ceasefire
line and thereafter returning to the Alpha side.
Several individuals in trucks from the Bravo side
subsequently arrived at the location where the items
had been left and loaded the items on the trucks
and drove off in an easterly direction.” (S/2016/803,
para. 10)
There is a second reference to this in the report of
the Secretary-General on UNDOF for the period from
1 March to 20 May 2016:
“Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians,
primarily shepherds, from the Bravo side to the
Alpha side was observed on an almost daily basis.
On a number of occasions on 9, 10 and 28 March and
11 April, United Nations personnel at observation
post 54 observed interaction at the Israeli technical
fence between the Israel Defense Forces personnel
and individuals from the Bravo side, some of whom
were armed.” (S/2016/520, para. 5)
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now call on him.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
asked for the floor to react to the statement made by
the representative of the Israeli regime during this
debate, which was totally irrelevant to the subject of
the debate, namely, facing asymmetrical threats to
peace operations. That representative chose not to talk
about the daily violations of resolution 1701 (2006), as
documented in many reports submitted to the Council.
Instead, he once again levelled some baseless and
fabricated accusations against my Government in his
statement to the Council.
I take this opportunity to categorically reject
those accusations, which have been repeated many
times in the past and each time without a shred of
evidence to substantiate those accusations. Apparently,
his delegation assumes that the mere repetition of an
accusation may make it acceptable and believable by
part of the audience. Not only is that assumption wrong,
but also the repetition of those baseless accusations
is repugnant and repulsive. Israel just hopes that, by
repeating the allegations against Iran, it can cover up
its crimes against Palestinian civilians and distract
the international community from the scourge of its
16-36375

07/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

occupation of the Palestinian and Arab lands for so
many decades and its crimes in suppressing the rights
of the whole nation. What Israel has so far done in
attacking Iran did not serve this purpose and, no doubt,
it will not in the future.

S/PV.7802

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

16-3637577/77
