V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

l. Agrees that products that have been banned from
domestic consumption and/or sale because they have been
judged to endanger health and the environment should be
sold abroad by companies, corporations or individuals only
when a request for such products is received from an importing country or when the consumption of such products
is officially permitted in the importing country;
2. Agrees that all countries that have severely restricted
or have not approved the domestic consumption and/or sale
of specific products, in particular pharmaceuticals and pesticides, should make available full information on these
products with a view to safeguarding the health and environment of the importing country, including clear labelling
in a language acceptable to the importing country;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure
the provision of the necessary information and assistance
by the United Nations system in order to strengthen the
national capacities of developing countries to protect themselves from the consumption and/or sale of banned, withdrawn, severely restricted or, in the case of pharmaceuticals,
non-approved products;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, based upon the work
already being done within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade, the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental
organizations, to the maximum extent possible within existing resources, to prepare and regularly update a consolidated list of products whose consumption and/or sale have
been banned, withdrawn, severely restricted or, in the case
of pharmaceuticals, not approved by Governments, and to
make this list available as early as possible and, in any case,
not later than December 1983;
5. Agrees that the consolidated list referred to in paragraph 4 above should be easy to read and understand and
should contain both generic/chemical and brand names in
alphabetical order, as well as the names of all manufacturers
and a short reference to the grounds and the decisions taken
by Governments that have led to the banning, withdrawal
or severe restriction of such products;
6. Decides, on the basis of the above-agreed criteria,
to keep under review the format of the consolidated list
with a view to its possible improvement;
7. Requests Governments and the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to
provide all the information and assistance necessary for the
prompt and effective fulfilment of the task entrusted to the
Secretary· General.
109th plenary meeting
I 7 December I 982

37/138.

Financing of the Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres of the Economic
Commission for Africa on an established basis

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/197 of 20 December I 977
and 33/202 of 29 January 1979 on the restructuring of the
economic and social sectors of the United Nations system,
in paiticular the designation therein of the regional commissions as, inter alia, the main general economic and social
development centres within the United Nations system for
their respective regions, having responsibility for the promotion of ~ubregional and regional co-operation,

113

Bearing in mind resolution 311 (XIII) adopted on l March
1977 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa, 10 by which the Conference established
the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres to
foster sectoral and subregional integration,
Recognizing the prominent role given to subregional and
regional economic integration in the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa 11 as a means towards
achieving the establishment of an African economic community by the year 2000,
Recognizing also that the Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres constitute an integral part of the Economic Commission for Africa, through which the Commission effectively carries out aspects of its mandate, as set
forth in its terms of reference, 12 and that they serve as the
principal mechanism of the Commission for fostering economic and technical co-operation at the subregional level
in Africa,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/64 of 5 December 1980
and 36/ 180 of 17 December 1981 on special measures for
the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ 178 of 17 December
1981, in which it invited the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the financing of Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres on an established basis and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1982/62 of 30 July 1982 on
the same subject,
Taking into account the views expressed by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa
in its resolution 450 (XVII) of 30 April 1982 13 on the need
to correct the present situation regarding the inadequacy of
the human and financial resources available to the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres for regular
budget and operational activities, as a result of which ~heir
very existence is threatened,
Bearing in mind the action already taken by the Executive
Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to improve the resource situation of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres of the Economic Commission for Africa
on an established basis, 14 prepared pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 36/178, and having examined, in particular, paragraphs 47 to 49 of that report,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the financing of the Multinational
Programming and Operational Centres of the Economic
Commission for Africa on an established basis;
2. Welcomes the decision adopted by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme at
its twenty-ninth session, in which the Council requested the
Administrator of the Programme to continue to provide financial support to the five Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres during the whole of the third programming cycle, 1982-1986; 15

10
See Official Recordl· of the Economic and Social Council, Sixty-third
Session, Supplement No. 7, vol. I (E/5941 ). part III.
11
NS-11/14, annex I.
12
E/CN.14/111/Rev.8.
11
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982,
Supplement No. JI (E/1982/21), chap. V.
14
E/1982/70 and Corr. I.
"See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982.
Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev I), annex I, decision 82/4 A. sect. IV.

114

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

3. Renews its call upon other organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, to
give their fullest financial and other support to the activities
of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres
of the Economic Commission for Africa;
4. Calls upon the Secretary-General further to explore
ways and means of ensuring substantial increases in contributions from extrabudgetary sources, including bilateral
donors;
5. Takes note of the financial support being given to
the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres by
States members of the Economic Commission for Africa
through voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust
Fund for African Development and through facilities of the
host Government, and urges them, where possible, to increase such contributions;
6. Endorses the recommendations contained in paragraphs 47 to 49 of the report of the Secretary-General, which
call for the provision of the financial resources required from
the regular budget, among other sources, for funding the
Multinational Programming and Operational Centres on an
established basis in order to bring about their immediate
and effective implementation.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/139.

Special measures for the social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/64 of 5 December 1980
and 36/ 180 of 17 December 1981 concerning the adoption
of a wide range of special measures for the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recalling further its resolutions 35/66 B of 5 December
1980 and 36/182, section II, of 17 December 1981 on the
Industrial Development Decade for Africa, 36/ 177 of 17
December 1981 on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa and 36/ 186 of 17 December 1981 on the
situation of food and agriculture in Africa,
Deeply concerned at the continuing low level of economic
activities in Africa and the devastating effects of the current
world economic crisis on the particularly vulnerable economies of the countries in the region that has the largest
number of least developed countries,
Fully aware that the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa 16 provides a framework of priority
actions for achieving the rapid overall economic and social
development of Africa, as reiterated in the Declaration of
Tripoli adopted by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa on 30 April 1982,1 7

Recognizing the primary responsibility of the African
countries for their development and the importance of the
mobilization of their national resources for their socioeconomic development,
Convinced of the need for increased and sustained external resources in order to achieve the aims and objectives
of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,
Recalling also the interim report of the Secretary-General
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session,
concerning special measures for the social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s, 18 in which were indicated the contributions planned by organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to the implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development
of Africa,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1982, 19
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General 19 indicating the actions proposed by nongovernmental organizations for promoting the realization of
the objectives of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa;
2. Expresses regret, however, that no comprehensive
report on the progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 36/180 has been made available
for the current session as requested in the aforementioned
resolution;
3. Renews its call upon the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to examine measures
to increase the resources for the execution of the programmes for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa
and to apply the special measures in a comprehensive and
co-ordinated manner;
4. Urges donor countries to provide substantial and sustained levels of resources for promoting the accelerated development of African countries and effective implementation
of the Lagos Plan of Action, and to contribute generously
to the United Nations Trust Fund for African Development;
5. Invites all international financial institutions, particularly the World Bank, the International Development
Association and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, to continue actively to consider increasing
substantially their development assistance to Africa during
the Decade;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to allocate the necessary resources to the Economic Commission
for Africa, taking into account its role as the main economic
and social development centre within the United Nations
system for the African region, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 32/ I 97 of 20 December 1977 and
33/202 of 29 January 1979;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1983, a full report on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

16

A/S-11/14, annex I.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /982. Supplement No. I I (E/1982/21), chap. IV.
17

IK
'

9

A/36/5 Ll.
E/1982/80.
