S/2000/1198

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 14 December 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I am attaching for your consideration, and for the consideration of the
members of the Security Council, a letter dated 9 November 2000 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Navanethem
Pillay (see annex).
In her letter, President Pillay states that the judges of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda support the principle that the victims of the crimes
over which the Tribunal has jurisdiction should be compensated for the losses or
injuries that they have sustained.
President Pillay states that the judges have considered the possibility that the
statute of the Tribunal might be amended in order to confer upon it a power, similar
to that to be enjoyed by the future International Criminal Court under its statute, to
order the payment of compensation to the victims of the crimes committed by the
persons whom it may convict.
President Pillay states that the judges have, however, come to the conclusion
that it is not desirable that the Tribunal be possessed of such a power, in particular,
for the reason that it would impose a significant additional responsibility upon the
Tribunal and would severely hamper it in the discharge of its core mandate of
prosecuting those responsible for the crimes over which it has jurisdiction.
In her letter, President Pillay states that the judges are of the view that there
are other, quicker and simpler mechanisms which might more appropriately be
considered for ensuring the payment of compensation to the victims of crimes
within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
At the same time, President Pillay states that the judges are of the view that the
Tribunal might, in tandem with one of those mechanisms, appropriately be vested
with a limited power to order the payment of compensation from a trust fund to
victims who appear as witnesses in trials before it. Adoption of this measure would
require the amendment by the Security Council of the Tribunal’s statute.
I would recall in this connection that, in my letter dated 2 November 2000
(S/2000/1063), I drew to the attention of the President and of the members of the
Security Council a letter dated 12 October 2000 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Claude Jorda, setting out
the views of the judges of that Tribunal on this same matter.

00-80155 (E) 181200

*0080155*

S/2000/1198

I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its attachment to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2000/1198

Annex
Letter dated 9 November 2000 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the Secretary-General
On behalf of the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (the
“Tribunal”), I have the honour of writing to you about the important issue of
compensation for victims of the atrocities that took place in Rwanda in 1994, over
which the Tribunal has jurisdiction.
At a plenary meeting of the nine trial judges and five appeals judges, the issue
of compensation for the victims of the tragic events in Rwanda was discussed at
length. The judges wholeheartedly empathize with the principle of compensation for
victims, but, for the reasons set out below, believe that the responsibility for
processing and assessing claims for such compensation should not rest with the
Tribunal.
1.
The principle that the victims of crime should be compensated for their
loss or injury is laudable and strong support should be given to it.
2.
The United Nations has taken various steps to meet the needs of victims
of crime. One of the most important is the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly in 1985. 1 This Declaration reminds the world that crime victims should
be treated with compassion and respect and states that they are entitled to receive
justice, be treated fairly and obtain redress in the form of restitution, compensation
and other assistance for the injuries that they have suffered.
3.
It is also noted that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 2
contains, in article 75, the following provision:
“Reparations to victims
“The Court shall establish principles relating to reparations to, or in
respect of, victims, including restitution, compensation and rehabilitation. On
this basis, in its decision the Court may, either upon request or on its own
motion in exceptional circumstances, determine the scope and extent of any
damage, loss and injury to, or in respect of, victims and will state the
principles on which it is acting.” (para. 1)
4.
For the reasons set out below, it is submitted respectfully that any such
proposal would not be efficacious, would severely hamper the everyday work of the
Tribunal and would be highly destructive to the principal mandate of the Tribunal.
5.
Further, it is respectfully submitted that there are other, quicker and
simpler methods which will ensure that the victims of criminal acts in Rwanda
receive just compensation.

__________________
1 General Assembly resolution 40/34, annex.
2 A/CONF.183/9.

3

S/2000/1198

Who are the victims that qualify for compensation?
6.
Using the definitions contained in the Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, referred to above, paragraph 1
defines victims as “persons who, individually or collectively, have suffered harm,
including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering, economic loss or
substantial impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or omissions that
are in violation of criminal laws operative within Member States, including those
laws proscribing criminal abuse of power.”
7.

Paragraph 2 of the Declaration states:

“A person may be considered a victim, under this Declaration, regardless
of whether the perpetrator is identified, apprehended, prosecuted or convicted
and regardless of the familial relationship between the perpetrator and the
victim. The term ‘victim’ also includes, where appropriate, the immediate
family or dependants of the direct victim and persons who have suffered harm
in intervening to assist victims in distress or to prevent victimization.”
8.

Paragraph 12 of the Declaration states:

“When compensation is not fully available from the offender or other
sources, States should endeavour to provide financial compensation to:
(a) Victims who have sustained significant bodily injury or impairment
of physical or mental health as a result of serious crimes;
(b) The family, in particular dependants of persons who have died or
become physically or mentally incapacitated as a result of such victimization.”
9.
Applying the breadth of that definition to Rwanda, while it is impossible
to establish any exact figure of the number of persons eligible for compensation, it
must comprise a substantial part of the population of Rwanda, both within and
outside of the present borders of the country.
The work of the Tribunal
10. The calendar of the Tribunal is full for the foreseeable future. All three
Trial Chambers are fully committed and will remain so for the life of the Tribunal.
There remain in custody a large number of defendants who have yet to be tried. The
mandate of the Tribunal is also a limited one.
11. It is salutary to remember that the Expert Group to conduct a review of
the effective operation and functioning of the International Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda observed of the latter in its report that “predicting future
developments is uncertain at best ... Bearing in mind the current and foreseeably
more rapid pace of judicial proceedings, a period of some seven or eight years
appears to be a minimum for discharge of the Tribunal’s mandate.” (S/2000/597,
annex I, para. 34)
12. The work of the Tribunal has been considerably complicated by the
uniqueness of its mandate, the ground-breaking nature of its considerations, the
necessity of developing new models of criminal procedure and the development of
new organizational structures. If the Tribunal adds to its responsibilities a whole
new area of law relating to compensation, then the Tribunal will not only have to

4

S/2000/1198

develop a new jurisprudence; it will also have to expand its staffing considerably
and establish new rules and procedures for assessing claims.
Compensation schemes
13. Research on compensation schemes presently in operation suggests that
very few of the eligible victims receive the compensation to which they are entitled.
Often, only victims represented by counsel achieve a satisfactory level of
compensation. There are substantial overhead costs in collecting and processing
documentation and the administration costs are usually very high. Victim
satisfaction with compensation programmes appears to be quite low. Victims usually
express considerable frustration with the complexity of compensation
documentation procedures. 3
14. It seems likely that if the Tribunal embarks upon the processing of claims
for compensation, then, in addition to any dissatisfaction with its present progress, it
can expect to add to this the frustration and disappointment of those attempting to
establish claims.
Other options
15.

There are other options which can be considered:

(a) A specialized agency set up by the United Nations to administer a
compensation scheme or trust fund that can be based upon individual application, or
community need or some group-based qualification;
(b) A scheme administered by some other agency or governmental entity on
similar lines to (a);
(c) An arrangement which could operate in tandem with options (a) and (b)
and which would allow the Tribunal to exercise a limited power to order payments
from a trust fund for victims actually appearing before it as witnesses in a case. It is
noteworthy that such a power exists in the criminal courts of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, but is especially limited to compensation issues
where the issue is factually clear and where there is no dispute as to quantum before
the court. In that jurisdiction, extensive inquiry into compensation issues by
criminal courts is expressly abjured.
In the light of the foregoing, any one of the options enumerated in (a), (b) and
(c) above may be considered to process and assess claims for compensation from
people who are victims of crimes that fall within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
(Signed) Navanethem Pillay
President

__________________
3 Elias, R., The Politics of Victimization: Victims, Victimology and Human Rights (New York and

Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), especially pages 162, 212 and 238.

5
