S/2009/588*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 November 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council *
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter dated 6 November 2009, which I received from the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex), transmitting the thirty-sixth
report on implementation of the Peace Agreement, covering the period from 1 May
2009 to 31 October 2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons.

09-59706* (E) 191109

*0959706*

S/2009/588

Annex
Letter dated 6 November 2009 from the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), by which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
in accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to you the thirty-sixth
report (see enclosure). I would ask you kindly to distribute this report to the
members of the Security Council for their consideration.
This is my second report to the Secretary-General since assuming the office of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (and European Union Special
Representative) on 26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from 1 May
to 31 October 2009.
Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what is
offered in the attached report or have any questions regarding its contents, I should
be pleased to provide further information.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2

09-59706

S/2009/588

Enclosure
Thirty-sixth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
1 May-31 October 2009

Summary
This report covers the period from 1 May to 31 October 2009. During the past
six months Bosnia and Herzegovina has made little progress towards implementing
its reform agenda. Of particular note are the ongoing attacks against State
institutions, competencies and laws, mainly by the Government of the Republika
Srpska, as well as continued challenges to the authority of the High Representative
and the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council. Nationalist,
anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging the sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina also played a role, with the earlier effort by three political leaders
to open a process of dialogue and compromise foundering.
As a consequence, only very limited progress has been made towards meeting
the outstanding requirements set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council for transition from the Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative as well as on the priorities and conditions which are
required for progress on the Euro-Atlantic agenda. The high-level political
discussions (“Butmir process”) initiated by the European Union and the United
States are welcome. They represent an exceptional opportunity for the country’s
leaders to seize and take the country forward. They have not yielded any concrete
results during the reporting period, but are ongoing and have my full support.
Progress was limited in general, with the late exception of visa liberalizationrelated laws, where legislative activity eventually gained speed after summer (with
some progress still required, especially related to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Criminal Code). This, together with the issuance of the first biometric passports in
October, revived hopes that Bosnia and Herzegovina might not lag too far behind its
neighbours in gaining admission to the “White Schengen” list.
The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR)
continues to contribute to a safe and secure environment in the country. EUFOR is a
key reassurance factor in Bosnia and Herzegovina at a time when the political
situation remains fragile and tense. For this reason, the mandate of EUFOR should
be extended. I have also recommended its extension to the European Union and its
member States.

09-59706

3

S/2009/588

I.

Introduction
1.
This is my second report to the Secretary-General since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina — as well as that of European
Union Special Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina — on 26 March. In
keeping with past practice, the present report assesses progress made towards
attaining the goals outlined in previous reports, reviews developments during the
reporting period, and provides my assessment of mandate implementation in the
most important areas, not least the conditions that must be met by the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina before transition from the Office of the High
Representative to the European Union Special Representative can be concluded. I
have focused my efforts on facilitating progress in these areas, as well as meeting
my primary responsibility of upholding the Dayton Peace Agreement. Regrettably,
my efforts have largely been dedicated to addressing negative developments, in
particular a number of attacks on the State institutions in a context of aggressive
rhetoric.
2.
The high-level political negotiations with the political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina which were initiated by the European Union (EU) and the United
States in October are set to continue in November. My staff and I have fully
supported this initiative as a means to facilitate and speed up key reforms related to
the country’s Euro-Atlantic perspective and institutional functionality, as well as the
conditions which have been set for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
3.
The successful election of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council in 2010-2012 represents a milestone in the country’s foreign
policy and an important recognition of the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, the Security Council membership will also be a major
challenge for the relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities.

II.

Political update
General political environment
4.
Anti-Dayton action continued (specifically in relation to Annexes 2, 4, 9 and
10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace) during the reporting period, in a
context of increasingly divisive rhetoric. Of particular concern has been the
challenge of the authorities in the Republika Srpska against the sovereignty and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the authority of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council and the High Representative.
The Republika Srpska Government and National Assembly took actions that further
undermined State competencies and progress on a number of EU partnership and
visa-liberalization requirements. The lack of trust and of meaningful political
dialogue between party leaders has also been of concern.
5.
The lack of progress in addressing reforms and the difficult political climate
resulted in a mostly negative progress report issued by the European Commission in
mid-October. The Commission concluded that there has been only “very limited
progress” in addressing key reforms required for further approximation towards the
European Union. The progress report also concluded that the European Union would

4

09-59706

S/2009/588

not be able to consider an application for membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina
before the Office of the High Representative has been closed.
6.
The work and productivity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly remained affected by the negative political climate, strained political
relations and the continuous impasse in the Council of Ministers. One of the key
problems related to the work of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly is the trend by which the political parties support draft legislation in the
Council of Ministers, only then to oppose the same draft laws in one or both houses
of the Parliament. This has been the case with a number of laws pertaining to visa
liberalization; the European Partnership laws also failed owing to Republika Srpska
opposition. Overall the performance of the Council of Ministers and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly has been poor, with ethnic and entity agendas
prevailing over the State’s intentions to fulfil requirements for EU and NATO
membership. Visa liberalization-related laws have (lately) become an exception,
with progress achieved towards the end of the reporting period.
7.
The reporting period began with the Prime Minister of Republika Srpska
suggesting on 7 May that Serb soldiers serving in the small contingent of the Armed
Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina then taking part in a NATO Partnership for Peace
disaster response exercise in Georgia should return home. Because the Republika
Srpska Prime Minister is not in the Armed Forces chain of command and should not
interfere in competencies exclusively belonging to the State, the call represented an
anti-Dayton act and led to a public outcry. The Office of the High Representative
condemned the incident, as did a number of other members of the Peace
Implementation Council.
8.
The Republika Srpska National Assembly further raised tensions on 14 May
when it adopted conclusions that called into question the constitutional basis and
legality of State competencies which were considered by the Republika Srpska
Government and National Assembly as “transferred” from the Republika Srpska to
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including some of the responsibilities
which the entities formally transferred to the State in line with the Constitution. The
legitimacy of the international community’s policies, decisions and presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were also challenged in the said conclusions. The
Republika Srpska National Assembly voted to initiate lawsuits challenging the
constitutionality of such transfers before domestic and international courts and to
hold the passage of future State budgets hostage to its own analysis of the
performance of state institutions based on those alleged transferred competencies.
The Republika Srpska alleges that only 3 of the 68 “transferred” competencies were
not “stolen”, seized or surrendered under false pretences, usually as a result of
alleged intervention by the High Representative.
9.
The Republika Srpska list of controversial “transferred” competencies
included a number of responsibilities that are already expressly listed in the General
Framework Agreement and thus in the Constitution from the very beginning as
belonging to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including matters related to immigration and
asylum, import and export of arms, and international and inter-entity criminal law
enforcement. Certain matters contained in the Republika Srpska list have already
been subject to challenges before the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which has decided that State-level legislation covering those matters
is in line with the distribution of competencies provided for in the Constitution.

09-59706

5

S/2009/588

10. I wrote to the Speaker of the Republika Srpska National Assembly on 25 May
demanding that the Assembly vote by 11 June to nullify its conclusions on transfers
of constitutional competencies, thus preventing them from entering into force. In my
letter I noted that the conclusions undermined the division of responsibilities
between the State and entities established by the Dayton Constitution and
subsequent decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. They
were also, I noted, “misleading, erroneous and therefore unacceptable”. The
conclusions were nevertheless published on 15 June and entered into force the next
day. As a result of their actions the Republika Srpska authorities left me with no
option but to issue a decision on 20 June annulling the said conclusions of the
Republika Srpska National Assembly.
11. On 19 and 20 May, Vice-President of the United States of America, Joseph
Biden, and the European Union High Representative, Javier Solana, visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Addressing the Parliamentary Assembly, the Vice-President
expressed concern about the deteriorating political situation, noting that “for three
years, we have seen a sharp and dangerous rise in nationalist rhetoric designed to
play on people’s fears, to stir up anger and resentment”. He noted that State
institutions required for EU and NATO membership were being “openly challenged
and deliberately undermined”, and that the reforms “that prompted the European
Union and NATO to open their doors to the citizens of this country” were being
rolled back. The Vice-President also noted that the Office of the High
Representative enjoyed the “full support” of the United States and that Washington
would not agree to the closure of the Office of the High Representative until all the
objectives and conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council had been met.
12. Difficulties in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued. Following
his re-election as President of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) on 26 May at
the party’s fifth congress, Sulejman Tihic immediately moved to secure the
resignation of the Prime Minister of the Federation, Nedzad Brankovic, who is
facing criminal charges for abuse of office in the late 1990s. The Federation Finance
Minister, Vjekoslav Bevanda, assumed most of the responsibilities of the Prime
Minister while the parties argued over a replacement for Brankovic. The Federation
Government faced a major challenge over its proposed “intervention” law, needed to
rebalance its 2009 budget and fulfil International Monetary Fund (IMF) conditions
to receive its share of the €1.2 billion, three-year standby arrangement negotiated on
5 May. Strikes, hunger strikes, road and border blockades, and threats of
demonstrations by trade unionists, war veterans and farmers multiplied, until, on
18 June, some 7,000 war veterans, civilian war victims and non-war invalids
demonstrated in front of the Federation Government building in Sarajevo. The
caretaker government backed down as Minister Bevanda promised to remove a
planned 10 per cent reduction in benefits.
13. The Federation House of Representatives confirmed the SDA replacement
nominee as premier, Mustafa Mujezinovic, on 25 June. He has since tried to hold
the line on meeting the entity’s commitments to IMF, but has also faced
demonstrations as well as a number of disputes with Croat ministers frustrated over
being outvoted in government sessions. In short, the Federation Government
remained disunited, weak and often dysfunctional.

6

09-59706

S/2009/588

14. Beset by fiscal woes that delay salary and pension payments and facing social
unrest caused by IMF-required cuts, the Federation Government experienced a new
crisis on 27 August. Having been outvoted by their fellow ministers on a proposed
law that would alter the course of a planned motorway through Herzegovina, the
four Croat ministers in the Government announced that they would take no further
part in its work. The Federation Government resolved the standoff by appointing a
working group to analyse the highway plans, but the responsible Minister, a
Bosniak, later resigned and his position remains unfilled at the time of writing.
Relations in the Federation were also shaken on 12 October over a hurriedly called
Government session to decide the fate of the near-bankrupt, Federation-owned oil
terminals at the port of Ploce in neighbouring Croatia. The Government decided —
in the absence of Bosnian Croat ministers — both to appoint a new management and
to provide a financial injection to the company.
15. The European Commission announced on 15 July that it was recommending
visa requirements be lifted for citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia as from 1 January 2010. Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina were not included. This decision increased the level of popular
frustration with politicians, but was also used to criticize the European Union over a
perceived double standard. In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the perception is
that the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina would be left as “second class” citizens
in a “ghetto”. While the European Commission later acknowledged, in its progress
report of October, that “progress has been made by Bosnia and Herzegovina with
regard to visa policy and in the wider framework of the visa liberalization
dialogue”, the country at this stage still lags behind its neighbours.
16. One of the principal targets of criticism for the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to win access to the European Union’s “white list” for visa-free travel
was Bosnia and Herzegovina Security Minister and Deputy Chairman Tarik Sadovic.
On 3 July the presidency of SDA ordered Sadovic to resign and, following his
resistance, he was removed by a parliamentary dismissal procedure approved by
both houses of parliament.
17. Relations between Serbs and Bosniaks in the Republika Srpska took a turn for
the worse when the Bosniak caucus of the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples, the
effective second chamber of the Republika Srpska National Assembly, decided on
13 July to suspend its participation in the Council of Peoples until the Republika
Srpska Constitutional Court amends its own rules of procedure to preclude
“outvoting” of non-Serbs in cases referred to it by the Council of Peoples. The spur
was a ruling by the Constitutional Court the previous week, rejecting the Bosniaks’
invocation of vital national interest against a Republika Srpska National Assembly
law to delete the prefix “Bosnian” from the names of the towns Bosanski Brod and
Bosanska Kostajnica. The Court ruled that the prefixes related to the State as a
whole and not to Bosniaks specifically. There could, therefore, be no violation of
their national interest. In response to the boycott, the Republika Srpska Prime
Minister threatened to eject SDA from his governing coalition at entity level. He
also threatened to eliminate non-Dayton institutions such as the Council of Peoples
from the entity constitution. This dispute continued throughout the summer and
early autumn.
18. The five-party coalition Government at State level, the Council of Ministers,
was unable to meet or make decisions over much of the summer, because of

09-59706

7

S/2009/588

obstruction from various quarters. When it did manage to meet on 20 August, it
failed to make appointments to the directorships of three important State agencies
that have long been vacant or occupied by incumbents whose terms have expired:
the Directorate for European Integration, the Indirect Taxation Authority and the
Communications Regulatory Agency. The Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
Nikola Spiric (SNSD) — with the support of the SNSD main board — continues to
block the appointment of the SDA nominee, Sadik Ahmetovic, to the post of
Minister of Security and Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. The
statutory time limit for this appointment lapsed on 12 September, and the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers is therefore in breach of the law. Chairman Spiric and
SNSD have said that they will hold this appointment hostage until appointments to
the other positions have been made. In the meantime, however, the Civil Service
Agency has substituted for the Government and appointed a new director of the
Directorate for European Integration. This controversy has led to a serious
deterioration of political relations at the State level as the delay in forwarding the
nomination to the House of Representatives has greatly exceeded the legal deadline
and prevents certain types of decisions from being made in the Council of Ministers.
19. The Republika Srpska Prime Minister became ever more outspoken during this
period. His pronouncements included provocative remarks on issues such as
wartime massacres, international judges and prosecutors (including my right to
extend their mandate), the lack of legitimacy and permanence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the option of calling for a public consultation/referendum in the
Republika Srpska and my own decisions (qualifying them as “unconstitutional,
illegal and criminal”).
20. At the same time the Republika Srpska Premier presented his analysis of the
supposed illegality of the Bonn powers and promised to sue me and all former High
Representatives (a threat he first made in person at the meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board in June 2009), indicating that he plans not
only to challenge new uses of the Bonn powers, but also to undo decisions of
previous High Representatives.
21. The Republika Srpska Prime Minister’s recent statements on wartime atrocities
have generated anger and chagrin among Bosniaks and members of the international
community. On 11 September he claimed that evidence existed that Bosniaks had
staged the massacres in the Markale Market in Sarajevo in February 1994 and
August 1995, as well as in Tuzla in May 1995. While many Serb leaders have
repeated allegations in relation to Markale Market over the years, the comments in
regard to the Tuzla Kapija massacre, in which more than 70 mostly young people
were killed, represents a new departure. In all three cases, the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia and the War Crimes Chamber of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Court have confirmed convictions of Serbs as being responsible. As I
noted in a statement issued with my OSCE and Council of Europe colleagues on
15 September, any attempt to change the established historical record of war crimes
is unacceptable and inexcusable. When such misstatements come from an official in
a position of high responsibility, an official who is obliged to uphold the Dayton
Peace Agreement and cooperate with the Tribunal, they are particularly
irresponsible, and undermine not only the institutions devoted to upholding the rule
of law but also the credibility of the individual himself.

8

09-59706

S/2009/588

22. Facing an imminent move by the Republika Srpska authorities to illegally
dismantle the State electricity transmission company Elektroprijenos Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is a public company jointly founded (in 2003) and jointly
owned by the two entities as shareholders, and which had seriously deteriorated as a
result of the continued boycott by the Republika Srpska of the Management Board, I
issued on 18 September a decision aimed at preventing the collapse of the company
and ensuring continuity of its operations. Indeed, several power outages in Sarajevo
have been attributed to failures of equipment that have become dilapidated owing to
major investments being blocked for the past two years by Republika Srpskacontrolled officials in Elektroprijenos. The decision reaffirmed the principle of
continuity of function under which the mandate of the general manager of
Elektroprijenos continues until a replacement is appointed, except if otherwise
provided by law.
23. My decisions of 18 September prompted the Republika Srpska Government to
issue a series of conclusions which the National Assembly endorsed, while declaring
all my decisions null and void, illegal and a violation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. It mandated lawsuits against all High Representatives but fell short of
initiating further immediate action, although it did adopt conclusions threatening a
walkout of Republika Srpska representatives from State institutions as well as a
public consultation in the Republika Srpska in case of future decisions of the High
Representative. The Republika Srpska Government also refused to publish my
decisions in the Official Gazette, in violation of Republika Srpska law.
24. On 17 September the Republika Srpska Government divided KM 5 million
among media outlets. This payment of direct subsidies has raised concerns about the
independence of the media in the Republika Srpska and together, with OSCE, I will
be monitoring the situation closely. My staff received complaints from opposition
parties in the Republika Srpska alleging difficulties in terms of appropriate coverage
of their statements and activities by Republika Srpska public broadcasters as well as
private media known to be affiliated with the ruling party.
25. Continuing a process begun by my predecessors, on 21 August I lifted the bans
on four former Serb Democratic Party (SDS) members who had been previously
barred from holding public office and standing for elections.
26. In October, the European Union and the United States jointly initiated a highlevel political dialogue (“Butmir process”), and the Swedish Foreign Minister, Carl
Bildt, representing the EU Presidency, the United States Deputy State Secretary,
James Steinberg, and the European Commissioner, Olli Rehn, jointly visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina twice within a couple of weeks in order to bring seven key party
leaders together. The aim was, through a “package approach”, to break the political
stalemate, relaunch a domestic dialogue and facilitate and accelerate reforms needed
for the country’s Euro-Atlantic perspective. This represented, in the light of the
earlier visit of Messrs. Solana and Biden, the highest-level international initiative to
move the country forward, and my staff and I gave my full support to it throughout
the (ongoing) process (for more details on the content of the process see para. 28
below).
Constitutional reform
27. Domestic actors continued to be given the space to develop their own views on
how to proceed, while I focused my efforts on facilitating the earliest possible

09-59706

9

S/2009/588

delivery by Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities of the “5 plus 2” agenda for
transition from the Office of the High Representative to the European Union Special
Representative. The response of the ruling coalition at State level was disappointing.
Not only did the parties fail to build on the success of the first amendment
(concerning Brcko District) to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution adopted in
March 2009, but they also failed to engage in any meaningful dialogue on
constitutional reform. As a consequence, they continued to be unable to reach an
agreement on launching a parliament-led constitutional reform process.
28. It was only when high-level visiting and local officials of the European Union
and the United States brought party leaders together on 9, 20 and 21 October that
substantial negotiations commenced (see para. 26 above). The fact that the
international community was required to step in to get this process moving clearly
confirms the need for the international community to play a substantial and handson role in facilitating constitutional reform. Together, the European Union and the
United States proposed, through a “package approach” covering remaining areas of
the “5 plus 2” agenda (apportionment of State and defence property) and
constitutional changes (relating to functionality, efficiency, respect of human rights
and related to the EU/NATO accession reform process), to reinitiate a domestic
political dialogue and facilitate and accelerate the country’s Euro-Atlantic
perspective and institutional capacity. While not having led to concrete results
during the reporting period, the process is ongoing at the time of writing. In its
progress report issued in mid-October, the European Commission also highlighted
the problems related to the Constitution, and underlined that the problem of
blockages due to abuse of the entity voting rules “needs to be addressed”, and that a
stricter definition of the vital national interest clause in the Constitution is
necessary. The Council of Europe’s Venice Commission had drawn attention to these
and other problems in a report issued in 2005.

III.

European partnership requirements and visa liberalization
Visa liberalization
29. The European Commission provided Bosnia and Herzegovina with a “road
map” for visa liberalization or abolition in June 2008. This identified the many
actions the authorities must take if the country’s citizens are to enjoy visa-free travel
to and within the Schengen zone. The road map set out tasks in the fields of
document security, illegal migration, public order and security, and external
relations. Citing the country’s inadequate progress in fulfilling the road map’s
requirements, the Commission decided in July that Bosnia and Herzegovina should
not be included among the other western Balkan States (the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia) whose Governments the European
Commission had judged had done enough to merit a recommendation on the
introduction of a visa-free regime early in 2010.
30. The outstanding requirements included the issuance of biometric passports; the
adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly of both the Law
on the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption and the Coordination of the Fight
against Corruption and amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Code
(provisions on asset forfeiture, convictions for organized crime and trafficking in
human beings); the appointment of a director and deputy directors of the Directorate

10

09-59706

S/2009/588

for the Coordination of Police Bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a State-level
police body which has yet to be established in accordance with the police reform
laws of April 2008; appropriate and effective coordination mechanisms for the
exchange of information between national agencies in the field of law enforcement
and the abolition of the offices of the Federation and Republika Srpska ombudsmen
in favour of a functional Bosnia and Herzegovina Ombudsman.
31. On 30 September, law enforcement officials signed an agreement on the
electronic exchange of data between registers of police bodies and prosecutors’
offices. On 1 October the Parliamentary Assembly rejected amendments to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Code, but on 14 October the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives adopted the Law on the Agency for the
Prevention of Corruption and the Coordination of the Fight against Corruption. This
law still awaits passage by the House of Peoples. Given that the issuance of
biometric passports also commenced in October, there has been a revival of hopeful
speculation that Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens might not lag too far behind their
neighbours in gaining admission to the “White Schengen” list.
Update on the implementation of police restructuring
32. In its assessment in May 2009 of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s implementation of
the visa road map, the European Commission noted the delay in appointing the
directors and deputy directors of the new bodies provided for in the police reform
laws of April 2008. In July, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
appointed the director of the Agency for Education and Advanced Training. It also
approved start-up budgets for that agency and for the forensics and support agencies
during the reporting period.
33. On 22 July the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives confirmed
the nominations to the Independent Board and the Public Complaints Board, two
supervisory bodies provided for in the police reform laws. The House of Peoples
followed suit on 23 July. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
approved the rules of procedure for the Public Complaints Board on 19 October. The
Independent Board adopted its proposed rule book on 28 September, but it has yet to
be approved by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. The
Independent Board is to be responsible for the still-outstanding procedure to select
the director and two deputy directors of the Directorate for the Coordination of
Police Bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it cannot proceed until its internal
rules are finalized. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly also
enacted amendments to the Law on the State Investigation and Protection Agency in
June and amendments to the Law on the State Border Police in July, as envisaged by
the police reform laws of April 2008.

IV.

Entrenching the rule of law
34. The reporting period has been marked by stagnation in the implementation of
both the National War Crimes Prosecution Strategy and the National Justice Sector
Reform Strategy. Moreover, blockage by the Republika Srpska of the extension
requested by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court President and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Chief Prosecutor of the mandates of the international judges and

09-59706

11

S/2009/588

prosecutors working in the State Court and Prosecutor’s Office have served to
highlight the continuing fragility of earlier justice sector reforms.
War Crimes Prosecution Strategy
35. The National War Crimes Prosecution Strategy adopted at the end of 2008 was
hailed as the first comprehensive policy document for dealing with the daunting war
crimes caseload facing Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although a Supervisory Board was
set up to monitor implementation of the Strategy according to the time lines set out
in the document, performance is lagging far behind those goals. So far, the only
visible progress is that the Council of Ministers has adopted two required
amendments to the Criminal Procedural Code. The Parliamentary Assembly has yet
to enact them. Nor is there a central database, which means that exact information
on war crimes cases remains unavailable. The lack of this basic element makes
further implementation nearly impossible.
36. Having been publicly criticized for falling behind schedule — most notably by
the President of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina — the Supervisory Board has
asked for the help of the Office of the High Representative in speeding up data
collection from lower level jurisdictions. My Office has thus written to all
prosecutors’ offices urging them to cooperate.
37. The initially promising talks in the spring between the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Justice and its Serbian counterpart in improving regional
cooperation in processing war crimes cases have also failed to produce results. The
September first-instance verdict of the Belgrade District Court sentencing a citizen
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ilija Jurisic, to 12 years in prison for his alleged part in
ordering an attack by Tuzla Civil Defence units on a retreating Yugoslav People’s
Army convoy in May 1992 has served both to inflame passions and to underscore
the need to clarify jurisdictional responsibilities when it comes to war crimes cases.
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy
38. The State-wide Justice Sector Reform Strategy has also fared poorly during the
reporting period. A second ministerial conference convened at the end of May to
assess progress concluded that implementation rates had averaged less than 20 per
cent over the previous five months and that between 40 and 50 per cent of projects
had registered no progress at all. The conference conclusions noted that the various
working groups would in the future meet only once between inter-ministerial
conferences, but that two quarterly reports on implementation must be provided. A
technical secretariat, comprising representatives of the State, entities, Brcko District
and the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, was established to support
coordination efforts according to an agreed plan of activities. The third ministerial
conference is scheduled for December.
Other rule of law issues
39. My Office has fully supported the view of the highest State-level judicial and
prosecutorial officials that the mandates of the international judges and prosecutors
working in the war crimes and organized crime, economic crime and corruption
chambers of the State Court and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office
should be extended beyond December 2009. Although the Council of Ministers had
endorsed an inter-party compromise that would keep the international judges and

12

09-59706

S/2009/588

prosecutors dealing with war crimes, no such extension for those engaged in
combating organized crime, corruption and terrorism was acceptable to all parties,
particularly those based in the Republika Srpska. The rejection late in September of
proposed amendments to the Law on the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Law on the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the Serb members of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples — which had the effect of nullifying
all extensions of foreign judges and prosecutors — thus represents a serious blow to
the ability of those institutions to function effectively and efficiently in future. This
is all the more so because the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly had
failed to provide the State Court and Prosecutor’s Office with budgets in 2008 and
2009 that would enable them to hire Bosnia and Herzegovina nationals to replace
the departing international judges and prosecutors, who have heretofore been paid
by the international community.
40. The political controversy that developed around the extension of the
international judges and prosecutors and, more generally, about the effectiveness
and legitimacy of these State institutions was symptomatic of the intensified
offensive mounted by the Republika Srpska authorities against past justice sector
and State-building reforms during the reporting period. On the other hand, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Registry successfully completed the integration of all its
services (maintenance, security, information technology and telecommunications) as
wholly domestic operations. Maintaining the Registry, however, may pose a new
challenge to international donors.
41. The Federation Constitutional Court is still short of three judges, the
appointment procedure having been delayed by an ongoing struggle between the
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council and the entity President over the procedure
of selection of the candidates. As was noted in the previous report, the Federation
President had nominated Croat and Serb candidates who failed to pass in the
Federation House of Peoples. The selection process has been reinitiated by the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, but has not yet returned to the Federation
Presidency. In the meantime, the appointment of a Bosniak judge has also stalled
after the entity President wrote to the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council in
June questioning the procedure. Although the High Council replied in July, the
President has thus far failed to endorse a candidate. It is therefore obvious that the
dispute between the Federation President and the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council over their respective roles in the appointment of Federation Constitutional
Court judges continues.
42. Laws imposed by a previous High Representative in December 2005 that, in
line with recommendations of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, regulate
the salaries of judges and prosecutors at all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
now under threat in the Federation because of steps taken to make expenditure cuts
required by IMF in return for the maintenance of the country’s standby arrangement.
This important reform, which has ensured the harmonization of salaries across the
country and so encouraged judicial mobility and independence, could be
undermined by the Federation Government’s across-the-board pay cuts for public
employees. Although the State and the Republika Srpska authorities have managed
to decrease expenditures in line with IMF requirements without cutting judicial
salaries, the Federation has thus far turned a deaf ear to expressions of concern by
my Office and the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.

09-59706

13

S/2009/588

43. Finally, while the technical review of the project to build a State prison that
had been requested by the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB) and the
delegation of the European Commission was completed in mid-September, some of
the initially committed donations have been lost as a consequence of the delay. The
Council of Ministers has, however, approved the loan application and forwarded it
to CEB within the set deadline. CEB is expected to consider the application in
November.

V.

Cooperation with the International Tribunal
44. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia continues to assess that
Bosnia and Herzegovina does cooperate with the Tribunal.
45. The trial of Radovan Karadzic which began on 26 October, as well as the early
release of former Republika Srpska President Biljana Plavsic from prison in
Sweden, stirred high emotions and continued to generate extensive press coverage
and public interest in Bosnia and Herzegovina and abroad. On the other hand, Ratko
Mladic remains at large. As the Tribunal seeks to complete its work in the shortest
possible time it will be important to retain the capacity to deliver concrete results.
46. It is necessary to note that Radovan Stankovic remains at large, and that no
serious measures have been taken to locate him. He was the first war crimes indictee
of the Tribunal to have his case transferred to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court for
trial. Soon after his conviction, he escaped from the prison in Foca in May 2007.
More positively, domestic and international efforts on behalf of the Tribunal have
continued to apply pressure on Mladic’s presumed support network, including
several raids on close relatives and known supporters. Cooperation among the
relevant agencies, including NATO, EUFOR, the Office of the High Representative,
the Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika
Srpska police, has been excellent, and will continue for as long as Mladic remains
on the run.

VI.

Reforming the economy
47. Economic indicators 1 demonstrate the impact of the global economic crisis on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its foreign trade deficit in the period January-August is
estimated at €2.2 billion, which is 29 per cent less than in the same period last year
owing to a 22-per cent decrease in exports and a 26-per cent decrease in imports. In
July, the registered unemployment rate was 41.8 per cent, while the real
unemployment rate was estimated at 24.1 per cent. Compared to the same period last
year, the average net salary in the period January-July increased by 8 per cent and
amounted to €400, while the average pension increased by 6.4 per cent and amounted
to €160. Foreign direct investments in the first half of 2009 dropped by 52.8 per cent
compared to the same period in 2008. In the period January-August, there was also a
decrease in revenues by 7.8 per cent in the Federation and by 12.9 per cent in the
Republika Srpska. The banking sector appears stable but there is evidence of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina-based banks’ reduced access to capital, which is reflected in

__________________
1 Data taken from the information on macroeconomic indicators for the period January-August

2009, prepared by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Directorate for Economic Planning.

14

09-59706

S/2009/588

their reduced potential for lending and high interest rates on deposits and particularly
loans.
48. To mitigate the effects of the crisis, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council
and IMF agreed on 5 May to a three-year standby arrangement worth €1.2 billion.
Based on a positive assessment of the readiness of the State and entity authorities to
cut expenditures through reforms and payment reductions, the arrangement was
approved by the IMF Executive Board on 8 July, the first tranche of funds being
released on 10 July. IMF is due to review Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in
meeting the agreed programme benchmarks in November, conditioning payment of
second tranche on the outcome. The biggest challenge to ensuring a positive verdict
is the Federation Government’s questionable ability to implement benefit cuts on war
veterans and other politically potent social categories.
49. As to the reform agenda, agreement within the Governing Board of the Indirect
Taxation Authority facilitated the adoption of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on
Excises and accompanying implementation legislation on 18 June, so ensuring, inter
alia, a boost in annual indirect tax revenues. However, the Board disagrees on a
manner of allocation of road toll tax revenue, as required under the new Bosnia and
Herzegovina Law on Excises, thus blocking disbursement of €24 million, as
accumulated on the Single Account so far. Moreover, there is still no agreement
between the entities on new coefficients for the allocation of indirect tax revenues
and, therefore, those agreed in the second quarter of 2008 continue to be applied. 2
This is because the Republika Srpska Minister of Finance continues to question the
main element of the allocation formula and, thus, the credibility of the institution
responsible for it: the Indirect Taxation Authority. This should be seen in the context
of calls from the Republika Srpska for the abandonment of the Single Account,
which is under the jurisdiction of the Indirect Taxation Authority, as well as in the
context of the Republika Srpska Government’s recent conclusions challenging the
jurisdiction of that institution. 3 There has also been no agreement on the long
overdue appointments of a new director of the Authority and expert members of its
Governing Board.
50. While the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council played an important role in
bringing the negotiations with IMF to a successful conclusion, it once again failed
to establish itself as a true coordination mechanism. The world recession has
appeared on the agenda of the Fiscal Council more often as a matter for information
than for action. Moreover, in the case of the assets received by Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a consequence of the post-Yugoslav succession agreement, the
__________________
2 Republika Srpska: 32.06 per cent; Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina: 64.39 per cent; Brcko

District: 3.55 per cent.
3 On 16 October, the Republika Srpska Government ordered Republika Srpska members of the

Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority to note that the Authority had illegally and
unconstitutionally usurped the competencies of the Republika Srpska Ministry of Trade and
Tourism by regulating the trade of bunker fuel and other petroleum heating fuel derivatives.
Board members from the Republika Srpska were instructed to demand modification of the Rule
Book on the Application of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Excises, thus de facto being
instructed to act inconsistently with the Law itself, as it is the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on
Excises that defines bunker fuel and other petroleum heating fuel derivatives as being subject to
excise tax. It is worth noting that the issues raised by the Republika Srpska Government were
not raised during the recent parliamentary adoption of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on
Excises nor prior to it.

09-59706

15

S/2009/588

Fiscal Council has provided an extralegal forum for dividing those assets between
the entities, without a proper legal basis and any regard to the State and Brcko
District. Following the failure of the responsible authorities to meet the deadline of
15 September set by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board for resolving
this issue, 4 I was obliged to act by issuing on 18 September a Decision Enacting the
Law on the Distribution, Purpose and Use of Financial Assets Obtained under
Annex C to the Agreement on Succession Issues. The Decision addresses the
distribution of succession assets in a systematic manner, establishes exact allocation
shares for the State, entities and Brcko, and sets a method of rebalancing the assets
allocated in April in line with the allocation shares.
51. There was no progress during the reporting period on efforts to improve the
business environment. The situation is especially worrying in the energy sector,
where the operations of Elektroprijenos Bosnia and Herzegovina, the electricitytransmission company owned jointly by the entities, have continued to deteriorate as
a result of both actions and obstructions on the part of the Republika Srpska
authorities and their representatives in the firm. Owing to the absence of investment
over the past two years, itself the result of the Republika Srpska boycott of the
management bodies responsible for such matters, the electricity transmission grid is
in increasingly poor shape and prone to interruptions and failures. Blackouts are
becoming ever more common throughout the country.
52. On 16 September I learned of a Republika Srpska plan to carve out an
extralegal, entity-specific transmission company from Elektroprijenos that was
scheduled to go into effect upon the expiration of the (Bosnian Serb) general
manager’s term of office on 19 September. Such illegal action by the Republika
Srpska authorities would have jeopardized all electricity transmission both in the
country and between Bosnia and Herzegovina and its neighbours. On the other hand,
the absence of a general manager, whose replacement or reappointment in
accordance with the applicable law had likewise been blocked by the Republika
Srpska boycott, would have brought all the company’s operations to a halt. In order
to provide for continuity of the company’s business operations — and thus also to
ensure undisturbed electricity transmission across Bosnia and Herzegovina — I
acted on 18 September by issuing a decision ordering the Elektroprijenos
Management Board to initiate the appointment of a new general manager without
delay, obliging the incumbent to continue in office and perform all his lawful duties
until a successor was appointed or he was removed, and providing for a mechanism
to appoint an acting director during the interregnum in case of his resignation or
incapacitation. This decision has served to prevent the collapse of the company and
helped maintain electricity transmission.
53. In addition, to prevent unlawful altering of the status and operations of
Elektroprijenos, the Brcko Supervisor issued on 19 September a Supervisory Order
confirming that the Elektroprijenos property situated in the Brcko District will
continue to belong only to Elektroprijenos in case of any action intended to have the
__________________
4 Communiqué of 30 June 2009 in which the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board noted

that the entities had not yet fulfilled their remaining obligations under the 1999 Awards of the
Brcko Arbitral Tribunal to resolve, inter alia, the issue of the share of gold and other proceeds
from Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia assets due to the Brcko District of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and called upon the entities, and the State, where appropriate, to resolve these
issues no later than 15 September 2009.

16

09-59706

S/2009/588

effect of dissolving, liquidating or incapacitating the company as a legal entity,
unless that company ceases to exist as a legal person. In such a situation, the
Elektroprijenos property in the Brcko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina would be
automatically considered property of the Brcko District, in accordance with the
Final Award, the Annex to the Final Award, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution.
54. On 24 September the Republika Srpska Government adopted, and on 1 October
the Republika Srpska National Assembly endorsed, a set of conclusions contradicting
my and the Brcko Supervisor’s decisions. In parallel, the Republika Srpska
Government continued to block a full restoration of the company’s normal operations
and, hence, to provide a pretext for creating its own electricity transmission system.
Relevant international partners as well as my Office remain engaged and, at the end
of the reporting period, the Prime Ministers of both entities had agreed to convey a
shareholders’ meeting early in November.

VII.

Public administration reform
55. During the reporting period, the national Public Administration Reform
Coordinator departed to become the director of the Directorate for European
Integration. Overall, there was little progress in addressing public administration
reform. The Public Administration Reform Strategy and the action plan have been
only partially implemented (36 per cent as of July).
56. The severe delays in appointing directors and other key personnel to Statelevel institutions are also affecting the performance of the public administration.
Several key appointments have been delayed for over a year and overall the
appointments of more than 10 Directors are pending at the State level. The reason
for these delays is principally the lack of agreement between the leading political
parties on how to distribute the positions.

VIII.

State property
57. Owing to the lack of demonstrable progress during the reporting period
towards a sustainable State property apportionment between the State and other
levels of government, which is one of the remaining objectives set by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board to allow for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, the Office undertook a more proactive role in assisting the
authorities by initiating an inventory of State property, which will underpin the
necessary intergovernmental agreement settling the competing ownership claims
and clarifying unresolved issues related to the former social ownership regime.
58. On 11 September, with the support of the Steering Board Ambassadors, I issued
a decision formally committing my Office to the inventory process and deploying
field teams to begin compiling the necessary property data. I initiated the process
recognizing that, despite the welcome decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers in April establishing a working group to compile the inventory,
the authorities took no action to complete the process within its 30 September 2009
deadline.

09-59706

17

S/2009/588

59. Since its initial deployment in September 2009, the State Property Inventory
Team of the Office of the High Representative has completed the initial data
gathering in 72 per cent of the 184 land registry and cadastre offices throughout the
country. However, further progress has been hampered by the refusal of the
Republika Srpska to release data from its cadastral offices. Efforts to gain access to
this data or to identify suitable alternative data sources are ongoing.
60. Perhaps more problematic are the threats by the Republika Srpska to
unilaterally overturn the High Representative’s temporary prohibition on State
property transfers, which was initially introduced in 2005 as three laws designed to
maintain the status quo until the authorities reach a sustainable agreement that
ensures that the State, and all subdivisions, own the property needed for the exercise
of their respective constitutional and legal responsibilities. Such a unilateral
revocation would undermine the authority of the Peace Implementation Council and
further enflame pre-election tensions.
61. An acceptable and sustainable resolution to State property issues remains a
requirement for the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to meet before the transition
from the Office of the High Representative to a stand-alone office of the European
Union Special Representative can take place.

IX.

Defence reform
62. Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to implement the NATO Partnership for
Peace although the overall political environment has hindered progress. Reforms
have proceeded, but delays or stoppages continued to be encountered as the
decision-making process moved from the technical to the political level.
63. Nevertheless, on 2 October the Chairman of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, Zeljko Komsic, visited NATO Headquarters to submit the country’s
official application for a Membership Action Plan, the penultimate step designed to
prepare candidate States for full NATO membership. The NATO Secretary General
welcomed Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Euro-Atlantic aspirations, but also stressed
that Bosnia and Herzegovina needed to continue and, indeed, step up its reform
work, especially in regard to its democratic institutions and constitutional
arrangements, and not only in the defence realm.
64. On defence property, despite earlier Republika Srpska Government assurances
to NATO that it would instruct Republika Srpska cadastre offices to cooperate with
the requests of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence for documentation
on property necessary for any agreement transferring ownership of prospective
defence property to the Bosnia and Herzegovina level, no such instruction was
issued. In fact, at the time of reporting, Republika Srpska cadastre offices were
continuing to deny access to relevant public property records in line with Republika
Srpska Government orders. While the issue of inventory data should be an
administrative matter, it was becoming apparent that political controversies relating
to an overall solution to the bigger question of State property in general were
impacting upon the more limited issue of defence property. Collection of all
property documents remained one of the basic preconditions for preparing an annex
to the Agreement on immovable defence property.

18

09-59706

S/2009/588

65. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence submitted its proposal for
the disposal of established surpluses of movable defence property to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency early in October. The destruction list was based on the
inspection of 11 ammunition sites (10 sites remained to be inspected). The
Presidency adopted the Ministry of Defence’s proposal on 7 October but,
regrettably, the vast majority of items were earmarked for sale rather than
destruction. This was despite repeated international and bilateral appeals and
declared commitments to pay for the destruction of surplus arms and ammunition, as
the equipment in question is either outdated or of dubious quality.
66. An acceptable and sustainable resolution to both the immovable and movable
defence property issues remains a requirement for the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to meet before the transition from the Office of the High Representative
to a stand-alone office of the European Union Special Representative can take place.

X.

Intelligence reform
67. The leadership of the Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continued its efforts to consolidate the reformed agency. At the European
Commission’s request, the Council of Ministers established a working group tasked
with harmonizing the Law on Secret Data Protection with European Union
legislation.
68. Through various conferences across Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Committee for Oversight of the Intelligence-Security
Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to promote and refine the functioning
of the oversight system by encouraging links between and among civil society,
academics, the media and sectoral stakeholders. The Committee also initiated a
working party charged with drafting an overarching Law on Parliamentary
Oversight — in line with the Law on the Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and requiring the harmonization of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
democratic oversight practices with those of EU and NATO member States. Overall,
a positive trend towards the entrenchment of democratic control over the sector
continued.

XI.

European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
69. EUFOR continued to provide a military force of some 2,000 personnel and
retained the capacity to bring in over-the-horizon reserves. Its headquarters and
peace-enforcement capability remained based in the Sarajevo area, but liaison and
observation teams were present throughout the country. The presence of EUFOR in
the field provided the crucial reassurance that citizens in general still feel to be
necessary. Given the difficult political environment, it remained important that
EUFOR retained the capacity to deploy troops throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina
at short notice. EUFOR also continued to work closely with the Armed Forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially in terms of handing over additional military
functions to the domestic authorities.
70. EUFOR still plays a key role in contributing to a safe and secure environment
that, in turn, helps the Office of the High Representative and other international
organizations to fulfil their respective mandates. As such, EUFOR continued to

09-59706

19

S/2009/588

serve as an important factor of stability in the country at a time when the political
situation was deteriorating. While the European Union has been planning for a
non-executive, capacity-building and training mission of some 200 military
personnel, an extension of the current executive mandate and configuration of
EUFOR will remain important in the near term, at the very least until three months
after transition from the Office of the High Representative to the European Union
Special Representative takes place. For this reason, an extension of the executive
mandate of the EUFOR configuration is important.
71. I have, in my capacity as European Union Special Representative, continued to
offer political advice and support to the EUFOR mission.

XII.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
72. There are still 120,000 persons registered as internally displaced, more than
2,000 of whom live in squalid collective centres. Despite this, political actors have
once again politicized the issue of refugee return and the full implementation of
Annex VII of the Peace Agreement. On 6 July 2009, Serb delegates in the Bosnia
and Herzegovina House of Peoples rejected the revised Strategy for Implementation
of Annex VII of the Peace Agreement, despite its earlier approval by the Council of
Ministers and House of Representatives. The draft strategy is back with the Ministry
for Human Rights and Refugees for revision. My Office considers that the draft
strategy provides a solid basis for resolving the problems of displacement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina by promoting sustainable return, addressing the needs of those still
living in collective centres, and by looking into the needs of those who cannot or
will not return to their homes of origin. The strategy needs to be adopted post-haste.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees remains the lead
international agency in this sector and my Office will continue to support its efforts
to ensure full implementation of Annex VII.

XIII.

Mostar
73. More than a year after the elections, a new mayor of Mostar has yet to be
elected and the parties have failed to even negotiate seriously. In July, with the city
gripped by widespread strikes and work stoppages, I had no choice but to enact a
temporary financing decision. The decision lapsed on 1 October. Owing to a lack of
action by the parties, Mostar still does not have a mayor or a budget. In this
situation, I had no other option but to impose a decision on 30 October, compelling
the Mostar City Council to hold a Council session within 30 days to elect a mayor
by secret ballot, which is already provided for in the city’s statute.
Football violence triggers rise in ethnic tensions
74. On 4 October a fan of the visiting team from Sarajevo — Vedran Puljic — was
shot dead in Siroki Brijeg in Herzegovina. Sixty-four civilians and 29 police officers
were also injured. The incident quickly took on ethnic overtones, as Croat and
Bosniak political actors made claim and counterclaim about who was responsible.
On 15 October a number of arrests were made in connection with the murder.
Several police officers have also been detained and questioned.

20

09-59706

S/2009/588

XIV.

Brcko District
75. The adoption of Amendment I to the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which ensures Brcko District’s access to the State Constitutional Court, and the
promising start of the District’s new all-party coalition government, enabled the
Brcko Supervisor to inform the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in
June that the District’s institutions were functioning effectively and apparently
permanently and that he might, as a consequence, be in a position by autumn to
recommend the closure of the supervisory regime, provided that the entities and
State fulfilled their remaining obligations under the Arbitral Awards and that the
Arbitral Tribunal concurred.
76. The Steering Board unanimously endorsed the Supervisor’s plan, but regretted
that the entities and State had thus far failed to resolve the remaining issues specified
in its communiqué of March 2009 regarding Brcko District. Those issues — the
settlement of mutual debts with the entities, the possibility for District residents to
choose, declare or change their entity citizenship, the District’s legal inclusion in the
regulatory framework of the Bosnia and Herzegovina electricity market, and its right
to share in the apportionment of ex-Yugoslav succession funds — derive either
directly from the 1999 Final Arbitral Award or from formal agreements signed with
the entities in autumn 2000. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
therefore called upon the entity and State authorities to settle these long-outstanding
matters no later than 15 September 2009 in anticipation of being in a position in
November to decide on terminating supervision.
77. Given the highly technical nature of these issues, my Office and the
Supervisor’s staff sought to assist the domestic authorities by preparing draft
amendments to the relevant State, entity and District legislation, which I duly
forwarded to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the entity premiers, and the
Brcko Mayor in July, asking for their comments and, as I hoped, their subsequent
introduction of the amendments into their respective legislative bodies. The
Supervisor and I would have been prepared to accept an extension of the
15 September deadline if there had been any serious effort to resolve these matters
by then. But in the absence of such efforts, and after nine years of non-action by
relevant local authorities, I resorted to my executive powers to enact the requisite
legislation on 18 September.
78. At this point the only requirement for the State and entities was to publish the
decisions in their respective official gazettes, so putting them into effect. That
would still have enabled the Supervisor (a) to notify the Arbitral Tribunal that the
entities were now compliant with their obligations under the Final Award, so
permitting the Tribunal to terminate its own jurisdiction and (b) to recommend to
the Peace Implementation Council that it close down the supervisory regime by
year’s end. Although the State, the Federation, and Brcko District duly complied
with my decisions, the Republika Srpska Government and Assembly publicly
rejected these decisions with the argument that the High Representative has no
authority under the General Framework Agreement for Peace to impose legislation.
Moreover, the Republika Srpska plan to dismantle Elektroprijenos mentioned in
paragraph 52 above, which would involve the Republika Srpska unlawfully
asserting authority over electricity transmission in Brcko District, is a serious
violation of the Final Award, which prohibits either entity from exercising any
authority in the territory of the District.

09-59706

21

S/2009/588

79. As a consequence of the Republika Srpska refusing to meet its remaining
obligations under the Final Award and attempting to assert authority in Brcko
District, the Brcko District Supervisor considers to be at present in no position to
recommend the closure of his office, and has now suspended all preparations to do
so, and is reserving the right to refer the serious non-compliance of the Republika
Srpska to the Arbitral Tribunal.

XV.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
80. Relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and its immediate neighbours,
Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia, have remained relatively stable. However, the
Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, has continued to engage in
occasional polemics with the President of Croatia, Stipe Mesic. For their part,
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic and member Haris
Silajdzic appear to relish taking issue with statements or actions by the President of
Serbia, Boris Tadic, though the latter has been consistent in expressing public
support to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and European perspective of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The two Presidency members, other non-Serb politicians and the
Federation-based media often complain also about other manifestations of the
Republika Srpska’s Dayton-ordained special parallel relations with Serbia.
81. Such arguments — and small, unresolved border issues — do not, however,
alter the fact that Croatia and Serbia remain the most important trading partners of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The potential threat to that trade — and to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s obligations under the Central European Free Trade Agreement —
represented by the Parliamentary Assembly’s adoption of protectionist legislation in
June — was averted late in September when the Constitutional Court ruled that
legislation to be unconstitutional. Meanwhile, the dispute with Croatia over its
construction of a bridge from the Dalmatian mainland to the Peljesac peninsula that
could imperil Bosnia and Herzegovina’s access to the sea was put on hold when
Zagreb was forced, for fiscal reasons, to suspend construction during the summer.
82. As noted in paragraph 37 above, the most serious blow to good relations with
Serbia was the conviction by a court in Belgrade late in September of Ilija Jurisic, a
former Tuzla municipal leader sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment for his part in an
attack in May 1992 on a Yugoslav People’s Army column withdrawing from the city.
The case highlights the continuing disarray among former Yugoslav republics
regarding their respective jurisdictions in the prosecution of war crimes cases.

XVI.

European Union Police Mission
83. The European Union Police Mission, working in coordination with my staff in
the Office of the High Representative and as European Union Special
Representative, has continued to support police reform, in particular, by promoting
the implementation of the new legislation, encouraging the harmonization of
existing laws, as well as supporting the fight against organized crime and assisting
in coordinating the policing aspects of efforts to combat major and organized crime.
I have, in my capacity as European Union Special Representative, continued to offer
political advice and support to the police mission.

22

09-59706

S/2009/588

XVII.

Non-certification of police officers
84. The Republika Srpska remained the only jurisdiction in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that has failed to implement the provisions of the letter of April 2007
from the President of the Security Council on persons denied certification by the
International Police Task Force.

XVIII.

Media development
85. The reform of the public broadcasting system (PBS) continued to proceed very
slowly. Owing to the lack of political support for the creation of a unified system,
cooperation among the three public broadcasters is poor. Many elements of the Statelevel PBS legislation, adopted four years ago, have still not been put into effect. The
PBS System Board — which was finally inaugurated on 11 August 2009 — has yet
to adopt a statute or register the PBS corporation (responsible for streamlining the
activities of the three broadcasters).
86. The Communications Regulatory Agency, responsible for regulating the
telecommunications and electronic media sectors, remains in a difficult position as a
result of the continuing blockade of appointments both to its council and of its
general director. Party-political wrangling and interference have been to the fore,
with the result that the Agency has had an acting director for more than two years.
In September the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives rejected the
slate of new nominees to the Agency’s council. This means that the Council of
Ministers will need to prepare and present a new list of candidates while the expired
council continues in a caretaker capacity. The delays in these appointments have
already had a negative impact on the functioning of the Agency, particularly as a
number of decisions prepared by it have been put on hold by the Council of
Ministers.

XIX.

European Union Special Representative
87. In my capacity as European Union Special Representative, I continued to
promote political processes, initiatives and events aimed at broadening and
deepening debate on EU issues and fostering active domestic support for the
country’s integration into the European Union. Together with the European
Commission, I held a number of EU agenda coordination meetings with the relevant
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to assist the European integration efforts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Targeting parliamentarians, media, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, social partners, as well as young people, the
second phase of the EU Outreach Programme was completed in summer 2009.
Seven sessions of the programme’s core component, “The Parliament for Europe”
have been held. European Union Special Representative staff have also initiated
dialogue with and support for non-governmental organizations and civil society
organizations designed to encourage their activities on behalf of EU accession. They
have likewise endeavoured to ensure more and better-informed media coverage of
EU-related issues and developments. Finally, the reci.ba (have-your-say.bosnia)
website has continued to serve as a useful tool for fostering discussion with and
among citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

09-59706

23

S/2009/588

XX.

Future of the Office of the High Representative
88. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board met at the level of political
directors once during the reporting period, on 29 and 30 June, to review the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Steering Board expressed its concern over
recent political developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not least the adoption of
the conclusions on 14 May by the Republika Srpska National Assembly. 5 The
Steering Board also expressed its concern and disappointment with the lack of
progress achieved on the “5 plus 2” agenda for transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the European Union Special Representative since its
previous meeting in March 2009. It set out in precise terms what remained to be
done. The Steering Board made clear that, until the domestic authorities deliver
fully on this agenda, the Office of the High Representative will remain in place to
exercise its mandate under the General Framework Agreement for Peace, ensuring
full respect for the Peace Agreement. The next Peace Implementation Council
meeting will be held on 18 and 19 November.

XXI.

Reporting schedule
89. In keeping with the proposals of my predecessor to submit regular reports for
onward transmission to the Security Council, as required by Security Council
resolution 1031 (1995), I herewith present my second regular report. Should the
Secretary-General or any Security Council member require information at any other
time, I should be pleased to provide an additional written update.

__________________
5 The delegation of the Russian Federation did not join with the rest of the Steering Board on this

paragraph of the Steering Board communiqué.

24

09-59706
