Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee

43

D

G

6. Calls u.ron the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights tC? study
ways and means which would ensure the nght of
peoples and nations to self-determination, and to prepare recommendations for consideration by the General Assembly at its sixth session;

9. ( ·alls upun the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its thirteenth
~ession concerning the above matters;

E
Whereas the Covenant should be drawn up in the
spirit and based on the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Whereas the Universal Declaration regards man
as a person, to whom civic and political freedoms as
well as economic, social and cultural rights indubitably belong,
Whereas the enjoyment of civic and political freedoms and of economic, social and cultural rights are
interconnected and interdependent,
Whereas, when deprived of economic, social and
cultural rights, man does not represent the human
person whom the Universal Declaration regards as
the ideal of the free man,

7. (a) Decides to include in the Covenant on Human Rights economic, social and cultural rights and
an explicit recognition of equality of men and women
in related rights, as set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations;
( b) Calls upon the Economic and Social Council
to request the Commission on Human Rights, in accordance with the spirit of the Universal Declaration,
to include in the draft Covenant a clear expression
of economic, social and cultural rights in a manner
which relates them to the civic and political freedoms
proclaimed by the draft Covenant ;
( c) Calls upon the Economic and Social Council
to request the Commission on Human Rights to take
s~ch steps as are necessary to obtain the co-operat10n of other organs of the United Nations and of
the specialized agencies in the consideration of such
rights;
(d) Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider,. at_ its twelft~ session, the methods by which
the s~ec!ahzed agencies might co-operate with the
Comm1ss10~ on Human Rights with regard to economic, soCial and cultural rights;

F
8. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
re9uest the Co!11mis~ion on Human Rights to proceed
~1th the cons1derat1on of provisions, to be inserted
m the ~raft Covenan~ or_ in separate protocols, for
t~e receipt and exammat10n of petitions from indiv~dua!s and organizations with respect to alleged
Vt?lati~:ms_ of the Covenant ; and to take into considerat1tm. m its stud!es of questions relating to petitions
and tmplementation the proposals presented by Chile
(A/C.3/L.81), Ethiopia and France (A/C.3/L.78),
Israel (A/C.3/L.91/Rev.1) and Uruguay (A/C.3/

L.93);

H
10. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to submit, by 15 February 1951, their
views concerning the draft Covenant as revised by
the Commission 011 Human Rights at its sixth session, in order that the Commission may have such
views before it during its further consideration of the
draft Covenant at its seventh session.
317th plenary meeting,
4 December 1950.

422 (V). Territorial application of the International Covenant on Human Rights

The General Assembly
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to include the following article in the International Covenant on Human Rights:
"Article .....
''The provisions of the present Covenant shall
extem1 to or be applicable equally to a signatory
metropolitan State and to all the territories, be they
Non-Self-Governing, Trust or Colonial Territories,
which are being administered or governed by such
metropolitan State'".
317th plenary meeting,
4 December 1950.
423 (V).

Human Rights Day

The (;eneral Assembly,
Considering that on 10 December 1948 the General
Assembly proclaimed the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights as a common standard of achievement
for all peoples and all nations,
Considering that the Declaration marks a distinct
forward step in the march of human progress,
Considering that the anniversary of this event should
be appropriately celebrated in all countries as part of
a common effort to bring the Declaration to the attention
of the peoples of the world,
Expressing its appreciation to all those countries
Members or non-members of the United Nations which
have already celebrated thi~ anniversary,
1. Invites all States and interested organizations to
adopt 10 December of each year as Human Rights Day,
to observe this day to celebrate the proclamation of the
Universal Declar-ition of Human Rights by the General
Assembly on 10 .uecember 1948, and to exert increasing
efforts in this field of human progress.
2. Invites all States to report annually through the
Secretary-General concerning the observance of Human
Rights Day.
317th plenary meeting,
4 December 1950.
