PART I/.
OTHER MATTERS CONSIDERED
BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL

DEUXIBME PA.RTIE.
AUTRES QUESTIONS
EXAMINEES PAR LE CONSEIL DE SECURITE

ARMAMENTS: REGULATION Ai"ID REDUCTION 13

ARMEMENTS : REGLEMENTATION
ET REDUCTION 13

Decision

Decision

At its 90th meeting, on 9 January 1947, the Council formally accepted General Assembly resolution
41 (I) of 14 December 1946 on the principles
governing the general regulation and reduction of
armaments.

A sa 9Qe seance, le 9 janvier 1947, le Conseil a
accepte formellement la resolution 41 (I) de 1'Assemblee generale, en date du 14 decembre 1946, concernant les principes regissant la reglementation et la
reduction generales des armements.

18 (1947). Resolution of 13 February 1947

18 (1947). Resolution du 13 fevrier 1947

[S/268/Rev.1 /Corr.1]

[S/268/Rev.1/Corr. l]

The Security Council,
Having accepted General Assembly resolution 41 (I)
of 14 December 1946, and recognizing that the general
regulation and reduction of armaments and armed
forces constitute a most important measure for strengthening international peace and security and that the
implementation of the resolution of the General
Assemb!y on this subject is one of the most urgent
and important tasks before the Security Council,

3. To set up a commission consisting of representatives of the members of the Security Council with
instructions to prepare and submit to the Security
Council, within the space of not more than three
months, the proposals (a) for the general regulation
and reduction of armaments and armed forces, and (b)
for practical and effective safeguards in connexion with

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant accepte la resolution 41 (I) de 1'Assemblee
generale, en date du 14 decembre 1946, et reconnaissant que Ja reglementation et la reduction generales
des armements et des forces armees constituent une
mesure tres importante en vue d'affermir la paix et
la securite internationales et que la mise en reuvre de
la resolution prise par l'Assemblee genera1e a ce sujet
est une des taches Jes plus urgentes et les plus
importantes du Conseil de securite,
Decide:
1. D'elaborer les mesures pratiques necessaires pour
donner effet aux resolutions 41 (I) et 42 (I) prises
par l'Assemblee generale le 14 decembre 1946 et
relatives, d'une part, a la reglementation et a Ja reduction genera1es des armements et des forces armees,
ainsi qu'a l'etablissement d'un controle international en
vue d'amener la reduction des armements et des forces
armees, et, d'autre part, aux renseignements sur les
forces arn1ees des Nations Unies ;
2. D'examiner dans 1e plus bref delai 1e rapport
presente par la Commission de l'energie atomique 14
et de prendre les decisions appropriees en vue de
faciliter ses travaux ;
3. De constituer une commission composee de
representants des Etats membres du Conseil de securite et chargee de preparer et de presenter au Conseil
de securite, dans un delai de trois mois au plus, des
propositions au sujet : a) de ]a reglementation et de
la reduction generales des armements et des forces
armees ; et b) des mesures pratiques et efficaces de

13 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also
adopted by the Council in 1946.
14 Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commission, First
Year, Special Supplement.

1a Question ayant fait l'objet de resolutions ou d~cisions
de la part du Conseil en 1946.
H Proces-verbaux 01ficiels de la Commission de rinergie
atomique, premiere anrile, SuppUment special.

Resolves:
1. To work out the practical measures for giving
effect to General Assembly resolutions 41 (I) and
42 (I) of 14 December 1946 concerning, on the one
hand, the general regulation and reduction of armaments and armed forces and the establishment of
international control to bring about the reduction of
armaments and armed forces and, on the other hand,
information concerning the armed forces of the United
Nations;
2. To consider as soon as possible the report submitted hy the Atomic Energy Commission 14 and to
take suitable decisions in order to facilitate its work ;

1

12

the general regulation and reduction of armaments,
which the commission may be in a position to formulate in order to ensure the implementation of the
above-mentioned resolutions of the General Assembly
of 14 December I 946, in so far as these resolutions
relate to armaments within the new commission's
jurisdiction ;
The commission shall submit a plan of work to the
Council for approval ;
Those matters which fall within the competence of
the Atomic Energy Commission as determined by
General Assembly resolutions 1 (I) of 24 January
1946 and 41 (I) of 14 December 1946 shall be excluded from the jurisdiction of the commission hereby
established ;
The title of the commission shall be the Commission
for Conventional Armaments ;
The Commission shall make such proposals as it
may deem advisable concerning the studies which the
Military Staff Committee and possibly other organs of
the United Nations might be asked to undertake ;
4. To request the Military Staff Committee to submit
to it, as soon as possible and as a matter of urgency,
the recommendations for which it has been asked by
the Security Council on 16 February 1946 15 in pursuance of Article 43 of the Charter and, as a first
step, to submit to the Security Council, not later than
30 April 1947, its recommendations with regard to
the basic principles which should govern the organization of the United Nations armed force.

garantie en liaisou avec la reglementation et la reduction generales des armements, propositions que la
commission sera en mesure de formuler afin d'assurer
la mise en reuvn: des resolutions precitees de I'Assembke gcncrale du 14 decembre 1946, dans la mesure
ou cc,; resolution~ se rapportent aux armcments du
d0maillc de la nouvelle commission ;
La commission presentera un programme de travail
a !'approbation du Conseil de securite ;
Les questions qui sont de la competence de la
Commission de l'energie atomique, aux termes des
resolutions I (I) et 41 (I) de l' Assemblee generate, en
date des 24 janvier 1946 et 14 decembre 1946, sont
exclues du domaine de la commission etablie par la
prescnte ;
La commission prendra le nom de Commission des
armements de type classique ;
La Commission fera les propositions qu'clle jugera
utiles au sujet Jes etudes que le Comite d'etat-major
et, cventuellement, les autres organismes des Nations
Unics pourraient etrc invites a entreprendre ;
4, D'inviter le Comite d'etat-major a presenter, le
plus tot possible et comme question urgente, au Conseil
de sccurite les rccommandations que ce demier, le 16
fcvrier 1946 1 5, Jui a demande de formuler en application de !'Article 43 de la Charte et, comme premiere
mesure, de soumettre au Conseil de securite, le 30
avril 1947 au plus tard, ses recommandations en ce
qui concerne Jes principes fondamentaux qui doivent
regir !'organisation de la force armee des Nations
Unies.

Adopted at the 105th meeting by 10 votes to none,
with I abstention (Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoptee a la 105' stance
par JO voix contre zero,
avec une abstention (Union
des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques).

Decision

Decision

At its 152nd meeting, on 8 July 1947, the Council
approved the following plan of work sYbmitted by
the Commission for Conventional Armaments in its
report :16

A sa 152• seance, le 8 juillet 1947, le Conseil a
approuve le plan de travail ci-apres presente par la
Commission des armements de type classique dans
son rapport 16 :

Plan of work adopted by the Commission
for Conventional Armaments

Plan de travail adopte par la Commission
des armements de type classique

1. Consider and make recommendations to the
Security Council concerning armaments and armed
forces which fall within the jurisdiction of the Commission for Conventional Armaments.
2. Consideration and determination of general
principles in connexion with the regulation and
reduction of armaments and armed forces.

1. Examen et presentation au Conseil de securite
de recommandations relatives aux armements et aux
forces armees qui relevent de la competence de la
Commission des armements de type classique.
2. Examen et determination des principes generaux relatifs a la reg:ementation et a la reduction
des armements et des forces armees.

15 Decision taken by the Council at its 23rd ir.eeting. See
Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1946,
p. 13.
18 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 14, annex 37.

15 Decision prise par le Con~eil a sa 23" seance.
Voir
Resolutions et decisions du Conseil de securite (1946), p. 13.
16 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
deuxieme annre, Supplement n" 14, annexe 37 (S/387), et
document S/387 /Corr. I (mimeographie).

13
