United Nations

A/RES/68/214

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 19 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2013
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/68/438/Add.6)]

68/214. Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity
and its contribution to sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/203 of 21 December 2009, 65/161 of 20 December
2010, 66/202 of 22 December 2011, 67/212 of 21 December 2012 and previous
resolutions relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity, 1
Recalling also the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992,2 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg Declaration on
Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation) 5 and the outcome
document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals convened by the President of the General Assembly, 6
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 7 and, inter alia, the
commitments concerning biodiversity contained therein,
Reaffirming also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 8 and
its principles,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annexes I and II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 68/6.
7
Resolution 66/288, annex.
8
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2

13-45229

*1345229*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/214

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development

Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, 9
Recalling also that the objectives of the Convention, to be pursued in
accordance with its relevant provisions, are the conservation of biological diversity,
the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the
benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate
access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies,
taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by
appropriate funding,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity as well as the ecological,
genetic, social, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic
values of biological diversity and its critical role in maintaining ecosystems that
provide essential services, which are critical foundations for sustainable
development and human well-being,
Recognizing that the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention is
crucial for sustainable development, poverty eradication and the improvement of
human well-being and a major factor underpinning the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, States have the sovereign right to exploit their own
resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the
environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Recalling that, in its resolution 65/161, the General Assembly declared the
decade 2011–2020 the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity, with a view to
contributing to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020,10
Recognizing that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of
indigenous and local communities make an important contribution to the
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and that their wider application can
support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Recognizing also the vital role that women play in the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, and reaffirming the need for the full
participation of women at all levels of policy-making and implementation for the
conservation of biological diversity,
Recognizing further the important role of the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, 11 an international agreement
that stands at the intersection between trade, the environment and development,
promotes the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, should contribute to
tangible benefits for local people and ensures that no species entering into
international trade is threatened with extinction, recognizing the economic, social
and environmental impacts of poaching and of illicit trafficking in wildlife, where
firm and strengthened action needs to be taken on both the supply and demand

_______________
9

Resolution 61/295, annex.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2.
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
10

2/6

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development

A/RES/68/214

sides, emphasizing in this regard the importance of effective international
cooperation among relevant multilateral environmental agreements and international
organizations, and further stressing the importance of basing the listing of species
on agreed criteria,
Noting the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, at its tenth meeting, of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to
Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from
Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity, 12 and acknowledging
the role of access to genetic resources and equitable benefit-sharing arising from
their utilization in contributing to the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability and, thereby, to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
Noting also that 91 States and 1 regional economic integration organization
have signed and that 25 States that are parties to the Convention have deposited
their instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya
Protocol,
Noting further that 50 States and 1 regional economic integration organization
have signed and that 19 States that are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity 13 have deposited their
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya-Kuala
Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol
on Biosafety, 14
Noting that 192 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are
parties to the Convention and that 165 States and 1 regional economic integration
organization are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,
Recalling the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at
its ninth meeting of the strategy for resource mobilization in support of the
achievement of the three objectives of the Convention, 15 as well as decision X/3,
adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth meeting, 16 on the review of its
implementation, including the establishment of preliminary targets by the
Conference of the Parties in its decision XI/4, adopted at its eleventh meeting, 17
Noting the outcomes of the eleventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention 17 and the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving
as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol, 18 both held in Hyderabad,
India, in 2012,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity on the work of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention; 19

_______________
12

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2226, No. 30619.
14
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/5/17, annex, decision BS-V/11.
15
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/11.
16
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
17
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/11/35, annex I.
18
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/6/18.
19
A/68/260, sect. III.
13

3/6

A/RES/68/214

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development

2.
Encourages parties in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to
take concrete measures towards achieving the objectives of the Convention on
Biological Diversity1 and the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization,12 requests
the parties, in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to coherently and
efficiently implement the obligations and commitments under the Convention, and
in this regard emphasizes the need to comprehensively address at all levels the
difficulties that impede the full implementation of the Convention;
3.
Recognizes that the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity can
significantly contribute to disaster risk reduction and to reducing the adverse
impacts of climate change, including by adding resilience to fragile ecosystems and
making them less vulnerable;
4.
Urges the parties to the Convention to facilitate the transfer of
technology for the effective implementation of the Convention in accordance with
its provisions, and in this regard takes note of the strategy for the practical
implementation of the programme of work on technology transfer and scientific and
technical cooperation developed by the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on
Technology Transfer and Scientific and Technological Cooperation, as well as of
decision XI/2, entitled “Review of progress in implementation of national
biodiversity strategies and action plans and related capacity-building support to
parties”;17
5.
Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the secretariat and the
Global Environment Facility, as the financial mechanism of the Convention, in
conjunction with United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies, as well as other entities, in organizing capacity-building workshops to
support countries in the updating of national biodiversity strategies and action plans,
with a view to enhancing capacity and addressing the need for human, technical and
financial resources to implement the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 10
and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention at its tenth meeting,10 in particular for developing countries;
6.
Urges parties to promote the mainstreaming of gender considerations in
developing, implementing and revising their national and, where appropriate,
regional, biodiversity strategies and action plans and equivalent instruments in
implementing the three objectives of the Convention;
7.
Calls upon Governments and all stakeholders to take appropriate
measures to mainstream consideration of the socioeconomic impacts and benefits of
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components, as well as
ecosystems that provide essential services, into relevant programmes and policies at
all levels, in accordance with national legislation, circumstances and priorities;
8.
Reaffirms the importance of continuing to pursue more efficient and
coherent implementation of the three objectives of the Convention, and calls upon
parties and stakeholders to strengthen international cooperation measures for the
fulfilment of obligations contained in the Convention, including through addressing
implementation gaps, in particular with regard to article 15 of the Convention;
9.
Also reaffirms the importance of achieving the Aichi Biodiversity Targets
adopted by the Conference of Parties to the Convention at its tenth meeting, and the
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020;
10. Recognizes that parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity have
reiterated that resources, financial, human and technical, need to be mobilized from all
4/6

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development

A/RES/68/214

sources, and that this should be balanced with the effective implementation of the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, stresses the need for further consideration
of the evaluation of all resources mobilized in terms of the biodiversity outcomes
achieved, and in this regard welcomes the decision of the parties to the Convention on
an overall substantial increase in total biodiversity-related funding for the
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 from a variety of
sources, including national and international resource mobilization, international
cooperation and the exploration of new and innovative financial mechanisms;
11. Invites countries that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the
Convention;
12. Invites parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the Nagoya
Protocol so as to ensure its early entry into force and its implementation, and invites
the Executive Secretary and the Global Environment Facility, as the financial
mechanism of the Convention, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to
continue supporting capacity-building and development activities to support the
ratification, early entry into force and implementation of the Nagoya Protocol;
13. Notes with appreciation the realization of the joint briefing by the United
Nations Environment Programme, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the secretariat of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources
for Food and Agriculture and the secretariat of the Convention on Biological
Diversity on the implementation of the objectives of the Convention, including
actions undertaken to promote access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable
sharing of benefits arising from their utilization and associated traditional
knowledge held on 30 October 2013, and notes that similar interactions should be
encouraged, recognizing the respective mandates of the organizations involved;
14. Takes note of the work done by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Intersessional
Working Group on Article 8 (j) and Related Provisions, and in this regard invites the
secretariat of the Convention, through the Secretary-General, to report on the
progress made when reporting on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
15. Encourages parties and all stakeholders, institutions and organizations
concerned to give appropriate consideration to biodiversity issues in the elaboration
of the post-2015 development agenda, keeping in mind the Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and taking into account
the three dimensions of sustainable development;
16. Recognizes the progress made towards the development of the first work
programme of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, which aims to provide the best available policy-relevant
information on biodiversity to assist decision makers;
17. Stresses the importance of the engagement of the private sector and other
stakeholders in the implementation of the three objectives of the Convention and in
achieving biodiversity targets, invites businesses to align their policies and practices
more explicitly with the objectives of the Convention, including through
partnerships, and in this regard notes the ongoing work of the Global Partnership on
Business and Biodiversity;
18. Notes the ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and
offices of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
5/6

A/RES/68/214

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development

the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 20 and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 21 (the Rio
conventions) and of the Liaison Group of Biodiversity-related Conventions,
acknowledges the importance of improving coherence in the implementation of
those conventions, recognizes the importance of enhancing synergies among the
biodiversity-related conventions, without prejudice to their specific objectives, and
encourages the conferences of the parties to the biodiversity-related multilateral
environmental agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard, taking
into account relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent
legal status and mandates of those instruments;
19. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to report, through the SecretaryGeneral, at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution,
including progress in the implementation of the Convention and the Aichi
Biodiversity Targets, and on difficulties encountered in the process of their
implementation;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Convention on Biological Diversity”.
71st plenary meeting
20 December 2013

_______________
20
21

6/6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
