S/PV.8006

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8006th meeting

Wednesday, 19 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ndiaye
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslystsya
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Enhancing African capacities in the areas of peace and security
Letter dated 5 July 2017 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/574)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21977 (E)
*1721977*

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

19/07/2017

In my first days as Secretary-General, I attended
the African Union (AU) Summit in Addis Ababa. I
wanted to launch a new era of cooperation with the AU,
founded on a core conviction. I firmly believe that the
international community needs to change the narrative
about Africa and to establish a higher platform
of cooperation that recognizes Africa’s enormous
potential and promise.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Enhancing African capacities in the areas of
peace and security
Letter dated 5 July 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/574)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada,
Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Germany, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Mali, Morocco, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
South Africa, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Smail Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, and
Mr. Stephane Ojeda, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

In the area of peace and security, the African
Union and the United Nations have a shared interest in
strengthening mechanisms designed to defuse conflicts
before they escalate and manage them effectively if they
do occur. Enhancing African capacities is essential both
in the context of our collective response to international
peace and security challenges as well as for the African
continent’s own self-reliance. That is why, on 19 April,
I joined with Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, in signing the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. Our
shared objective is to work together closely on the basis
of the principles of mutual respect and comparative
advantage in all stages of the conflict cycle and to do
so systematically, predictably and strategically. We
are committed to institutionalizing our partnership
through formal annual consultations between the
Heads of the secretariats of both organizations. The
Framework includes four key action areas. The first
is preventing and mediating conflict and sustaining
peace; the second is responding to conflict; the third is
addressing the root causes of conflict; and the fourth is
continually reviewing and enhancing our partnership. I
will address each item in turn.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

First, with regard to our joint efforts to prevent and
mediate conflict and sustain peace, the Framework’s
effective implementation requires coordinated and
complementary action on the part of both the United
Nations and the African Union. We must identify
the underlying causes of conflicts, work closely on
developing joint analyses, share information and
strive to reach a common understanding on issues
that can lead to prompt action. They include key
areas of ongoing collaboration such as good offices
and mediation, electoral matters, human rights and
humanitarian assistance.

The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
the Government of China for convening this meeting
to focus on enhancing African capacities in the area of
peace and security.

It is also critical to ensure that we build on our
work with subregional mechanisms with the aim of
tackling political disputes. In the Gambia, for example,
the strong leadership of West African nations, with the

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/574, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 July 2017 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

2/35

17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

support of the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations,
made a significant contribution to reaching a peaceful
settlement to a political crisis. And in South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations are actively
coordinating efforts to achieve a durable peace,
including through a joint call for an immediate end
to hostilities and a comprehensive and inclusive
political dialogue.
Secondly, where responding to conflict is
concerned, the African Union and various subregional
organizations have deployed tremendous efforts to
develop and operationalize the African Standby Force
and its Rapid Deployment Capability. Under our new
Framework, we look forward to further supporting the
strengthening of the Standby Force and to exploring
synergies with the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. We must also promote
coordinated efforts to confront new asymmetric
threats to peace and security such as terrorism and
violent extremism.
In Somalia, the United Nations continues to
provide logistics, technical and training support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to
the Somali National Army. Despite many challenges,
our cooperation has helped to facilitate concrete results
that have yielded crucial progress, such as the recent
successful holding of elections. I firmly believe that
with predictable funding and enhanced support to
AMISOM, together with a coordinated effort to build
the Somali army and police force, Al-Shabaab can be
defeated, paving the way for a more peaceful future
for the people of Somalia and beyond. That is an
opportunity we should not miss.
In Mali, we must intensify our collective
commitment to further supporting the peace process,
with a focus on restoring and extending State authority.
I welcome the initiative taken by the Group of Five
for the Sahel to create a Joint Force, and I hope that
the Security Council will recognize the importance
of ensuring that it has a strong mandate and credible
funding. In the Lake Chad basin, we must continue to aid
the efforts of the African Union and the Multinational
Joint Task Force against Boko Haram, as well as other
regional initiatives aimed at countering terrorism and
violent extremism, ideally with more effective support.

S/PV. 8006

The third pillar of the Joint United Nations-AU
Framework focuses on addressing the root causes of
conflict and emphasizes our commitment to increasing
cooperation related to peacebuilding and the rule of law.
Sustaining peace and continued development requires
strengthening national institutions in order to address
the root causes of conflict.
Fourthly, we should underscore the importance
of establishing a process for the continuous review
and enhancement of the partnership through regular
consultations and coordination. It will include staff
exchanges; joint fact-finding missions; strengthened
cooperation in promoting national peace infrastructures;
the mobilization of funding for AU peace operations
that are authorized by the Security Council; and the
prevention of violent extremism and illicit flows
of weapons and ammunition. The Framework also
emphasizes how critical it is to further advance the
agenda on women and peace and security.
Enhancing African peace and security capacities
requires adequate, timely and predictable financing
for AU peace support operations. In May, I submitted
a report (S/2017/454), pursuant to resolution 2320
(2016), That welcomed the African Union’s decision
to fund 25 per cent of AU peace support operations,
a commitment in line with the AU’s goal of achieving
self-reliance and African ownership in the area of peace
and security. My report included options for financing
those operations and highlighted the importance of
compliance and oversight in African Union peace
support operations through robust and effective human
rights mechanisms and a framework for conduct and
discipline. The African Union is working to develop
those capacities and the United Nations stands ready to
provide the necessary support.
Taken together, the Joint United Nations-AU
Framework, the adoption of the African Union Peace
Fund and resolution 2320 (2016) represent significant
steps in our efforts to reinvigorate cooperation with
the African Union. I pledge to continue working with
all Council members to further elevate our platform
of cooperation for sustainable peace, stability and
development throughout the African continent, and I
hope their deliberations on this important topic will
be fruitful.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.

17-219773/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Chergui: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the important subject of enhancing capacities
for peace and security in Africa. I would like to express
my gratitude to the People’s Republic of China for
the invitation both on behalf of the African Union
Commission and for myself personally. I am pleased to
be briefing the Security Council under the presidency of
China, which has made such an invaluable contribution
to peace and security in Africa. In that regard, I would
like to recall the donation of $100 million that China
has provided in support to the enhancement of the
African Standby Force and the regular contributions it
has made in recent years to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), to name only a couple.
I am also grateful for the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive presentation and would like to pay tribute
to his unflinching commitment to peace, security and
stability in Africa and his tireless efforts to consolidate
and further promote the strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations, including in
the area of peace and security. I would like to assure
him of Africa’s full respect and support.
The African Union is an indispensable partner in
the promotion of peace and security in Africa. Through
those efforts it is making a consistent contribution
to the task of addressing global security challenges,
which are becoming increasingly complex and
transnational — indeed transregional. Over the past
decade, the African Union has mandated or authorized
the deployment of more than 100,000 uniformed and
civilian personnel, many of them to some of the world’s
most high-risk and volatile environments. That has
come at a huge human cost. In that regard, it is worth
mentioning that in the past decade, the casualties
among African troops in peace support operations have
exceeded the total combined casualties experienced
by United Nations peacekeeping missions over the
past 70 years. This compelling reality demonstrates
the commitment of Africans and the African Union to
durable peace and stability on the continent.
Despite these sacrifices and commitment, African
troops are faced with some of the most challenging
situations due to inadequate force enablers and
multipliers, as well as financial resource gaps. Last
week, the African Union Peace and Security Council
declared that AMISOM had successfully achieved its
mandate over the past decade, on the basis of a recently
concluded lessons-learned study by the African
4/35

19/07/2017

Union Commission. Yet, AMISOM remains the leastresourced Mission in comparison with other deployed
regional or international enforcement missions with
similar mandates. It is against that background that I
would like to make a few proposals for the consideration
of the Council on how best to support African capacities
in the prevention and effective response to peace and
security challenges in Africa.
First, the United Nations and the international
community should promote greater strategic
cooperation and coherence in the prevention of conflicts
in Africa. Conflict prevention remains the most costeffective conflict management tool, yet it is the least
resourced. I would therefore like to recommend to the
Council that both the African Union Commission and
the United Nations Secretariat establish an institutional
approach that will allow for real-time consultations,
joint assessments and joint analysis with a view to
recommending coherent options to our respective
policy organs that would allow for timely prevention
of conflicts, including but not limited to preventive
diplomacy. The April 2017 Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security represents a good foundation
through which to institutionalize that practice. I have
already established an internal secretariat within the
Peace and Security Department of the African Union
to develop an implementation matrix of the Joint
Framework, and dedicated staff has been assigned to
fulfil this objective.
Some of the concrete priorities we are working on
in the area of conflict prevention include enhancing
coordination between the African Union and relevant
African Union organs and regional economic
communities in order to create better synergies
between the African Governance Architecture and the
African Peace and Security Architecture; strengthening
platforms for engagement in early warning issues
through regular horizon scanning to the Peace and
Security Council; assisting our member States to
strengthen their own national peace infrastructure;
assisting member States to identify and address local,
political and socioeconomic root causes of conflict.
In that regard, the African Union has developed the
Continental Structural Conflict Prevention Framework,
which allows member States to identify their resilience
and vulnerabilities and brings various stakeholders
together to work on a mitigation strategy. As we speak,
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

one of our member States is currently going through
this exercise.
Other priorities include strengthening efforts to
encourage member States to sign, ratify and domesticate
African Union instruments related to conflict
prevention, and supporting member States in the
delimitation, demarcation and reaffirmation of African
borders with the objective of preventing conflict and of
transforming borders from barriers to bridges.
Secondly, the enhancement of the operational
readiness of the African Standby Force must be fully
supported. The African Union and its regional standby
forces have put in tremendous efforts to develop and
operationalize the African Standby Force and its Rapid
Deployment Capability as one of its conflict management
tools, as enshrined in the African Peace and Security
Architecture. That was evidenced by the declaration
of full operational capability of the Force in January
2016 by the African Union Specialized Technical
Committee on Defence, Safety and Security. Despite
this historic achievement, the Ministers of Defence
of African Union member States further recognized
that there are challenges ahead, especially with the
mandating process, funding and logistics support and
therefore called for further strengthening of the ASF.
The enhancement process will be achieved within the
framework of the Maputo Five-year Strategic Workplan
on the African Standby Force, which has been finalized.
As I speak, a high-level technical team is undertaking
the verification of the capabilities of the five brigades
of the African Standby Force. I will encourage Council
members and partners to support the implementation
of the African Standby Force Strategic Workplan. We
look forward to closely working with the new UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Vladimir Ivanovich Voronkov.
Thirdly, the spread of violent extremism remains a
source of concern. The recent authorization of regional
coalitions such as the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram and the Group of Five for the Sahel
force are innovative ways through which the African
Union and its member States are responding to the
prevalence of terrorist activities within the framework
of the African Union Peace and Security Architecture.
Yet, prolonged conflicts and governance deficits
provide fertile grounds for a cycle of radicalization
and extremism.
Therefore, the African Union and United Nations
must work together to resolve seemingly intractable

S/PV. 8006

conflicts by building resilience through sustainable
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
development
initiatives. This entails supporting the African Union’s
efforts in countering violent extremism through greater
investment in political, human rights, humanitarian
and developmental approaches. In addition, the African
Union Counter-terrorism Fund, as well as activities
of the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, the Nouakchott and Djibouti processes are
important coordination platforms through which the
African Union can be supported in the fight against
terrorism. Here, I should like to reiterate our readiness
to work with the new Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Vladimir Ivanovich Voronkov.
Fourthly, the financing of peace support operations
remains a perennial issue of discussion, which we hope
can be resolved soon. In that respect, I am pleased to
note that the implementation of the Kigali Summit
decision on financing is now under way. We are
convinced that the efforts that we have invested in the
African Union since 2001 to realize alternative sources
of funding will be achieved. As a way of enhancing
our accountability measures, the African Union
Commission has requested that the United Nations and
the European Union nominate representatives to the
governance structure of the Peace Fund. Yet, it is clear
that Africa will not be able to fund peace initiatives
on its own. Therefore, the prospects of predictable and
sustainable funding for addressing peace and security
challenges, including through the utilization of United
Nations assessed contributions remains a common
African position. We therefore look forward to further
deliberation and possible decision by the Council, in
September 2017, on the dedicated support from the
United Nations to all Council-mandated African peace
support operations.
In conclusion, Council members will agree with
me that the new leaderships of the African Union
Commission and the United Nations are determined to
promote greater synergy between peace, security and
development. Both organizations have set mutually
reinforcing and ambitious, but not insurmountable,
strategic priorities, as reflected in Agenda 2063 and
Vision 2030 respectively. We continue to count on
the political leadership and guidance of our member
States, especially in the Council, in the realization
of our institutional mandates. Without the political
cooperation and support of the Council, the attainment

17-219775/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

19/07/2017

of collective security within Africa and beyond will be
difficult to achieve.

partnerships in the area of peace and security between
the two organizations.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now call
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs Senegal and
Senegalese Abroad.

In that regard, the visit of Secretary-General
Guterres to African Union headquarters in Addis
Ababa this past January and the visit made by the
Chair of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, to United Nations Headquarters in New
York in April 2017, in the framework of the first United
Nations-African Union annual conference, reflects a
renewed dynamic that must be welcomed. It was during
that periodic meeting that the joint Framework for a
Strengthened Partnership in the Peace and Security
was signed.

Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, as well as the Chinese Government, on
your accession of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I also welcome the organization
of this debate, which your country, the People’s
Republic of China, has decided to devote to the theme
“Enhancing African capacities in the areas of peace and
security”. Senegal welcomes the prominent role played
by China and its contribution to building peace and
security in the world, especially in Africa. This is an
issue to which Senegal attaches great importance, and
it was highlighted in the discussions during the debate
(see S/PV.7816) that Senegal organized last November
on the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.
Allow me as well to express my gratitude for the
important briefing by Secretary-General António
Guterres, to whom we reiterate our support for his
firm determination to work for the promotion of peace
and security in the world, in particular in Africa, and,
above all, for the stress that he has placed on prevention
issues, which are very important questions. We also
thank the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, His Excellency Mr. Ismail Chergui, for
his important briefing, which has also shed light on
our debate.
Today’s debate is certainly part of a move to
maximize the enormous potential of the African Union
and the African regional economic communities in
the area of ​​peace and security, a potential that, if used
wisely, could make it possible to effectively tackle the
immense challenges that the continent faces in this
sphere. Senegal is convinced of the importance of a
strategic partnership in the efforts aimed at maintaining
peace and security in Africa. We therefore believe that
strengthening African capabilities in this area must be
approached as part of the current discussions on how to
intensify the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union and the continent’s regional
economic communities. From that point of view, my
delegation welcomes the positive trend to strengthen
6/35

With the experience of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, under African leadership, deployed by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, or of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
to just mention a few, the African Union and its
regional organizations were able to show their ability
to provide front-line responses to the conflicts erupting
on the continent.
At the subregional level, the tangible results
of operations carried out by ECOWAS in resolving
several crisis, namely, with the deployment of its
Ceasefire Monitoring Group, in numerous theatres of
operations, including in Liberia at the time, as well as
its missions in Guinea-Bissau and recently its mission
in The Gambia, reflect the crucial role that African
subregional organizations can play in promoting
peace on the continent. However, the lessons learned,
specifically in the transition from African Union peace
operations towards United Nations peacekeeping
operations, shows the limits that African organizations
have from the point of view of logistics, operations and
capabilities. To that we must add the complexity of the
new challenges within the area of peace and security,
in particular in Africa, with the increase in violent
extremism, the proliferation of terrorist groups, which
feed on all kinds of criminal activities, while using
sophisticated tools and techniques, not to mention
cybercrime, which threatens both the sovereignty of
States and the safety of its populations.
With more than 20,000 registered attacks a year
in Africa, cybersecurity is one of the major challenges
that has sorely tested our capabilities to tackle the
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

artful and sophisticated tactics of its perpetrators.
Mindful of the seriousness of the problem, Senegal
and Spain co-organized in December 2016 an Arria
Formula meeting on the subject with the participation
of the business community, legal experts and national
and international security agencies.
Maritime security is another major challenge that
must command the Council’s attention — an issue
that was in fact widely discussed in October 2016 in
Lomé at the first African Union Summit devoted to the
topic, after which the Charter on Maritime Security
and Safety and Development in Africa was adopted. It
will be included in the African Union’s 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy.
As we can see with the several initiatives under
way, the African States concerned have, fortunately,
strengthened their mobilization and their cooperation to
tackle these threats to peace and security despite their
very limited capabilities. I would also like to welcome,
by way of example, the efforts of the countries that
participated in the Joint Multinational Force, which
made it possible to reduce the operational means and
the advance of Boko Haram.
I also welcome efforts at inter-African coordination,
supported by the relevant United Nations agencies, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, to develop holistic and strategic approaches
to better tackle threats, including terrorist threats, and
to favour the development of synergies between the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and the Sahel, on the one
hand, and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, on the
other, in particular in implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I would also like to
mention the establishment of the Group of Five States
for the Sahel Joint Force, whose deployment was
welcome by the Security Council through resolution
2359 (2017).
Beyond those very commendable efforts, we must
nevertheless strengthen international mobilization and
adopt an approach that would favour an analysis of the
root causes of conflicts. In that way, we can forever
avert violence and wars, which seriously jeopardize
the future of many African countries. That is the spirit
behind the Dakar International Forum on Peace and
Security in Africa, which Mr. Macky Sall, President of
the Republic of Senegal, committed to continue since

S/PV. 8006

it was first organized in 2014. The first three Forums
experienced great international success, bringing
together approximately 500 high-level participants
from around the globe. That provided an opportunity
for a fruitful exchange and to better identify the security
and strategic challenges faced by Africa. It also made
it possible to bring out new approaches in defence,
security and development policies and to strengthen
African partnerships with international authorities.
I would like to invite you, Mr. President, and
Secretary-General Guterres to the fourth Forum,
planned for Dakar on 13 and 14 November, which
will be devoted to the new strategic challenges of the
continent. The theme will be entitled “Current security
challenges in Africa — towards integrated solutions”.
It goes without saying that strengthening African
capabilities in the area of peace and security will be
at the heart of the discussions. The establishment of
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture is
an expression of the African Union’s desire to tackle
head-on issues that are linked to peace and security on
the continent despite the number of challenges and the
scope of the difficulties.
In that regard, I would like personally to welcome
the role of Mr. Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, in this initiative. We also
note the adoption of the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map for the period 2016-2020, which
aims, among other things, to prevent and to lift obstacles
to the full functionality of the Peace and Security
Architecture, something we should work towards in
order to qualitatively strengthen the capabilities of
the African Union in the area of peace and security.
Strengthening the current partnership with the United
Nations at the strategic and operational levels should
allow the African Union to acquire the appropriate
tools for effective action given the evolving security
challenges that Africa faces, and which require the
taking on board of the dimension of sustaining peace,
in accordance with the spirit of the idential resolutions
on peacebuilding adopted in 2016 by the General
Assembly and the Security Council (respectively,
resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016)).
At a time when the African Union is assuming
greater responsibility in the area of peace and
security on the continent — which, let us remember,
hosts 10 of the 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations — it is disturbing to note that the lack
of predictable and sustainable financing limits the

17-219777/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

potential of the pan-African organization in this
area. My delegation welcomes the efforts carried out
thus far in the search for predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing mechanisms for African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council. The adoption, in November 2016 during
Senegal’s presidency of the Council, of resolution 2320
(2016) ushered in an important stage for real prospects
to deepen our discussion on the best way of ensuring
sustainable and predictable financing for African
Union peace operations.
The four financing options identified by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/454) on the
possible modalities to authorize African Union peace
operations and the provision of support to those
operations are robust, realistic and could help the Council
take appropriate measures in this area. We therefore
hope that the Council will demonstrate all of the political
will required to appropriately address this important
issue, by working collectively in a constructive spirit
to adopt a substantive draft resolution that establishes
the principle that peacekeeping operations mandated or
authorized by the African Union and with the consent
of the Security Council must be financed through
assessed contributions from the United Nations budget,
with decisions on the funding of specific missions to be
undertaken made on a case by case basis.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to express
our gratitude to you, Sir, for having convened today’s
open debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union (AU) Commissioner
for Peace and Security, who provided us with an
update on strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and wishes to make several remarks in its
national capacity.
As we gather here today, peace remains as elusive a
goal as it has been throughout human history. Despite the
universal appeal for peace and the declared commitment
of States to uphold it, wars and armed conflicts remain a
recurring feature of today’s world affairs. Their causes
may be different — some are internal in nature, some
are instigated and sustained from outside — but their
consequences are similarly horrible.
It is true that the long overdue reform of our
Organization is yet to be accomplished in order to
8/35

19/07/2017

maintain its once unquestionable credit of trust and to
restore its ability to take prompt preventive measures. As
a Chinese philosopher once said, it does not matter how
slowly you go so long as you do not stop. I do not dare
challenge that philosophy. Nevertheless, I insist that,
in matters of preventing conflicts and gross violations
of human rights, the speed of United Nations action is
crucial. In 1994, in Rwanda, the United Nations failed
to act promptly to prevent genocide. Twenty years later,
in Ukraine, the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Secretary-General took no action to stop the
occupation of Crimea and the military aggression
by Russia.
Regional organizations remain one of the most
efficient mechanisms that are employed swiftly in
response to full-scale conflict or a situation where
the civilian population is in danger. Therefore, the
United Nations should redouble its efforts to enhance
strategic partnerships with them, while building up
joint planning and supporting collaboration.
The African Union has made tremendous progress
in developing its peace support capabilities since the
deployment of its mission in Burundi back in 2003.
Today it acts as the first responder to crises in Africa,
with the authorization of the Security Council. As an
observer to the African Union, Ukraine follows closely
the development of the Union’s peace support potential
and shares the view of the Secretary-General that
the world can greatly benefit from African wisdom,
African ideas and African solutions. As a country
associated with the European Union, we also support
the approach of exploring possibilities for trilateral
United Nations-EU-AU cooperation in order to ensure
effective and sustaining peacebuilding assistance in
Africa. The upcoming fifth African Union-EU summit
in November will provide an important opportunity in
that respect. It is also in that light that Ukraine decided
to co-sponsor this year’s General Assembly resolution
71/254, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union.
Last month, in this very Chamber, Council members
expressed a variety of views on ways to enhance United
Nations-AU cooperation (see S/PV.7971). At the same
time, there was a common understanding that both
organizations have to work in concert while using
their competitive advantages. We believe that, given
the complex nature of threats to international peace
and security on the continent, supporting the full
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Architecture should be seen as a priority for the African
Union. At the same time, we see a need to provide
adequate support in logistics and funding for peace and
security operations in Africa on a sustainable basis.
The African Union-United Nations mission in
Darfur has become one of the vivid examples of how
the two organizations can be partners in the design
and implementation of peacekeeping operations. The
African commitment and United Nations resources and
experience allowed the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to implement its mandate
effectively, thereby paving the way to transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the region.
No less important is the African engagement in
promoting the political process in Darfur. We welcome
African Union efforts to meaningfully engage all
parties in the Sudan in the peace process. As Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, Ukraine fosters further
collaboration and dialogue between the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations. In May, the Chair
and Committee members visited Khartoum and Darfur,
where they received first-hand accounts of the state
of implementation of the measures imposed by the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The visit helped
to develop a number of recommendations intended
to review the sanctions regime in order to reflect the
needs and demands of the current situation.
In the Horn of Africa, a strong relationship
between the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia, as well
as the Somali security forces, helped to significantly
reduce terrorist activity and the number of recruits to
Al-Shabaab, which, however, continues to constitute a
threat to peace and security in the region.
A similar approach and level of coordination with
the international community is desperately required
in Burundi. Without meaningful cooperation with
the United Nations, the African Union and other
international community actors, the road to a political
settlement of the crisis will be even longer and, most
likely, fraught with additional complications and
dangers. While resolution 2303 (2016) has yet to
produce a breakthrough, we call on Burundi to accept
the deployment of the African Union human rights
observers and military experts with increased human
rights monitoring capacity and police components.

S/PV. 8006

Developments in the Central African Republic
are a cause for concern. As Chair of the Sanctions
Committee on the Central African Republic, Ukraine
is especially worried about the continuing presence
and violent activity of armed groups. We are ready
to continue our practical contribution to support all
peace and reconciliation efforts. We recognize the
important role of the African Union in that process and
welcome the African Union’s initiative on peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
As an active troop and capabilities contributor
to United Nations missions in Africa for many years,
Ukraine is proud to be a part of success stories on the
continent. We welcome Côte d’Ivoire being entrusted by
the United Nations membership to serve on the Security
Council as an elected member with vast experience in
peacebuilding and in overcoming past conflict. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia is another vivid
example of the United Nations positive peacekeeping
and stabilization efforts. We must draw from positive
transitions from war to peace in order to reinforce the
United Nations and regional peace support capacities.
Yesterday, the world marked Nelson Mandela
International Day. He was a person who devoted his
life to the service of humankind in Africa. In that light,
it is particularly encouraging that efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms for human rights protection
have become an indispensable element of the African
Union’s activities and policies. Human rights and
democracy are two prerequisites that could bring about
lasting peace and security on the African continent.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me first commend you, Sir,
for convening this meeting on such an important theme
with the appropriate timing and format. As your concept
note (S/2017/574, annex) indicates, there is a continuity
of discussions and relevant documents on the issue, and
focus should now be placed on implementation. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefings.
Today’s topic is strategic in relation to the
stabilization of the African continent and beyond. As
a Mediterranean country with a historical relationship
with Africa, Italy is acutely aware of the need to enhance
African capacities in the areas of peace and security. In
the context of the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, signed on 19 April, the Secretary-General
spoke of the mechanisms to finance African Union

17-219779/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

peace operations, and the report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the same subject
marked the outset of a strategic partnership between
the two organizations.
The African Union has taken on important
responsibilities in recent years and shown the
willingness to take on more. We support African
ambitions with regard to the development of the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture, the African
Union Peace Fund and the African Standby Force and
its rapid-deployment capability.
African Union peace operations often have
comparative advantages. In that respect, Italy supports
the mechanism set out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/454) for joint planning and mandating African
Union peace operations. The mechanism provides for
African ownership, while preserving the prerogatives
of the Security Council. The African Union-United
Nations cooperation has been extensively tested in the
African Union Mission in Somalia and in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I also recall the potential of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, referred to by the
Minister of Senegal, the revitalization of which we deem
essential for the entire region, and the establishment
of the Group of Five for the Sahel force to combat
terrorism, which, in our view, can effectively cooperate
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the European Union
missions deployed in the region. We underscore once
again the importance of that innovative operation and
of the need for the Council to ensure that it receives
all the necessary support in our joint endeavour against
violent extremism in the region. In that regard, I
also underscore that the recently established unified
command of the European Union missions in Somalia,
the Central African Republic and Mali reinforces the
European Union’s strategic role as a coordination
partner to the United Nations, the African Union and
the African forces.
In that respect, I would like to align myself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African
Union is the main way towards smart and cost-effectiv
peace operations. We welcome the commitment
undertaken by the African Union Summit in July 2016
to contribute 25 per cent of the cost of African Union
10/35

19/07/2017

peace operations by 2020 and encourage the African
partners under the leadership of Mr. Kaberuka to
finalize its operative arrangements. We believe that
it is important to note that that commitment would
significantly increase the financial contribution of
Africa to peace operations.
The various options to provide financial support
envisaged in the report of the Secretary-General can
be chosen on a case-by-case basis. I would like to
recall that, already in 2008, the report (see S/2008/813)
prepared by the panel of experts chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi called for predictable
and sustainable financial support to United Nationsapproved African Union peacekeeping missions.
We are therefore in favour of exploring the use of
assessed contributions, provided that the appropriate
set of requirements in terms of troop quality, training,
equipment and high-accountability standards is met.
Predictability as to financing is essential but not
the exclusive way to strengthen African capabilities.
Equipment, technological innovation and, first and
foremost, training and institution-building are crucial
to enhancing the effectiveness of African efforts to
prevent and manage conflicts and to build peace. Italy
stands ready to strengthen its engagement in capacitybuilding with regard to police and military units in
African Union missions, as it is already doing through
many centres, such as the Center of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, and contribute to
devising new training skills tailored to African needs.
The interconnected nature of current threats to
peace and stability is evident in Africa more than
in other areas of the world. Terrorist organizations,
transnational organized crime, human trafficking,
climate change and food insecurity are all common
elements in most of the crises that we are witnessing
in the continent. Therefore, given the horizontal and
evolving nature of the threats, it is clear that the United
Nations cannot and should not tackle them on its own.
A renewed and enhanced partnership with regional and
subregional organizations based on Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and on the principle
of subsidiarity is essential. Thanks to the coordinated
action of subregional organizations, developments in
some parts of the African continent are, in our view, a
clear indicator of the potential of that approach.
In the longer-term, tackling the root causes of
African instability is the only sustainable solution.
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Italy will continue and intensify its efforts bilaterally
within the European Union and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to help Africa embark
upon a path of sustainable economic growth. We will
also continue to provide specific mediation expertise
through Italian non-governmental entities, as we are
doing in the Central African Republic.
In conclusion, so as to achieve those ambitious
and important goals, the Security Council has to
show its readiness in embracing the innovative spirit
that the terms of the relationship with Africa require
today. Ultimately, what is at stake is the idea itself of
constructive multilateralism, which we as members of
the United Nations and of the Council should uphold and
advance by showing the necessary political leadership.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General and Commissioner Chergui for
their positive and constructive briefings this morning.
It was also a pleasure to hear the interventions of the
Foreign Minister of Senegal and the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who reminded us that
yesterday was Nelson Mandela Day. He would have
turned 99 yesterday. I therefore wanted to begin with a
quote from him from his book Long Walk to Freedom.
He wrote,
“Man’s goodness is a flame that can be hidden but
never extinguished”.
Man’s goodness is a flame that can be hidden but
never extinguished, and that flame does remain hidden
for far too many people across the continent of Africa.
For the people of the Kasai in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the people of South Sudan, that flame
may appear almost extinguished and lost among the
shadows of instability and conflict. But although the
flame grows dim in parts of the continent, Mandela was
right. It cannot be extinguished. We know that from the
great strides made by countries like Côte d’Ivoire, which
is moving away from years of war and now is looking
ahead towards decades of peace. We see it in progress
towards democracy like the elections in Somalia in
February, where women won nearly a quarter of the
parliamentary seats. That was a vital step towards
one-person-one-vote elections. And we see that flame
burn brightly in the work of organizations such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, which are helping African countries
find common cause to overcome common concerns.
The Council has a vital role to play in fostering that

S/PV. 8006

flame. To do so, I would like to propose three particular
things that I think we need to do.
First, we must all work together — the United
Nations, the Council and the countries and organizations
of Africa — to address the root causes of conflict. We
spend too much time and money responding to crises,
rather than preventing them. That is why the United
Kingdom so strongly supports the Secretary-General
and his sustaining peace agena and his increased focus
on conflict prevention. For that agenda to succeed,
the United Nations needs to diversify the way that it
engages using development cooperation proactively to
build peace and supporting more diplomacy, including
mediation. As the Economic Community of West
African States mediation in The Gambia showed, that
means more cooperation with regional actors that have
the right to experience and influence to deliver results
on the ground. The Council and our colleagues in the
African Union must demonstrate unambiguously to
those who perpetuate conflict that there are severe
political and economic consequences for doing so.
Secondly, we must all be ready to respond when
conflict does occur. Effective and efficient United
Nations peacekeeping is one of our strongest assets
to do so, and it is a shared asset. African nations
provide over half of the peacekeepers deployed to
African missions. I want to pay tribute to all of them
for their service, so often in dangerous circumstances.
The United Kingdom is committed to improving the
planning of peacekeeping missions, the quality and
quantity of pledges of troops and equipment and the
performance of missions and troops on the ground.
But that will count for little if we do not have the
trust of those we seek to protect. That means, among
other things, eradicating the corrosive spectre of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. We
must implement fully the framework for action and
resolution 2272 (2016) to uphold and enforce the highest
standards of conflict — zero tolerance must mean zero
tolerance. In parallel, we need more women working in
missions, out in the field, reassuring local populations,
gathering vital intelligence and contributing to more
effective operations.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen and deepen our
existing partnerships. The United Nations and African
Union relationship is critical for peace and security in
Africa. As we have seen in Somalia, Mali and Central
African Republic, that relationship makes such a
difference to those most in need. We therefore applaud

17-2197711/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

the work to make those joint efforts more systematic,
and we are reassured that the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security will lead to better cooperation
and coordination. There are many issues we should
address to realize fully the corporation envisaged in
resolution 2320 (2016) — agreeing on mechanisms and
processesl sharing standards and procedures, including
on human rights, accountability and transparency; and
establishing, as the Secretary-General reminded us
again today, a source of sustainable and predictable
financing for African peace support operations. We
welcome the work that the United Nations has done
with the African Union so far on that agenda, and we
now need to see that work continue. I look forward
to our visit as a Security Council to Addis Ababa
in September.
There is a lot more to do, but we cannot be deterred
in our efforts to support peace and security in Africa. I
would like to conclude by returning to the words of the
late Nelson Mandela:
“Do not look the other way. Do not hesitate.
Recognize that the world is hungry for actions, not
words. Act with courage and vision.”
Let us all act in that spirit.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
join previous speakers in congratulating the Chinese
presidency for organizing this debate, as well as for the
concept note (S/2017/574,annex), which was circulated
in a timely manner. I would like to particularly thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, his detailed
report (S/2017/454) and his emphasis on prevention as a
central part of peacekeeping. I am also grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Smail Chergui.
Uruguay believes that, as part of enhancing
African capabilities in peace and security, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is a fundamental aspect.
Such organizations are playing a greater role in
building global peace and security. In the particular
case of Africa, cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is crucial and urgent, given the
existence of conflicts in very complex contexts, where
there are asymmetrical threats, the spread of violent
extremism and terrorism and, where in many cases,
they must tackle humanitarian crises and massive
human rights violations.
12/35

19/07/2017

In that respect, Uruguay values the efforts that
the African Union is putting forth with vigour and
enthusiasm to achieve peace and development in Africa,
playing a positive role in peaceful conflict resolution.
For that reason, we encourage the African Union to
continue to contribute constructively to addressing
the different conflicts on the continent, including the
question of Western Sahara, the last remaining vestige
of the decolonization process still unresolved in Africa,
and where one of our oldest peacekeeping missions is
deployed in Africa — the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara.
The willingness of both organizations to further
deepen their strategic alliance when it comes to peace
and security has been reflected in several documents,
among them resolution 2320 (2016) and the road map
signed on 19 April, which the Secretary-General
described in detail a few minutes ago. We would also
like to acknowledge the report of the Secretary-General
issued in May (S/2017/454) on options for authorizing
and resourcing African Union peace support
operations. The greatest challenge lies in the practical
implementation of all of those documents.
Uruguay highlights the importance of Africa for
peacekeeping, and vice versa. The statistics are clear:
out of 16 peacekeeping operations, nine are deployed
in Africa, and those missions include more than
80 per cent of all of uniformed personnel and approved
financial resources. Out of the 30 main countries that
provide uniformed personnel to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, 19 of them are African States.
As was pointed out a few minutes ago by Ambassador
Rycroft, 50 per cent of the entire uniformed personnel
in charge of a peacekeeping come from member States
of the African Union. We also acknowledge that the
peacekeeping personnel at the United Nation is not
always in the best position to respond to a crisis in
Africa, especially when there is no peace to maintain
or when armed groups threaten civilians. But it is
also reality that given such cases, the African Union
itself does not have sufficient capacity to respond to
those situations.
With regard to African Union peace support
operations, I would like to underscore three factors
that we believe to be decisive in ensuring that the
partnership with the United Nations achieve its
full potential: planning and establishing mandates,
financing African Union operations and developing
personnel capabilities.
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

First, with regard to the process for planning and
establishing the mandates of joint African Union-United
Nations peace support missions authorized by Security
Council, Uruguay believes that close cooperation is
essential with a view to ensuring effectiveness and
efficiency. It is key to continue with efforts aimed
at improving the joint efforts of the organizations
throughout the entire life cycle of a mission, which
includes, among other things, the initial assessment of
the crisis and the joint strategic assessment, the launch
of the mission and joint assessments of compliance with
the mandate and accountability.
Secondly, with regard to financing African Union
peace support operations, we have observed that a
lack of financing and predictable and sustainable
support for such operations has undermined the
capability of the African Union to take action and
respond to a crisis situation. Uruguay believes that
the different financing models presented in the report
of the Secretary-General issued in May offer viable
alternatives to the use of voluntary contributions
through trust funds. Therefore, we encourage the
Secretariat to continue working on the basis of those
options in close consultation with Member States. It is
also important to point out that the financial support of
the United Nations would be an additional contribution
to the financing that the peace operations will receive
from the African Union Peace Fund.
Thirdly, with regard to developing the capabilities
of African Union personnel deployed in peace
support operations, as a country that has spent
many years participating actively in peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay attaches particular importance
to the responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries. They are the ones that carry out actions
on the ground and must implement the mandates of
the operations. In that context, we highlight that any
force outside the United Nations that is authorized
by the Security Council, including an African Union
peace support operation, must comply with the
same requirements as United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in terms of capabilities, performance,
conduct, discipline and accountability. We point out
that the African Union is making efforts to finalize its
frameworks on human rights and for compliance with
conduct and discipline standards in order to ensure
that its peace support operations are conducted in
full compliance with international human rights and

S/PV. 8006

international humanitarian law standards, as well as to
ensure monitoring and accountability.
Lastly, I would like to recognize the different
efforts undertaken by the African Union in the area of
facilitation and conflict mediation— for example, in
South Sudan and in the Central African Republic. We
trust that an even closer alliance with the United Nations
would also contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of
such tasks.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today’s timely meeting. We also thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their detailed briefings.
We welcome the efforts of our African partners in
the resolution of conflicts on the continent. We note the
marked intensification of the African Union’s activities
and that of subregional organizations in this area,
including through the establishment of a Peace and
Security Architecture for the continent. We must also
note the African Union’s ambitious plan to put an end to
armed conflicts on the continent by 2020.
We are confident that, in order to effectively
overcome crisis situations in Africa, we need an
approach that, first and foremost, brings together
Africans, gives them the leading role in defining the
path to the settlement of conflicts on their continent
and ensures effective support for those efforts by the
international community. We support an approach
that seeks African solutions to African problems. We
advocate close cooperation among the United Nations,
African organizations and individual States with the
aim of developing a coordinated approach to dealing
with conflict situations in Africa on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and while
observing the basic principles of peacekeeping. At
the same time, Russia’s principled position is that
any settlement should be carried out using political
methods, based on national dialogue and the settlement
of the root causes of conflicts.
We understand the concerns of our African
partners about the provision of adequate resources for
African peacekeeping operations. We must increase
the predictability, reliability and flexibility of the
financing for African operations and joint missions. In
principle, we do not object to considering the possibility

17-2197713/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

of expanding United Nations participation in such
missions, and we are ready to engage in constructive
dialogue in that regard. At the same time, we believe
that, regardless of the option we choose, it is extremely
important that we maintain the current United Nations
system of reviewing and approving the corresponding
budgetary requests, ensure transparency and
accountability in the allocation and use of funds, and
provide for the participation of United Nations personnel
in all stages of the planning and implementation of the
designated tasks.
We believe that one of the reasons for the growing
instability on the African continent is the attempts to
engage in political engineering in a number of States
in the Middle East and North Africa. We regret that the
accumulated experiences of the African Union in Libya
and Côte d’Ivoire are simply being ignored. Inter-State
relations have been unequal and disrespectful,
based on ideological dogmas, and international law
has been ignored, which have resulted in clumsy
interference in the internal affairs of Africans and in
the deterioration of State structures, the formation of
new sources of instability, and the outbreak of terrorist
groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). ISIL’s positions in Libya have been
strengthened and militants have penetrated further to
the south in Mali, the Niger and Chad, thereby creating
a springboard for the creation of new terrorist threats
in the Sahelo-Saharan region. There has been a clear
trend of cooperation between ISIL and local terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb.
The increasing cooperation of ISIL with Boko
Haram is of particular concern. In the border areas of
the Group of Five for the Sahel countries, we have seen
the Al Mourabitoun group increase its activity with a
view to bringing together all the Islamic structures in
Mali, the Niger and Mauritania. In Somalia, under the
banner of Al-Qaida, the activities of the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab have noticeably increased.
Terrorists obtain material support through the
criminal organizations they control, which traffic
in drugs and weapons, organize channels of illegal
immigration and take hostages. An essential source
of income for terrorists remains the illegal trade in oil
and oil products. We have also seen a strengthening in
the cross-border link between terrorists and criminals,
which is essentially a regional system of regeneration,
14/35

19/07/2017

capacity-building, funding and ideological influence in
the sphere of international terrorism.
Russia has consistently advocated the pooling of
international efforts, which would allow us to develop
concerted approaches to countering the terrorist
threat on the African continent with an emphasis on
assisting countries in the region in strengthening
their anti-terrorist efforts. We support United Nations
initiatives aimed at creating more favourable conditions
for the provision of specialized technical assistance and
capacity-building for African countries. We are ready to
share with our African partners our counter-terrorism
experience and to implement projects to increase the
potential of African countries in their struggle against
terrorism and extremism.
With regard to the activities of terrorist
organizations in the region, Russian universities are
working to train African law enforcement personnel and
peacekeepers. Every year, the educational institutions
of the Russian Ministry of the Interior train up to 80
peacekeepers and approximately 150 African police
officers through higher education programmes, as well
as approximately 300 individuals through short-term
professional development courses.
We regret the most recent attempt of the delegation
of Ukraine to draw the Security Council’s attention
away from the issue we are currently discussing.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its appreciation to the presidency of China for convening
this debate, as well as to Secretary-General António
Guterres and the Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, Ambassador Smail Chergui, for
their thoughtful and insightful briefings on enhancing
African capacities in the areas of peace and security.
The first United Nations-African Union annual
conference, which was held on 19 April and resulted
in the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, marks a new phase of enhanced
strategic partnership between the two organizations.
We need to maintain that momentum with a view to
accelerating and increasing its operationalization and
implementation. My delegation therefore would like to
make the following observations.
First, we should prioritize conflict prevention and
mediation by improving the efficiency of the United
Nations-African Union preventive diplomacy with more
coordinated actions, early warning, rapid response and
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

what the Secretary-General calls a whole new approach
that shifts our focus to preventing conflicts rather than
the current trend of spending more time and resources
resolving them. That characterized the SecretaryGeneral’s new agenda for peace, which also strives to
fast forward the Agenda 2063, including the Silence the
Guns by 2020 project.
Secondly, our response to crises remains
fragmented despite the fact that the causes of crises
are deeply interlinked. Therefore, it is necessary to
elaborate a comprehensive approach that connects
security, humanitarian and development efforts, all
with a greater emphasis and additional financial outlays
on peacebuilding measures. Currently, we spend more
than $7 billion on peacekeeping and less than $1 billion
on laying the foundations for long-term sustainable
peace by addressing the root causes of tensions
and instability. Therefore, we must invest more in
sustainable development, building State institutions and
consolidating constitutions, democracy-building, rule
of law, good governance and security sector reforms.
Equally important are investments in human
development, including education, health, job
creation, employment and social services. We must
simultaneously boost infrastructure development in
order to foster trade and agriculture, as well as water,
food and energy security. Kazakhstan has invested
in the problems of technical assistance and capacitybuilding through the Ministries for Foreign Affairs of
45 African States. Looking to the future, we intend to
stay engaged in that sphere. It is critical to focus on
climate mitigation, disaster-risk reduction and building
resilience, because only that will promote intra-African
economic growth and result in greater and more vibrant
regional integration and progress. Implementing the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
which features a dual track of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, is a good model for achieving stability
and development in other conflict zones. It is also
important to ensure that women and youth are fully
integrated into all activities at every stage related to
peace and security. It is also important that they are at
the negotiating table at the highest levels.
Thirdly, the United Nations should be encouraged
to leverage the comparative advantages of regional
and subregional organizations, as well as groups
of neighbouring countries, which possess a better
understanding of the dynamics and root causes of
conflicts, and mobilize respective local resources. The

S/PV. 8006

AU’s peace operations have proven to be very effective
owing to the familiarity of African soldiers with their
own terrain and local conditions, as well as the tactics
of armed groups. Good examples of that are the work
of the AU-United Nations hybrid missions and the
creation of regional forces, such as the Multinational
Joint Task Force, which was able to effectively combat
Boko Haram, as well as the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force.
Likewise, Africa should be part of our global
counter-terrorism multilateral action. However, that
means that the mandates of our multidimensional
hybrid missions must be realistic and achievable. At the
same time, they must address asymmetrical conflicts
with ongoing monitoring and evaluation. That calls
for sufficient financial and capacity-building support
to AU. Otherwise, the ability to deliver will not match
the expected aspirations. The United Nations and the
international community should provide equipment,
resources, technical support and training and establish
sustainable and predictable financing mechanisms for
AU peace operations, in accordance with resolution
2320 (2016). The various options for a jointly developed
budget, as identified in the Secretary-General’s report
of 26 May (S/2017/454), should be explored for optimal
results. We also believe that the Peace Fund will be
a robust mechanism for cooperation and partnership.
We look forward to discussing the matter further
during our planned visit to Addis Ababa in September
for the annual consultations with the AU Peace and
Security Council.
As an observer to the African Union, Kazakhstan
remains committed to further strengthening the
capacity of the AU and to helping African countries
fulfil their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.
We need to invest now because as Africa develops,
it will shape global events in the future. It is already
recognized to be the driver of the world economy in the
twenty-first century.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
the
Secretary-General
and
His
Excellency
Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, for their attendance and
excellent briefings.
Africa is a continent of hope. Today we are
pleased to witness great strides in economic growth
and stability in many African countries, which are
grounded in national ownership. Those strides have

17-2197715/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

come from undertaking efforts to diversify economies
towards self-sustaining growth and enhance the
capacities of individuals and institutions. Africa’s
bright future, however, is predicated on the development
of peaceful societies throughout continent that are
free from conflict, poverty and violent extremism.
The key to unlocking that future is a combination of
African ownership and international partnership. More
concretely, it entails responding not only to immediate
crises, such as conflict and famine, but also to the root
causes of conflict. Resilient national, regional and
local institutions are essential to empowering Africa’s
greatest resource, which is its people.
One year ago, Japan, as the President of the Council,
organized an open debate on peacebuilding in Africa
(see S/PV.7750). Council members were united on the
importance of African ownership and addressing the
root causes of conflict, as well as the need to cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations, which were
included in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/12).
We commend China for providing an opportunity to
reaffirm the importance of those areas for Africa’s
peace and stability.
The African Union (AU) is a prime example of
African ownership being used to achieve political and
economic integration, as well as prevent and resolve
conflicts, based on its solidarity and shared values.
The AU has acquired diverse capacities for regional
action on matters pertaining to international peace
and security, including mediation, such as regional
efforts for the peaceful transition in The Gambia, peace
support operations, such as the African Union Mission
in Somalia, institution-building, such as security sector
reform, as well as peacebuilding in order to address
the root causes of conflict. In South Sudan, the AU,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and regional countries are actively engaged, and the
United Nations is also working together to change the
situation for the better. The United Nations is capable
of expanding its dynamic partnership with the AU
far beyond peace support operations to include broad
efforts to address root causes.
In particular, the Security Council can consider
the various areas of cooperation included in the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April by Secretary-General Guterres
and AU Commission Chair Moussa Faki Mahamat.
The Framework includes a focus on preventing
16/35

19/07/2017

and mediating conflict, addressing root causes and
responding to conflict, including financial cooperation
on AU peace support operations. Broad and holistic
cooperation will be needed to meet the challenges we
collectively face.
Peace and stability in Africa require self-sustaining
economic growth. In turn, that requires that the benefits
of economic growth reach all people, who must be able
to exercise their potential and participate actively in
national and social development. Cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU on the Sustainable
Development Goals and Agenda 2063 will play a vital
role in Africa’s peace and stability and in addressing
root causes of conflict.
Since October 1993, together with the United
Nations, the United Nations Development Programme,
the African Union Commission and the World Bank,
Japan has co-hosted the Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD) in order to achieve
Africa’s long-term development through African
ownership and international partnership. Through the
TICAD process, Japan’s efforts have always centred
on the long-term development of individual and
institutional capacities. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we have partnered with the United Nations
since 2004 to conduct training for more than 20,000
police officers in the country, including women and
reintegrated former combatants. Similar efforts are
under way in Côte d’Ivoire and Mali.
Finally, during his trip to Somalia in March, the
Secretary-General noted that the country is at a moment
of both tragedy and hope. The same twin possibilities
exist for many countries in Africa and are the subject
of much international attention, as demonstrated by
today’s open debate. With this in mind, it is essential
that Africa’s partners, including States Members
of the United Nations, the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other international
organizations sustain the current high level of attention
towards Africa. Japan will remain actively engaged
with the continent going forward under the twin pillars
of African ownership and international partnership.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
expressing sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate to facilitate
discussion on enhancing Africa’s capacity in the area
of peace and security. This is indeed, as Commissioner
Chergui has said, a demonstration of China’s continued
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

commitment to and support for Africa in the spirit
of the China-Africa partnership, which we very
much welcome.
We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his presence here with us this morning and for his
briefing on the efforts being made to strengthen the
United Nations-African Union (AU) partnership. We
are also very glad to have Commissioner Chergui
with us and are grateful to him for sharing the AU
perspective on the topic under discussion today. I must
state that both briefings we have heard, that of the
Secretary-General and that of Commissioner Chergui,
were very enriching indeed. We are also extremely
pleased to have with us the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal, whose presence is a demonstration of his
commitment and that of his country to peace and
security on our continent.
It is fitting that this open debate is taking place
following the 29th AU Summit, held in Addis Ababa,
which, among other things, deliberated on the state of
peace and security in Africa. The Summit exchanged
views on ways and means of strengthening the role
and capacity of the African Union in responding to
conflict and crisis situations on the continent. In this
regard, conflict prevention has been given the utmost
priority, and the Summit attached great importance to
the implementation of the African Union master road
map of practical steps for silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020, as reiterated by Commissioner Chergui in his
statement today.
Of course, enormous challenges exist that
undermine the prospects for realizing this noble
objective, and there is a need for greater mobilization
of efforts by States members of the African Union as
well as its regional mechanisms to reverse the tide of
conflicts ravaging various regions of the continent.
That is why addressing the root causes of conflicts as
well as undertaking effective security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in countries emerging from conflict in
order to avoid relapse was strongly stressed during
the Summit.
There is also a recognition that if it does not
undertake the necessary institutional reforms and
ensure self-reliance in financing its strategies, including
in the area of peace and security, the African Union
will not be able effectively to contribute to achieving
sustainable peace and prosperity. It is in this context

S/PV. 8006

that the 29th Summit held thorough deliberations on
accelerating institutional reforms and stepping up
efforts in financing the Union, particularly the Peace
Fund, which is considered a key factor for the success
of peace efforts on the continent.
Accordingly, important decisions were made
by the Summit, including endorsing the governance
structures and eligibility criteria of the Peace Fund as
well as the scope of operations to be submitted, on a
case-by-case basis, for authorization by the Council and
subsequent financing through United Nations assessed
contributions. This is one of the concrete outcomes of
the Summit that demonstrates Africa’s commitment
to ensuring greater ownership and responsibility in
dealing with the peace and security challenges facing
the continent.
This is indeed a considerable asset for the
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. At a
time when the world is confronting new and emerging
challenges to international peace and security, the
United Nations cannot alone effectively respond
to the many existing conflict and crisis situations.
Enhancing partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, in the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, is indeed the sensible
and logical approach needed to effectively respond to
the ever-changing global security dynamics and thus
improve collective security.
That is why we welcome the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed by the leadership of the
two organizations on 19 May. We believe that this will
contribute to addressing challenges relating to peace
and security in Africa across the full spectrum of the
conflict cycle.
On a number of occasions, the Council has expressed
its determination to take effective steps to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union. The adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) last
year — and we applaud that initiative by Senegal — is
a tangible testament to the Council’s commitment to
strengthening the cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union. It is in this
context that the Council acknowledged the need for
more support so as to enhance AU peace operations

17-2197717/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

and the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for the African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council.
As we discussed last month, a concrete proposal has
been developed jointly by the United Nations and the
African Union that provides options for authorization
and support of AU-led peace-support operations on
a case-by-case basis. Progress in the discussions on
this issue is extremely critical in supporting Africa
in building its capacity to deal with its peace and
security challenges.
The Council has had the right sentiments and
made encouraging gestures in terms of expressing full
support for the enhancement of the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, but now it
is time for it to match that expression of strong support
with concrete action by taking practical steps towards
the financing of AU-led peace-support operations
authorized by the Council. As the representative of
Italy said, this must be a time for implementation.
Finally, we once again express appreciation to
China for having provided this important platform
for discussion on this issue of paramount importance
to Africa, building on the important meeting we had
last month. We hope that we will be able to sustain the
necessary momentum over the next couple of months
with the upcoming presidency of Egypt and Ethiopia,
in August and September, respectively.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s important discussion. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for their very valuable inputs into this
important issue.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be made
on behalf of the European Union and the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Nordic countries.
We live in a world where most of the challenges we
face are common and increasingly interconnected. The
issues of transnational crime, illicit financial flows,
the negative effects of climate change and the threat
of terrorism — to name but a few — have little respect
for national borders. This is no less true on the African
continent than anywhere else. The security threats
facing African countries are the threats that face us all.
They are regional manifestations of global phenomena.
18/35

19/07/2017

Thus, when African countries respond, they respond on
behalf of us all.
Supporting and further strengthening African
capabilities to deal with threats to peace and security
is therefore essential to our common and global efforts.
In Africa, the African Union (AU), working with other
regional and subregional actors, is already playing a
central role in enabling regional unity and action. The
recently adopted resolution 2359 (2017), welcoming
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, is
an important example of how the Security Council
is moving towards supporting enhanced regional
cooperation and ownership to address such common
security threats.
As we all know, prevention is the best cure. The
response to the crisis in the Gambia earlier this year
illustrates how active diplomacy at the subregional
level, through the Economic Community of West
African States — reinforced at the regional level by
the African Union and with the strong backing of a
united Security Council — contributed to ending the
crisis. There are important lessons to be learned from
the Gambia experience, particularly regarding the
importance of regional unity and aligned action, which
can help guide action in similar situations in Africa
and beyond.
Tomorrow, we will discuss the crisis in the South
Sudan. Close coordination among the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
United Nations is essential to achieving a ceasefire and
resuming an inclusive political process.
Enhanced regional capacities will allow regional
actors to undertake operations and work in environments
where they are best placed to do so. We welcome the
current momentum around the United Nations-African
Union partnership agenda. We must now act to seize
this win-win opportunity. The leadership is in place.
Since the very beginning of his tenure, the SecretaryGeneral has rightly underscored the importance of the
mutually beneficial partnership between the United
Nations and Africa as central to the sustaining peace
agenda. The Secretary-General has a partner in the
African Union leadership, represented here today by
the Commissioner for Peace and Security.
The framework for collaboration and cooperation
is also in place. The recently signed Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security underlines our
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

shared commitment. The joint efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Commission Chairperson to advance
the partnership, not least through recent reports and the
implementation of resolution 2320 (2016), are welcome
and encouraging. With the leadership and framework in
place, what is now needed to realize the full potential
of the partnership is the stronger financial and better
calibrated political support.
We recognize the need for flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions, and we
look forward to continued discussion on the modalities.
Sweden is ready to play its part and looks forward to
engaging further on this issue, based on the proposals
laid out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/454).
In addition, as a member of the European Union (EU),
we are proud of the long-standing and considerable EU
support to the African Union’s peace operations and
the African Peace and Security Architecture, not least
through the African Peace Facility.
In Somalia, we see important work being carried
out by the African Union, the European Union and the
United Nations, separately as well as through genuine
collaboration. In this context, let me also underline the
need for continued financing for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is crucial to stability and
peace in Somalia. We understand that the fight against
Al-Shabaab in Somalia is part of the global right against
terrorism. Based on the positive experience in Somalia,
we would welcome further opportunities for a trilateral
collaborative platform among the three organizations.
Moving forward on this agenda will require substantial
and sustained political investment, including on the
part of the Security Council.
Our efforts to enhance African capabilities must
go beyond strengthening military responses. Holistic
approaches to peacebuilding across the conflict cycle are
needed. Such approaches include structural prevention,
as well as building strong and inclusive institutions.
They also require scaled-up efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and underdevelopment, including by
ensuring respect for human rights, also within peace
operations, and the inclusion of women in mediation
and peace processes. Taken together, the AU Agenda
2063, the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustaining peace agenda can offer
a framework for this work.

S/PV. 8006

The upcoming annual consultation with the AU
Peace and Security Council, followed by the plenary
session of the General Assembly, both in September;
the AU-EU Summit in Abidjan in November; as well
as a sequence of discussions planned in the Council all
offer opportunities to move forward with this agenda.
Let us fully seize these opportunities.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui, and
thanks them for their briefings. We also thank China
for having organized this important debate.
Bolivia believes that the development of African
capabilities in the areas of peace and security should be
framed in the principles of sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, and in accordance with the
national priorities of each State. The countries of
Africa enjoy a unique history where the plurality of
cultures converges and where biodiversity, ecosystems
and natural resources are the heritage of Africans
and humankind.
It is pertinent to recall that, in the 1960s, Africa
took a major step forward in addressing its problems
by creating the Organization of African Unity, drawing
the foundational outline of the continent’s integration
dynamics and setting the stage for the construction of
African conflict-resolution initiatives. Over time, the
Organization of African Unity gave way to the African
Union and a gamut of organizations such as African
Union Commission, the Pan African Parliament, the
Economic, Social and Cultural Council, the African
Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the African
Union International Law Commission and the Peace and
Security Council, among others. Each step strengthened
the institutionality of African organizations, deepening
the integration dynamics of the continent. This
institution-building has given us many successful
examples of what we now call “African solutions to
African problems”.
In the same way, time has also shown us that
African institutions and organizations can benefit
greatly from the experience and practices of other
international institutions and organizations, such as
the United Nations, provided that the relationship is
one of respect and partnership and does not impose
formulas and alien ways. As an example within the
framework of the collective approach, coordination and

17-2197719/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

joint work with the United Nations, we must highlight
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, which has enabled the African Union to do
important work on the protection of civilians, which is
one of the most important peacekeeping tasks in the
world. Similarly, the African Union Mission in Somalia
demonstrates the active participation of the African
Union in the region through the initiative to stabilize
the country through dialogue and reconciliation.
Furthermore, the participation of such subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Economic Community of West
African States have proven their importance in the
area of cooperation.
​​
Likewise, the role played by the
Group of Five for the Sahel in Mali reinforces the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in areas of border security,
the fight against organized crime and the protection of
civilians in the sector. It is extremely important that we
continue to support that regional initiative.
Bolivia reiterates that it is essential to consolidate
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in the political, operational,
tactical and financial spheres. In that regard, the
African Union has acknowledged that it hopes to
receive support from the United Nations for the
development of its capabilities, a sentiment reflected
in the document entitled “Enhancing United NationsAfrican Union cooperation: Framework for the 10-year
capacity building programme for the African Union”,
agreed in November 2006 — with peace and security as
one of the dimensions of that cooperative framework.
Ten years later, in a qualitatively different African
context from that in 2006, which, despite the notable
progress, is still complex, we have the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed on 19 April.
The Framework identifies various activities that could
enhance the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. Among those ideas
is the need to develop a shared understanding of the
factors that give rise to conflict, to share early warning
information on potential conflicts, to jointly develop
ways to prevent conflicts, and to coordinate joint
action and mutual support during the various stages of
conflict response — ranging from conflict mediation
and management to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
20/35

19/07/2017

We are eagerly looking forward to the Council’s
visit to the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which will enable the consolidation of the cooperative
framework between those institutions and the concrete
pursuit of additional steps that will bolster the capacities
of the African Union in the field of peace and security.
Bolivia firmly believes that multilateralism,
preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices and
inclusive dialogue are key instruments in the promotion
of peace, stability and socioeconomic development
in Africa. Finally, we must note that it is time to
permanently settle our historic debt to Africa. Partner
countries and entities should keep their commitments
to Africa in that regard, so that we can continue on the
path to stability, peace, security and development of the
people of our brother continent.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for having
organized this very timely debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their briefings and for their personal
commitment to fostering strong relations between their
two organizations, which is a top priority for France.
I would also like to warmly welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye. I
would like to highlight three points.
First of all, France warmly welcomes the firm
commitment of African countries and organizations
to the peace and security of the continent. That
commitment is evident in the participation of African
States in peacekeeping operations, in which they have
been among the top contributors of both military and
police personnel. Indeed, some African States have
taken the decision to increase their participation, and
France welcomes their initiative.
The African commitment to peace and security on
the continent is also reflected in the operations under
the auspices of the African Union. That is definitely
the case for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Multinational Joint Task Force
fighting Boko Haram today, but we have also seen,
in past years, the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic. In
the Gulf of Guinea, the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States have joined
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8006

forces to combat the resurgence of maritime piracy. For
the continent as a whole, the operationalization of the
African Standby Force is a positive development that
provides significant opportunities.

European Union is also a major contributor to the
financing of African operations, such as AMISOM,
the Multinational Joint Task Force for the fight against
Boko Haram, and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

Today it is the countries of the Group of Five (G-5)
for the Sahel that are showing their willingness to be
fully engaged in the fight against terrorist groups that
destabilize the region. That strong commitment is to be
welcomed and encouraged, and is the goal of resolution
2359 (2017), adopted by the Council on 21 June.

That support also includes promoting an integrated
approach to the stabilization and fostering sustainable
peace. In that connection, on 13 July, France, Germany
and the European Union launched the Alliance for
the Sahel, which promotes an integrated approach
to the region — focusing initially on security and
stabilization and then on medium- and long-term
development. Drawing on that experience, France calls
on the international community to maintain and bolster
its support for the continent.

Secondly, against that backdrop of progress, France
fully supports the African continent’s commitment to
peace and security. The Ten-Year Capacity Building
Programme for the African Union reflects Africa’s
commitment, which France fully supports.
At the bilateral level, France is one of the leading
partners of African countries on issues of peace and
security. In that connection, France has contributed to
the training of more than 25,000 African soldiers per
year, officers and soldiers, in 11 African countries.
Those courses cover more than 57 different themes,
including peacekeeping, management training,
logistics, demining and maritime security. They are
priority courses offered through a network of 14
national schools with a regional focus, but also in
officer schools in France.
France also collaborates at the operational level
with a view to implementing partnership agreements.
France thereby supports our African partners in
peace operations and contributes to such operations
by providing training, but also by equipping African
contingents and supporting their operational
deployment. In the Sahel, French forces of Operation
Barkhane are fighting alongside the African and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali forces for the stability
of the region. In the Gulf of Guinea, in the framework
of Operation Corymbe, France supports the maritime
security efforts of the countries of the region.
Those efforts are intended to be carried out in
synergy with those being deployed by international
organizations, in particular the European Union.
In Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic
and Somalia, the European Union is committed to
strengthening African peace and security capacities
through its European Union Military Training Mission
in the Central African Republic and European Union
Capacity Building Mission in Mali operations. The

Thirdly, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union — which France firmly
believes must be strengthened — is now more than ever
a way to ensure African capacity-building in the area of
peace and security. Over the past few months, there has
been growing momentum in pursuit of enhancing the
existing cooperation between the two organizations.
In that respect, I welcome the Secretary-General’s
personal commitment to that process, particularly
through the partnership framework that he signed with
the African Union in April.
That momentum is necessary in a context where
African peace operations can have real comparative
advantages over those of the United Nations when they
contribute to the goals of the Charter of the United
Nations and build on its provisions. The reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the Chairperson
of the Commission of the African Union submitted in
accordance with resolution 2320 (2016) have provided
useful information on the progress that has been made
and the objectives still to be achieved. Their proposals
on mechanisms for deploying and financing African
peace operations deserve close, constructive and
collective examination from the perspective of current
reciprocal commitments. In that context, we welcome
the African Union’s commitments, both with regard to
covering 25 per cent of the cost of its operations and
related aspects, such as their planning and conduct,
and with regard to training and supervision, including
through mechanisms for accountability and respect for
human rights on the part of the forces concerned. A
strengthened, dynamic dialogue will enable us to make
structural improvements to our common response
efforts. Next September’s consultations in Addis
Ababa between the Security Council and the Peace

17-2197721/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

and Security Council of the African Union will be an
important phase in that regard.
The development of African peace capacities is a
crucial factor for peace and stability on the continent
and therefore a priority area for us. France will continue
to play its full part in the efforts for security in Africa
in a spirit of dynamic partnership.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank China, as President of the Security
Council for the month of July, for choosing the subject
of enhancing African capacities in the area of peace
and security for today’s open debate. It demonstrates
China’s commitment to strengthening peace and
security efforts in Africa. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union for their comprehensive
briefings on the evolution of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in the
various areas related to peace and security.
The past few months have seen a number of
developments with regard to the strengthening of peace
and security in Africa. In January, the African Union
Summit adopted a road map reaffirming its decision on
practical steps to silence the guns by 2020, whose effects
can be measured and which divides the burden of the
tasks involved between the African Union and regional
organizations. The month of April saw the signing of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner discussed
this morning in their briefings. To that we can add the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/454) pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016), on options for providing support
to African Union peace support operations. From now
on, the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union constitutes one of the pillars of
the two organizations in their efforts to deal with the
challenges facing our continent of Africa, based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
with regard to the specific characteristics of each of the
parties concerned.
In the past few years we have seen joint efforts
meet with success in such peacekeeping operations as
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and through United Nations support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Through its Office
to the African Union, the United Nations has also
helped to strengthen the AU Commission’s human
22/35

19/07/2017

and institutional capacities, in a demonstration of
the increased awareness in both organizations of
the importance of new, innovative working methods
in dealing with today’s challenges to peace and
security in Africa, which demand that the cooperation
arrangements between the two be restructured. As the
challenges continue to evolve in unconventional ways,
taking the form of transnational organized crime,
terrorism, piracy and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, those challenges, whose effects are not
limited to our continent, are driving increased efforts
for cooperation and joint action between Africa and its
partners. Success in combating such challenges is also
closely linked to factors such as the strengthening of
institutional and human capacities in the African Union
and regional organizations, with the goal of achieving
our shared objective of achieving peace and security on
the continent and ensuring that the principle of African
solutions to African problems can become a reality.
The efforts that have been agreed on with a view
to implementing the concept of sustaining peace and
incorporating it into the work of both the United
Nations and the African Union require that we sharpen
our focus on the prevention of conflicts and on early
warning and the peaceful settlement of disputes. That
aspect is a major component of Africa’s peace and
security architecture, through its Panel of the Wise and
the Continental Early Warning System. We hope that
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union will win the support it needs to help strengthen
African capacities in this area so as to implement the
concept of sustaining peace.
Tackling the real, underlying causes of conflicts
is the simplest and least difficult way to settle them,
in both human and economic terms, because economic
development is so closely tied to respect for human rights,
to strengthening good governance and to preventing
conflicts. We can also not ignore its importance as a
route to resolving conflicts on our continent through a
comprehensive vision based on all the activities that I
have just mentioned. Post-conflict reconstruction and
development is one of the chief pathways enabling us to
strengthen peace and security in our States by ensuring
that countries emerging from conflict do not relapse
into a vicious circle of violence. We must support
efforts to build institutions in those countries, so that
they can provide basic services, as the representative
of Japan so eloquently said. We must support national
reconciliation efforts, particularly those made through
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

national and conventional mechanisms. The African
Union has launched the African Solidarity Initiative,
which is currently being fine-tuned to create an African
Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development in Cairo. We would like to see the United
Nations play an active role in support of that initiative
through assistance in setting it up and in supporting
efforts to establish the Centre.
The African Union has played a decisive role
alongside regional groups in recent years aimed
at strengthening peacekeeping operations on the
African continent, in particular peace operations and
efforts to fight terrorism, as well as action taken in
dangerous circumstances that do not correspond to the
conventional criteria for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I welcome the role played in that connection
by the African Union as well as by regional groups.
Their actions have been effective in tackling the
challenges, the repercussions of which are not limited
to the continent but spread to other parts of the world.
It is clear that efforts to build the foundations for
peace and security on the African continent will be
successful only with the support of the African Union
and regional groups aimed at carrying out those tasks,
whether in the Lake Chad region, the Sahel, Somalia
or elsewhere.
At African Union summits in recent years,
ambitious resolutions have been adopted to strengthen
self-sufficiency in reinforcing African peace and
security operations and to strengthen the Peace Fund
as a component of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. I would like to remind the Council of
the importance of resolution 2320 (2016), as well as to
direct the Council’s attention to alternatives cset out
in the report of the Secretary General (S/2017/454) on
supporting African peacekeeping operations and on the
principle of using assessed contributions with a view
to financing peacekeeping operations in Africa in a
sustainable, flexible and predictable way.
I would also like to refer to the role of women and
young people in peace and security efforts in Africa.
We must strengthen the contributions of those two
groups in order to achieve peace and security on the
continent.
I once again thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for having given us this opportunity to have an
exchange on this subject.

S/PV. 8006

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
our briefers. I also thank China for organizing this very
important debate.
Over the past couple of decades, a welcome shift has
occurred in the international community’s relationship
with Africa. The United States regards itself as a partner
to Africa and looks to build on that relationship and
strengthen it. In a relationship of equals, responsibility
falls on both parties to contribute to solutions.
We applaud and encourage the increasing leadership
that the African Union and African Member States
have exercised in contributing to peace operations
and battling terrorist and insurgent groups. Today we
reaffirm the African Union’s role as an indispensable
partner to both the United States and the United
Nations in promoting peace and security in Africa.
But true progress cannot be achieved unless the efforts
of the United Nations and others are accompanied by
accountability on the part of the Governments involved
in conflict. The developing famines in Africa are a
tragic example of that. More than 14 million people are
at risk of famine today in north-east Nigeria, Somalia
and South Sudan. That is a crisis that should be leading
every newscast and should be on the front page of every
newspaper. The United States will continue to lead in
bringing together resources to overcome that crisis.
On 8 July we announced an additional $446 million
in humanitarian assistance to suffering people from
South Sudan, Nigeria and Somalia, bringing the total
for fiscal year 2017 to $1.4 billion.
We thank all the donors and communities hosting
displaced persons for their incredible generosity; but
our ability to provide real relief is hampered by one
inescapable fact: armed conflict is the primary cause of
food insecurity in South Sudan, Nigeria and Somalia.
Famine in Africa is an issue of peace and security.
People are dying of hunger, not because of acts of
God, but because of acts of man. It is the parties to
those conflicts that bear direct responsibility. They are
responsible for the lack of access to people in need of
food, water and health services. They are responsible,
as well, for the millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons suffering in Africa today.
More than half of the population in Somalia is in
need of humanitarian assistance; but ongoing violence,
including deliberate attacks on aid workers, is preventing
people from getting the assistance they need.

17-2197723/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

Al-Shabaab’s terrorist attacks, as well as logistical
and administrative obstacles, are cutting off access to
hard-hit rural areas. We urge the Federal Government
of Somalia and the leadership of the interim federal
member states of the country to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian goods. We also strongly call for an
end to the use of illegal checkpoints by Governmentaffiliated entities.
The man-made crisis in South Sudan has created
the greatest number of refugees in Africa since the
Rwandan genocide. The crisis would be much worse
if it were not for neighbours like Uganda, which is
taking in hundreds of South Sudanese every day. But
the patience and generosity of humanitarians are being
severely tested. Their efforts to lessen the suffering
in South Sudan are being actively obstructed by the
Government and other parties. Such famines are a sign
of a collective failure, and any effective response must
begin with the nations of Africa themselves. African
Union (AU) member States must ramp up their response
to this crisis. AU Commission Chair, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, spoke for many of us when he said,
“I cannot hide my deep frustration at the silence
and inaction of Africans in the face of the terrible
tragedy of famine in these regions.”
We must continue to look for ways to bolster the
capabilities of Member States to promote peace and
security. The African Union must work with subregional
organizations and individual States to confront peace
and security challenges with one voice.
African nations must also work constructively with
the United Nations to address an underlying cause of
the conflict that is driving the risk of famine in Africa. I
have spoken many times about the relationship between
human rights violations and conflict. To its credit, the
African Union has established a Hybrid Court for South
Sudan to investigate and prosecute individuals who
have violated human rights laws during the conflict.
The establishment of that Court and the message that it
will send are important and necessary, if there is to be
lasting peace in South Sudan.
However, the commitment to promoting human
rights must precede conflict and take precedence over
politics in order to secure peace and security. When the
nations of the Group of African States put forward a
country like the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
be a member of the Human Rights Council it does more
than just weaken that body, it adds to the conflict that
24/35

19/07/2017

is causing so much suffering on the continent. This is
a pivotal time for the Human Rights Council. It has the
potential to be an asset to the men, women and children
suffering in Africa today, but it can play that role only
if its membership consists of nations committed to
promoting and upholding universal human rights. That,
in turn, depends upon African States putting forward
credible candidates with strong human rights records.
The nomination of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an inexcusable failure of that process.
My hope is that we can all summon the political
will and courage to change the trajectory of the ongoing
political and humanitarian crisis in Africa. Famine
should not exist in 2017. Our duty is to hold those
responsible to account. The United States will continue
to do its part.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
China thanks Secretary-General Guterres and
Mr. Chergui, the Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union (AU), for their briefings. We
greatly appreciate their important efforts to promote
capacity-building in the area of peace and security in
Africa. The peace and security of the world constitute
an indivisible whole. Enhancing African capacities in
the areas of peace and security is in the interests of
the entire international community and represents an
important responsibility of the Security Council.
In recent years, African countries have worked in
unison to address African problems in African ways,
thereby making great contributions to the maintenance
of peace and security in the continent. The twentyninth AU Summit, which just concluded, decided to
preserve the Union’s commitment to addressing the
hotspot issues in Africa, to continue to enhance African
capacities in peace and security, to reinforce Africa’s
collective security mechanism and to improve the
African peace and security framework. The Summit
also reaffirmed the goal of silencing the guns by 2020.
That important decision demonstrates to the
international community Africa’s resolve to strive
for peace and security, and represents an important
contribution to international peace and security, for
which China wishes to express its great appreciation.
Africa is still confronted with multiple challenges in
the areas of peace and security. Some countries of the
region are still plagued by ongoing conflicts or political
instability. Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

in Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida, are infiltrating the
heartland of the continent and are engaging in rampant
terrorist activities in collusion with other terrorist
organizations, such as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab.
Some African countries suffer from sluggish economic
growth and are beset with problems of unemployment,
poverty and refugees.
In the face of those difficulties, Africa is not
fully equipped for the tasks of conflict prevention
and resolution and the maintenance of peace and
security, and AU peace operations are constrained
by inadequacies in financial resources, equipment,
technology and management systems. The international
community must vigorously help Africa solve those
difficulties and support the continent in its capacitybuilding in the areas of peace and security.
First, we need to continuously improve the
cooperation partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, as well as other regional and
subregional organizations.
In recent years, the United Nations has carried out
fruitful cooperation with the AU on the questions of
Darfur, the Sudan, Somalia and Mali. In April this year,
the two organizations signed the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security so as to further strengthen
their partnership in this area. We hope that the Joint
Framework will be put into practice at an early date,
and we support the United Nations in continuing, on the
basis of full respect for the leadership of Africa in their
efforts to address the continent’s security problems, to
deepen coordination with the AU and other regional
and subregional organizations, and to strengthen
cooperation with Africa in conflict-prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict reconstruction.
The
Security
Council
should
increase
communication and coordination with the AU Peace
and Security Council, build mechanisms for joint
planning, decision-making, assessment and briefings,
jointly conduct work in the areas of early warning,
strategic review, mandate design and deployment, and
continuously improve cooperation.
Secondly, we need to effectively support peace
operations conducted by the AU, which represent an
important means for responding to crises in the African
continent and provide a welcome supplement to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The actions taken
by the AU in Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the

S/PV. 8006

Sahel have played an important role in addressing the
crises there. However, AU peace operations are faced
with difficulties in terms of personnel, funds and
resources. Not long ago, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the AU Commission submitted their
respective reports to the Security Council on support
for AU peace operations, which called on the Council
to consider models of United Nations financing of AU
peace operations.
China supports the United Nations in its efforts to
give positive consideration to the proposals made by
Africa and to provide adequate, stable and sustainable
funds to AU peace operations through assistance
aimed at helping them to establish a sustained, stable
and predictable funding mechanism, so that AU peace
operations can enhance their capacities in mandate
designation, financing, mandate implementation and
management. There is a need to help the AU speed up
the building of a standby force, a rapid reaction force
and an early-warning mechanism. We also need to
deepen cooperation in military technology and expand
the scope of military training.
Thirdly, we need to support Africa in addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Africa’s hotspots involve
complex national, ethnic, religious and social tensions.
It is therefore necessary to address both the symptoms
and the root causes. While giving attention to the current
problems of peace and security, we need also to work
to eliminate the source of those problems, particularly
by supporting Africa in its efforts to accelerate
development and reduce poverty, thereby eliminating
the breeding grounds for conflicts and extremism.
The twenty-ninth AU Summit chose youth as its
theme and focused on youth employment and poverty
reduction. The international community should combine
its efforts to help Africa implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development with the Africa Union’s
Agenda 2063; start working on infrastructure-building
in the areas of medical care, education, the economy,
trade and interconnectivity; and focus on addressing
the problems facing Africa in such areas as youth,
women and children, refugees and employment with
a view to enhancing socioeconomic development in
African countries.
Fourthly, we need to keep strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Africa. Africa is the
focus of the Security Council’s agenda and of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations

17-2197725/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

peacekeeping operations in Africa must uphold
the basic principles of peacekeeping, respect the
sovereignty of host countries, take into account all
factors, such as the practical needs of host countries,
the security environment and the mandate’s goals,
design well-targeted mandates for peacekeeping
missions, and adjust the priorities and the focus of
work for different phases. The Secretariat needs to take
effective measures to improve its command system
for peacekeeping operations in Africa; increase the
efficiency of the missions; take measures to ensure the
safety and security of peacekeepers; enhance earlywarning capacity to deal with security threats; and
provide adequate logistical guarantees.
China has been a firm supporter of the efforts
of African countries to address African issues in
African ways. China has taken an active part in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa, with 2,600
peacekeepers currently serving in Africa. We have
also participated actively in combating piracy and in
escorting commercial ships off the coast of Somalia. In
2015, the China-Africa Cooperation Forum developed
10 major China-Africa cooperation plans, which cover
economic and social development as well as peace
and security.
In the areas of peace and security, China will
focus on enhancing Africa’s peacebuilding capacity,
including supporting the establishment of a standby
force and a rapid reaction force of Africa. Currently,
the relevant work is well under way. The Belt and Road
initiative proposed by China will help Africa realize its
own development and solve the root causes of conflicts.
China will uphold the idea of wide consultations, joint
contribution and benefit-sharing, cooperate closely
with African countries within the framework of the Belt
and Road initiative, continue to help and support Africa
in enhancing its capacity in peace and security, with
a view to realizing an early settlement of the hotspot
issues in Africa and achieving peace, stability and the
development of the African continent.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to conduct its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their written text and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
26/35

19/07/2017

I now give the floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the People’s Republic of China for
having convened today’s open debate, which provides
an ideal opportunity to discuss the important and
necessary need to enhance African capacities in the
areas of peace and security.
Similarly, my delegation thanks the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security for their valuable contributions to
today’s debate.
Despite the progress achieved in strengthening
democracy in Africa and the continent’s vast potential,
its security is threatened by the presence of violent
extremist groups, terrorism and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, for many years the United Nations
has been establishing regional offices and peacekeeping
missions to address those threats. Peru is pleased to
participate in that initiative by contributing military
observers, administrative staff, officers and troops to
five peacekeeping operations in Africa, including an
engineering unit in the Central African Republic.
In addition, the Organization has built strategic
partnerships with various regional and subregional
initiatives on the continent, which are all part of that
joint effort, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
Mano River Union. Peru acknowledges and commends
the leadership demonstrated by the African countries
spearheading those initiatives, which has created a
virtuous circle of cooperation and positive synergies at
the global, regional and subregional levels and among
the States involved.
Since its establishment, in 2002, the African Union
has played a fundamental role in maintaining peace
and security in the region. Through its Peace and
Security Council, it works to implement a common
African defence and security policy and to establish
the continent’s Peace and Security Architecture. In that
regard, Peru welcomes the ever-closer relations and
complementarity between the African Union and the
United Nations, in particular with the signing in April
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.
My country believes that the Council’s firm
commitment to security is important, as it continues
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to supporting African countries in the fight against
radical groups, as stipulated in resolution 2359 (2017),
which authorizes the deployment of the Group of Five
for the Sahel Joint Force to restore peace and security in
the region. That measure seeks to combat the terrorist
threat, transnational organized crime, trafficking in
illicit weapons and drugs, and trafficking in persons.
Peru believes that such schemes can also be used in
other African subregions.
Although the initiatives I mentioned are examples
of the way in which joint efforts can help to combat
threats to peace and security, many challenges remain.
The establishment and renewal of peacekeeping
mission mandates are opportunities for partnership
with African countries and regional and subregional
organizations, which should be analysed by all
organizations concerned and equipped with the
necessary resources. Similarly, acknowledging that
peace and development are directly related, we feel that
it is essential for the international community to take
part in building the capacity of Governments so as to
enable them to address the threats to peace and security
in Africa, within the framework of what is referred to
as sustaining peace. To that end, Peru underscores that
several countries in the region have been implementing
constitutional, institutional and political reforms.
In conclusion, Peru acknowledges that States and
African organizations are called upon to shoulder
greater responsibilities in the joint endeavour of
promoting peace and security in the continent. That
will be possible only through close cooperation among
the Security Council, United Nations agencies and the
various African subregional and regional organizations
in order to capitalize on each entity’s comparative
advantage, based on the knowledge of the threats posed
and unique circumstances on the ground.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
holding today’s important debate.
Allow me to reiterate Brazil’s support for Africa,
a continent with which we have a unique historic and
cultural connection. It is also a region of strategic
importance for us. Today Brazil maintains 39 diplomatic
posts in Africa, which are a very important part of our
global network of Embassies.

S/PV. 8006

Brazil has participated in United Nations efforts
to promote peace in Africa from the outset, having
contributed to the United Nations Emergency Force
in Suez from 1956 to 1967, and to the United Nations
Operation in the Congo from 1960 to 1964. Since then,
Brazil has actively taken part in several United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the continent. We have
contributed troops to the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique and to the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission. More recently, from 2013 to
2015, a Brazilian army officer, General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, was the Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today Brazil
contributes military observers and staff officers to
seven United Nations missions in Africa. We reiterate
our willingness to continue supporting United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, now and in
the future.
In its capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Brazil also attaches great importance to
close coordination with other African countries and
institutions in supporting Guinea-Bissau in its efforts
to achieve peace and prosperity.
Bilaterally, Brazil is also involved in the
enhancement of African capabilities with regard to
peace and security. The Brazilian army now cooperates
with Cape Verde, Mozambique, Namibia, Sao Tome
and Principe, and South Africa. We are also starting a
project in the predeployment training of peacekeepers
with Ethiopia, while officers and other members of
the armed forces from the region have graduated from
Brazilian military academies. The Brazilian army is
also involved in the triangular partnership project to
train African military engineers to be deployed to
peacekeeping missions.
In Namibia, a Brazilian naval mission has
contributed to the training of more than 2,000 members
of the Namibian navy. In Cabo Verde, since 2013, and in
Sao Tome and Principe, since 2015, we have maintained
naval missions to identify possibilities for cooperation
with those countries and to help train members of their
navies. Brazil also conducts maritime exercises with
African countries aimed at improving cooperation
among participating nations.
Allow me also to recall the zone of peace and
cooperation in the South Atlantic, made up of 24

17-2197727/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

countries, including all of the countries situated on the
West African coast, from Cape Verde and Senegal to
South Africa, as well as Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay.
Members of that zone have agreed to consolidate the
region as one of peace and cooperation so as to ensure
that it remains free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of its countries.
An innovative project is under way in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Through the
practice of the Afro-Brazilian martial art of capoeira,
Brazil has facilitated, in partnership with UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and civil
society, the social reintegration of children formerly
linked to armed groups.
We welcomed the adoption of resolution 2330
(2016) and look forward to the implementation of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. We
support African Union initiatives aimed at dealing with
crises and instability in Africa. The role of the African
Union (AU) in Darfur, Mali, Somalia and the Central
African Republic demonstrates the possibility of the
positive impact of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations.
In discussing the United Nations-AU partnership,
we should not avoid the question of adequate means
for the implementation of increasingly complex tasks.
On the one hand, peacekeeping mandates must be
accompanied by the necessary resources, while, on the
other hand, regional actors should spare no effort to
progressively bring their troops to the level of United
Nations principles and standards of performance. In
that regard, we take note with interest of the proposals
presented by Secretary-General Guterres concerning
authorization and support for African Union operations,
which deserve further discussion. We should concentrate
on prevention and the peaceful settlement of African
problems instead of focusing disproportionately on
peacekeeping and military operations once a conflict
has broken out. With regard to the provision of financial
support to the African Union missions authorized by
the Council, it is important that our discussions also be
carried out in depth in the General Assembly.
Brazil will continue to work closely with African
countries within the multilateral and regional
28/35

19/07/2017

structures at its disposal for the promotion of peace and
development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We appreciate the initiative
by your presidency, Sir, to organize this debate on
peace and security in Africa. It is certainly encouraging
that a permanent member of the Security Council has
convened an open debate on a region that remains
underrepresented in the Council, despite the fact that
its peace and security continues to be the Council’s
main preoccupation.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and insightful remarks at the beginning of
today’s debate.
The Charter of the United Nations provides that, in
matters pertaining to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council acts on behalf
of the General Assembly. It is therefore not just useful
but also imperative for the Security Council to take
into account the views of the general membership on
those issues. Similarly, on regional peace and security,
it only makes sense for the Council to listen closely to
the opinions of Member States of the region concerned.
After all, who can better understand the challenges
faced by a region than the countries of that region
themselves? Chapter VIII of the Charter therefore
lays emphasis on a cooperative, interdependent and
mutually reinforcing relationship between the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations. As
the Secretary-General underlined this morning, that
relationship should encompass prevention, mediation
and the resolution of conflicts, as well as addressing
the root causes of conflicts.
The growing dialogue between the Security Council
and the African Union (AU) aimed at developing better
and more effective responses to peace and security
issues in Africa is welcome. Resolution 2320 (2016),
as well as regular consultative dialogues between
members of the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council — the most recent one having taken place in
May 2017 — are manifestations of that trend. Pakistan
believes that the African Union is a critical link between
the Council and the challenges being faced in Africa,
especially on issues of peace and security. That linkage
can be utilized through a strategic partnership between
the two organizations.
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The partnership should be based on, inter alia,
respective comparative advantage, burden-sharing
and consultative decision-making, as identified in
resolution 2320 (2016). If pursued with an objective
approach, such a partnership can not only augment the
ability of the Council to effectively meet its challenges,
but also help enhance the capacity of the AU Peace and
Security Council to shoulder more responsibilities for
peace and security in Africa. We urge the Council to
consider investing more financial and capacity-building
resources in the enhancement of the AU’s capabilities,
especially in peacekeeping missions mandated by
the Security Council itself. That support needs to be
flexible, sustainable and predictable.
Pakistan also welcomed the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed in April, between the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the AU
Commission. We hope that the themes identified
for cooperation, as well as the mechanisms set out
for operationalizing those themes, will provide a
good basis for further collaboration between the two
organizations.
As one of the top troop-contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, Pakistan and its security
personnel have contributed to many of the success
stories in Africa, from Liberia to Sierra Leone. Our
well-trained and professional peacekeepers have
protected civilians, provided much-needed medical
care and rebuilt lives and countries. They have worked
in difficult and, at times, dangerous circumstances, but
have never shied away from fulfilling their mandate.
I must say, however, that our voice has remained
either unsolicited or unheard when major decisions
were made with regard to new deployments, crafting
mandates, devising strategies pertaining to regional
and trilateral cooperation and many of the other issues
directly affecting our troops. That silo culture must
change, if we want to make peacekeeping work at its
optimum capacity. We also believe that the flawed
notion of doing more with less should be seriously
revisited, because erratic budget cuts will undermine
and not advance peacekeeping in Africa.
The Security Council’s consultative dialogues with
regional organizations are a useful tool for the Council
in its efforts to develop regional partnerships so as to
address relevant issues of peace and security, just as
we have seen in the case of the Council’s dialogue with
the AU Peace and Security Council. Those tools are of

S/PV. 8006

pivotal importance if unburdened from issues that go
beyond the purview of regional problems. Therefore,
in order to be of optimal use, those dialogues must
continue to focus on practical approaches to the
resolution of issues that are exclusively regional in
nature. It is important to ensure that valuable time and
effort are dedicated to finding pragmatic and durable
solutions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the pleasure to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia.
As close neighbours, Europe and Africa share
a common future. Never before have the European
Union’s interests been so intertwined with Africa’s.
The direct connection between Libya and the Sahel
and between the Horn of Africa and the Gulf, the Great
Lakes and Southern Africa, call for a more strategic
approach, while going beyond established formats.
We thank the presidency for organizing today’s
debate. This is an opportune moment to revisit our
engagement and explore further avenues so as to better
adapt the partnerships between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union to the new
threats and challenges faced by Africa. The partnership
between the European Union and Africa encompasses
many aspects and many actions, at the continental,
regional, subregional or local levels. Allow me to focus
today, as we have been invited to do in the concept
note (S/2017/574, annex), on the ways in which the
international community can best support the African
Union.
At the political level, we welcome the strong signal
of commitment conveyed by the recent signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. The
26 May report of the Secretary-General on options
for authorization and support for African Union peace
support operations (S/2017/454), and the accompanying

17-2197729/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

update from the African Union, are also very good
demonstrations of how cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the AU are being
strengthened in a sustained manner.
But the report also sheds additional light on how
the two organizations can best work together. It puts
forward concrete proposals for joint assessments of
the political, security, humanitarian and human rights
dimensions of missions from the outset, as well as
on the comparative advantage of the African Union
and the roles of other partners. Similarly, it details
how institutionalized approaches to joint planning,
mandating and financing could look.
The European Union is already cooperating closely
with the United Nations in all EU Common Security
and Defence Policy missions. The EU and the United
Nations are also working on joint programming and
coordination mechanisms in support, for example, of
security sector reform and the rule of law in the Central
African Republic, and starting pilot projects in Mali
and Somalia. Expanding this logic, such initiatives
could be widened to include the African Union in a
trilateral cooperation set-up. The EU stands ready to
identify, together with the United Nations and the AU,
areas to be addressed and deepen complementarity and
synergies among all stakeholders. In this context, one
of the proposals discussed with the AU and the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms
during the recent senior officials meeting held in Addis
on 5 July was to establish a collaborative platform to
facilitate the sharing of information and to enhance
operational cooperation among the EU, AU and the
United Nations. More concrete suggestions on what
this might look like are expected in the lead-up to the
fifth African Union-EU Summit, which will take place
in the fall in the Côte D’Ivoire.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights the
importance of compliance and oversight, particularly in
the areas of human rights and conduct and discipline.
These are critical concerns in all peace operations. We
welcome the African Union’s efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to ensure respect human rights
in all of its missions and encourage further progress
in their implementation. Joint standards for reporting,
accountability and protection are critical to ensuring
the highest standards and robust oversight of missions.
Allow me to say a few words on funding.
Diversification of funding is critical. The African
30/35

19/07/2017

Union and the continent have shown a strong sign of
ambition and ownership with the important decision
taken by the AU Summit in Kigali in July 2016 to
finance the African Union Peace Fund. We welcome
the significant steps since taken, under the leadership
of Mr. Kaberuka, to ensure the financing of 25 per cent
of the African Union peace support operations budget
by 2020. We encourage further sustained progress in
this regard. We are ready to continue to look at how the
EU, together with the United Nations and the African
Union, could contribute to progress in the discussion
on sustainable financing and the division of labour for
African peacekeeping.
All these issues require further debate and further
joint work, which are also in line with the call by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, to
have the United Nations embrace a future role of not
only working alongside regional organizations but
also enabling them to share the burden in peace and
security matters, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
We look forward to the upcoming fifth AU-EU
Summit in Abidjan in the fall. It will be an important
moment to build on the results already achieved by the
partnerships with the United Nations and the AU by
emphasizing the importance of an equal, sustainable
and mutually beneficial relationship with Africa in
a spirit of shared ownership and responsibility, and
guided notably by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, the African Union Agenda 2063, and the
European Union Global Strategy and European
Consensus on Development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, I would like
to reiterate my congratulations to the friendly People’s
Republic of China on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success in implementing your mandate, Sir. The choice
of today’s open debate is commendable, as are the
efforts made in the preparation and circulation of the
concept note (S/2017/574, annex).
We would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for his valuable
intervention and the very precise and central points he
shared with us today on this important subject.
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Peace and Security in Africa, as well as its
economic, social and cultural development, are among
my country’s priorities. My country places peace and
security in the African continent at the centre of its
international policy. This commitment is translated
through concrete actions, in particular in the area of
conflict resolution. His Excellency the President of the
Republic, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, in his capacity as
Coordinator of the African Union for counter-terrorism
and violent extremism, presented to the latest Summit
a memorandum on the African counter-terrorism
strategy, which was introduced on his behalf by our
Prime Minister. The memorandum, which will serve
as a road map for the continental organization in the
context of the fight against terrorism, was unanimously
adopted by the Heads of State and Government of the
55 States members of the African Union.
Based on its long-standing experience in the field
of mediation, Algeria’s contribution to peace in its
neighboring countries is also foreseen in the cases of
Mali, Libya and the Western Sahara, as well as in its
cooperation and coordination with the countries of the
Sahel and beyond.
As reaffirmed at the latest Summit of the African
Union, held earlier this year in Addis Ababa by the
Heads of State and Government of its member States,
finding lasting and durable African solutions to African
problems and conflicts is a core principle of the African
Union. In this regard, many bold initiatives and actions
are undertaken to uphold the continent’s peace, security
and development. Agenda 2063, silencing the guns by
2020, countering terrorism and violent extremism, and
the completion of the decolonization process in the
continent, among other things, are but a few examples
of the many commitments decided together at the
level of the Heads of State and Government of the 55
African countries.
As we live in an interconnected world, it is obvious
that Africa’s contribution to its own security and
prosperity is also a contribution to the larger world
peace and prosperity. To that end, cooperation with
the United Nations and with regional and subregional
partners of Africa is of paramount importance. In this
regard, we would like to commend the holding of the
first annual African Union-United Nations Conference,
on 19 April, as well as the conclusion of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which states, inter
alia, that

S/PV. 8006

“the United Nations and the African Union
have strongly endorsed closer cooperation and
coordination in peace and security”,
and that both the Security Council and the African
Union have stated the need to transform the partnership
between the two organizations into one that is
predictable, systematic and strategic.
In reality, these latest developments in the relation
between the intergovernmental bodies, based on the
provisions of Article VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
are but a step forward building on previous realizations
in this regard. It is worth recalling that the very first
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is the one
adopted in 1963 on cooperation with the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and that many peace processes
for conflict resolution in Africa conducted by the United
Nations were possible because of the contribution of the
African Union-OAU, as shown by many examples.
The AU Peace and Security Council, at its 689th
meeting held on 30 May, adopted a decision in which it
recalled its earlier decisions on the partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations in the area
of peace and security, including the financing of AUmandated or -authorized peace support operations
undertaken with the authorization of the Security
Council. In this decision, the Peace and Security
Council recalled also the communiqué that was
adopted at its 547th meeting, held in New York on
26 September 2015, which welcomed the modalities
proposed by the Chairperson of the Commission on
the follow-up steps on the African common position on
the review of United Nations peace operations for the
provision of United Nations assessed contributions to
African Union-mandated or -authorized peace support
operations, and agreed that the operationalization of the
proposed arrangements for the financing of AU-led peace
support operations undertaken with the authorization
of the Security Council should be predicated on the
following: first, African ownership, as a key factor to
the success of peace efforts on the continent; second,
reaffirmation of the primary role of the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and of the role of regional arrangements as elaborated
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations;
third, acknowledgment that support by the United
Nations to regional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security is

17-2197731/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

an integral part of collective security as provided for
in the Charter of the United Nations; fourth, enhanced
strategic partnership with the United Nations, including
the development of a framework outlining the steps
necessary to activate authorization by the Security
Council of AU-led missions to be supported by United
Nations assessed contributions; fifth, strengthening
the AU’s capacity to plan and manage peace support
operations; sixth, the enhancement of AU financial
oversight mechanisms; and seventh, the strengthening
of the AU’s human rights due-diligence capabilities,
including preventing and combating sexual exploitation
and abuses in AU-led peace support operations. My
delegation believes that those core points constitute a
strong basis for a partnership relation between the two
organizations.
In conclusion, we would also like to suggest the
following. First, any selective approach in areas of
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the AU for any question that is related to
Africa should be abandoned. Secondly, this suggestion
applies also to the annual meeting of the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council on the
decision-making related to the agenda of consultations.
Thirdly, a continuous process of association of the
African Union to consultations on any document or
action on African issues to be taken by the Security
Council or by other United Nations organs should be
established. Fourthly, cooperation should be enhanced
in the field of training, technology transfers, science
and innovation, especially as the African continent has
the greatest demographic potential.
Finally, Africa deserves a place in the permanent
category of Security Council membership, given the
current geopolitical realities in terms of its numerical
strength, growing economic power, demographic
dynamics and growing role in multilateral forums.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
a very important topic. We also would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union for their briefings.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
32/35

19/07/2017

Indonesia has been with Africa since the beginning.
Since the Asian-African Conference in Bandung held
over six decades ago in 1955, Indonesia and Africa have
been together to achieve equality among all nations
and spur independence. With a strong sense of global
morality and ethics, Indonesia and Africa have worked
hard to establish higher ideals within their countries,
as well as to strengthen historic bonds between them.
As a follow-up, with South Africa, Indonesia
initiated the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership
in 2005 to accelerate cooperation in politics, the
economy and socio-culture. This cooperation was
reinforced in 2015, and it is being implemented through
many multi-faceted bilateral support projects in both
Indonesia and Africa. At the same time, we are also
undertaking South-South and triangular cooperation
as platforms to promote cooperation particularly in the
area of capacity-building and technical cooperation.
We are clear that African development must take
place without causing any harm to Africa. Guided
by that, Indonesia will focus even more on Africa to
realize mutually beneficial outcomes in economic
development. Nationally, as well as through the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, we are ready
to play a greater role to help sustain peace efforts in
Africa. This is in addition to our contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping in Africa, where almost 2,000
Indonesian peacekeeping troops and police are already
participating in eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations there.
Indeed, many African countries confront serious
peace, security and governance issues. We commend
the increasingly important role of the African Union
as a strong and principled force for dialogue, peaceful
conflict resolution and cordial relations among African
countries. Indonesia fully supports the AU Agenda
2063 with its key pillars of a conflict-free Africa, as
well as the five thematic priorities of the African Union
road map (2016-2020). The commitment by African
leaders to finance 25 per cent of the cost of AU peace
support operations is another concrete sign of their
determination to build sustainable peace.
Yet the challenges — ranging from counterterrorism, peacebuilding, sustaining peace and political
processes to poverty, climate change, capacity-building
and governance — cannot all be met properly without
adequate and predictable financing, hence the need for
international cooperation. Today’s question of how to
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

enhance peace and security capacities of Africa cannot
be answered without spelling out how the needed
financial and political support will be provided.
Indonesia is therefore pleased that resolution 2320
(2016) and the subsequent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/454) on options for authorization
and support for AU peace support operations have
underlined, among others, adequate and predictable
finances. Responding to the proposals by the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the report
of the Secretary-General points to five financing
models and various decision-making options to
support AU-initiated peace support operations. The
report also recognizes rightly that each situation may
warrant its own particular solution. It is important
now that the report be examined by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, along with
the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, so that the
General Assembly can offer a comprehensive response.
Indonesia stands fully behind the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which was signed
in April. It is vital that all United Nations entities,
along with Member States, play their role to help
make it a success. Just as ownership, collaboration
and cooperation by all national and relevant external
stakeholders are essential for the success of sustaining
peace in a country, all United Nations and relevant
non-United Nations actors must develop synergies
around the three United Nations pillars in order to keep
the promise to Africa.
For its part, Indonesia will continue to work actively
in all United Nations and non-United Nations forums
to ensure that robust support is extended to Africa.
As an example of that work, in the recent Group of 20
forum in Hamburg, Germany, President Widodo stated
that Indonesia will host the Indonesia-Africa Forum in
2018 as a platform to promote equal partnership and
greater cooperation with Africa. Indonesia’s President’s
statement is clear: “Africa, you will never walk alone
and we shall move forward with Africa”.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We thank China for organizing
today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8006

Africa plays an important role in maintaining
peace and promoting development. However, serious
challenges to lasting peace and security in the
continent persist. Sustaining peace and security in
Africa requires strong cooperation and coordination
among local, national and international actors. That
is essential for ensuring collective security. In that
regard, we take note of resolution 2320 (2016) and the
Security Council’s intention to take further steps to
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). Likewise, we welcome
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April.
Turkey believes that peace and security are
instrumental for development. In that vein, Turkey
supports the African strategy to end all wars in the
continent by 2020 as outlined in the Silence the Guns
initiative. Furthermore, we value the central role of the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Structure in promoting peace, security
and stability. African Union-led peace operations are
critical initiatives to address crises in Africa. Turkey
contributes to the efforts of those operations, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. As a strategic partner of the continent since
2008, Turkey has tried to assist its African friends in
their quest for ensuring peace, security and stability.
While doing so, we have attached importance to
regional ownership.
In line with the principle of African solutions
to African problems, Turkey has contributed to the
development of the security capacities of African
countries, based on the needs and requests of its partners.
We pursue a comprehensive and holistic approach that
takes into account peacebuilding, development, and
humanitarian dimensions of international assistance,
including through our diplomatic network of
approximately 40 embassies across the continent.
In the peace and security sector, Turkey’s
assistance and partnership with the African Union and
African States are manifold. Turkey has been providing
financial assistance to the African Union, including
in the field of security, since 2009. In the past decade,
Turkey provided over $4 million to AMISOM, the
East African Standby Force and the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

17-2197733/35

S/PV.8006

Peace and security in Africa

The Turkish National Police helps to build
structural and operational capacities of security
institutions through bilateral programs. As a co-Chair
of the Horn of Africa Working Group of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, Turkey has led a series
of bilateral efforts aimed at capacity-building in the
field of security and counter-terrorism in the region.
In Somalia, we have been carrying out a large-scale
project since 2014 in Mogadishu for the reconstruction
of the Somali National Army. The Anatolia-Somalia
Joint Military Training Centre is expected to become
operational by September.
Conflict prevention and mediation are also
important aspects of Turkey’s engagement with Africa.
In our efforts to address the root causes of conflicts,
Turkey has been collaborating with the African Union
Commission and African partners to realize projects
in the fields of trade, rural development, rule of law,
infrastructure, health and education. In our approach,
we recognize that stabilization and development
efforts in Africa cannot succeed if women and youth
lack security and access to political, economic, social
and judicial resources. In that context, we promote
increased political and social partnership, as well as the
economic empowerment of women and youth.
In response to recent waves of drought and climate
events in sub-Saharan Africa, we have launched
nation-wide donation campaigns for assistance. As
the Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Summit, we took the initiative to raise awareness for
development and humanitarian assistance efforts for
East Africa. Implementing the “New Way or Working”,
which aligns with Turkey’s development-oriented
humanitarian assistance, is vital in order to reach
collective outcomes, while also building resilience and
ending need.
Turkey will continue to do its utmost to contribute to
peace and security in Africa. We will also constructively
participate in the international and regional initiatives
to that end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
First, we would like to thank the Chinese presidency
for convening today’s open debate. We welcome the
34/35

19/07/2017

efforts of the African Union (AU) to respond effectively
to conflicts and crises in Africa. A lot has been
achieved but a lot remains to be done. The international
community’s role and support in that regard are vital.
We welcome the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which took place in
April. We also commend the African Union Assembly
decision from January 2015 to fund 25 per cent of AU
peace-support operations, as well as the subsequent
AU Assembly decision to operationalize the AU
Peace Fund. Furthermore, the AU Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020 is
a welcome step forward. It is now crucial to implement
all of those important decisions.
In order to silence the guns in Africa, it is
imperative to address the root causes of conflict. The
AU Agenda 2063 identifies democratic deficit and
weak governance as the root causes of conflict and
impediments to sustainable development in Africa.
Forging synergies between governance and peace and
security is crucial in order to address conflicts in a
holistic manner. We welcome the African efforts on
concrete structural conflict prevention initiatives, early
warning, mediation, and preventive diplomacy. We
encourage further efforts to that end.
We believe that one of the most important
guarantees for the world’s sustainable development and
the expansion of the influence of democracy and rule
of law is mainstreaming gender equality to all areas of
life. Women can play a key role in conflict prevention
and resolution, peace negotiations and peacebuilding,
as well in post-conflict reconstruction.
Furthermore, the AU theme for 2017 is “Harnessing
the demographic dividend through investments in the
youth”, and 2018-27 was just declared the African
Decade for Technical, Professional, Entrepreneurial
Training and Youth Employment. Africa is the youngest
continent on Earth and creating enabling conditions,
jobs, education, and the rule of law for young people
at home will play a crucial role in silencing the guns
in Africa.
Estonia stands ready to work with all partners to
enhance capacities and work on solutions, including
in the digital sphere for conflict prevention and good
governance. That is also something we prioritize in
our quest to become a non-permanent member of the
Security Council in 2020-2021.
17-21977

19/07/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Since we celebrated Nelson Mandela International
Day yesterday, let me finish my intervention with a
quote from him: “It is easy to break down and destroy.
The heroes are those who make peace and build.” That
is something that we, as the international community,
should always keep in mind.

S/PV. 8006

The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the consent of
the members of the Security Council, to suspend the
meeing until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

17-2197735/35
