General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

142

Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General
on emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad, 190
Noting with satisfaction that a mission was dispatched to
Chad by the Secretary-General to review with the Chad
authorities the needs of the country, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 35/92 A,
Deeply concerned about the massive destruction of property and the serious damage to the economic and social
infrastructure of Chad during the past fifteen years,
Affirming the urgent need for financial and material support from the international community to the Government
of Chad in its efforts for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of the country and to meet immediate
humanitarian needs,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member States
about the deterioration of the socio-economic situation as
a result of the fighting in Chad and the interest they have
shown in its speedy return to normal conditions of life and
in its reconstruction and development,
Considering that Chad is in a particularly disadvantageous
position as a least developed, land-locked and droughtstricken country,
Noting the urgent appeal made to the international community by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity in resolution AHG/
Res.102 (XVIIl) 191 adopted at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, and by the
Chairman of the delegation of Chad in the General Assembly
on 7 Oi;tober 1981, 192
Aware of the need to take urgent steps to mobilize financial and material assistance for the reconstruction of
Chad,
1. Commends and encourages the efforts exerted by the
Government and people of Chad for national reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development and for assistance to the
victims of the civil war;
2. Expresses its gratitude to Member States, institutions
and agencies that have provided assistance to Chad but
regrets that all the emergency humanitarian needs listed in
the report of the Secretary-General have not yet been met;
3. Appeals to all Member States, governmental and
non-governmental organizations, and the specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
World Food Programme and the World Health Organization, to provide the necessary assistance, as a matter of
urgency, to the Government of Chad to enable it to come
to the aid of the people affected by the civil war, in conformity with the report of the Secretary-General;
4. Urgently appeals to all Member States, the specialized agencies and other bodies of the United Nations system
and international financial and economic institutions to provide generous emergency aid to Chad, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to meet its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs, in conformity with the report
of the review mission that visited Chad from 26 October
to 6 November 1981; 193
5. Requests the Secretary-General to organize a pledging conference at Nairobi in the first half of March 1982,
in close co-operation with the Organization of African Unity

190
191

N36/261.
See N36/534, annex II.

192
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session. Plenary Meetings, 30th meeting, paras. 85-131.
193

N36/739, annex.

and the Government of Chad, to help Chad to carry out its
reconstruction programme;
6. Urges Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to consider taking part in
the International Conference on Assistance to Chad and to
contribute generously in support of the objective of the
Conference;
7. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizations of the United Nations-in particular the United
Nations Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme,
the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund-to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General in organizing an effective international
programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help Chad;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development to bring the special needs of Chad to the
attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration,
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 July 1982;
9. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account for Chad which has been established
under the auspices of the United Nations Trust Fund for
Special Economic Assistance Programmes for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Chad;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize an international programme of financial, technical and material assistance for Chad so as to
enable it to meet its short-term and long-term reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development needs;
(b) To have the report of the review mission to Chad
disseminated as widely as possible;
(c) To contact the Government of Chad with a view to
the urgent appointment of a resident co-ordinator who will
also be his special representative for reconstruction, rehabilitation, development and emergency relief operations in
Chad;
(d) To ensure that appropriate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made for the establishment of an effective
international programme of assistance for Chad and for
mobilizing that assistance;
(e) To keep the situation in Chad under review and to
report to the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1982 and to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sevent!- session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/211.

Assistance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/99 of 13 December 1977, 33/
127 of 19 December 1978, 34/ l l 9 of 14 December 1979
and 35/104 of 5 December 1980, in which the international
community was requested to provide an appropriate level
of resources for the implementation of t,lle programme of

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

assistance to Cape Verde as envisaged in the reports of the
Secretary-General, 194
Noting that Cape Verde, one of the least developed as
well as the most seriously affected island country, and a
member of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sahe!, is in need of substantially increased
assistance to overcome its economic backwardness.
Stressing the urgent need to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. in which the programme
of assistance to Cape Verde was endorsed,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and the people of Cape Verde in the process of
their socio-economic development, despite existing
constraints,
Recognizing also the essential role of both short-term and
long-term international assistance in the process of development of Cape Verde,
Gravely concerned that the expected harvest for 1982 has
been lost as a result of the failure of the seasonal rains and
the recurrence of drought,
Taking into account the results of the United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in particular
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries, adopted on 14 September
1981, 195
Taking into account also the country programme of Cape
Verde presented to the Conference, in which a five-year
plan as well as long-term planning were delineated,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 196
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
which visited Cape Verde in implementation of General
Assembly resolution 35/104,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in the process of mobilizing resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
2. Expresses Its gratitude to States, international, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
3. Calls the attention of the international community
to table 10 in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which contains a statement of projects that have
not yet been financed;
4. Urges States, international, regional and interregio!lal organizations ~nd o~her intergovernmental organizations to extend and mtens1fy substantially their assistance
with a view to implementing the programme of assistance
to Cape Verde as soon as possible;
5. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to supp?rt the realizati~m of the Five-Year Plan of Cape
Verde, m accordance with the Substantial New Programme
of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
6. Requests the organizations, organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to continue and to increase their
assistanc~ to _Cape Verde, to co_-operate with the SecretaryGener~l m his efforts to mobilize resources for the impleme~tat_10n of the programme of assistance and to report
penod1cally to the Secretary-General on the measures they

194

N33/167 and Corr. I. A/34/372 and Corr. I, A/35/332 and Corr. I.

N36!265.
195
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Pans, 1-/4 September /98/ I United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
196
A/36/265.

143

have taken and the resources they have made available for
assistance to that country;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and the other competent organizations of the United Nations system to help
it cope with the critical situation in the country;
8. Draws once again the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established at
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99, for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
continue, through their governing bodies, to consider the
special needs of Cape Verde and to report the decisions of
those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1982;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development
assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1982, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for Cape
Verde;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
?f Cape V:erde and t~e progress made in organizing and
1mplementmg the special programme of economic assistance
for that country and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 198/

36/212. Assistance to the Comoros
The General Assembly.
Recalling its previous resolutions on assistance to the
Comoros, particularly resolution 31/42 of 1 December 1976,
in which it urgently appealed to the international community
to assist the Comoros in an effective and continuous manner
so as to enable it to face successfully the critical situation
resulting from the economic difficulties experienced by that
newly independent country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 197
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
which he sent to the Comoros,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the Comoros as a developing island country and as one of the least
developed countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the Comoros
has assigned to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-of-payments problems facing the Comoros.
"'' A136/268 and Corr I
