91

Re1olution1 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories tiy the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Declares that any administering Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise of their
rlpts or by subordinating them to foreign economic
and financial interests, violates the obligations it has
181Umed under Chapters XI and XII of the Charter
of the United Nations;
5. Condemns the present activities and operating
methods of foreisn economic and other interests in the
Territories under colonial domination;
6. Condemns in particular the construction of the
Cabora Busa project, which is contrary to the vital
intmests of the people of Mozambique and represents
a plot designed to perpetuate the domination, exploitation and oppression of the peoples of this part of Africa
by the Government of Portugal and the minority racist
r6gimes of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia, and
which would lead to international tensions;
1. Requests the colonial Powers and States concerned, whose companies are participants in the construction of the Cabora Bassa pro1ect, to withdraw
their IUPJ?Ort from the scheme and put an end to the
participation of their companies in the project;
8. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
the discriminatory and unjust system of wages applied
to the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and in all other Territories under colonial
and racist regimes, notably in southern Africa, and to
apply one system of wages to all the inhabitants without
any discrimination;
9. Requests the colonial Powers and States concerned to take legislative, administrative and other
measures in respect of their nationals who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
bi Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and the Territories
under Portuguese administration, in order to put a
atop to their activities which are detrimental to the
interests of the inhabitants of the Territories;
10. Requests all States to take effective measures to
atop the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military equipment, to colonial regimes that
use such assistance to repress the national liberation
movements;
11. Requests the colonial Powers and States. concerned, whose companies and nationals are CDJaged in
such activities, to comply fully with the provISions of
General Assembly resolutions 2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967, 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968
and 2554 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, and also to
acloJ?t effective measures to prevent new investments,
particularly in southern Africa, which run counter to
the above-mentioned resolutions;
12. Deplores the attitude of the colonial Powers
and States concerned which have not taken any action
to implement the relevant provisions of the resolutions
of the General Assembly;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to use all the
facilities at his disposal to render assistance to the Special Committee in the pursuit of this study.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2704 (XXV). Implementation of the DeeJaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the 1pedalued
agencies and the International lmtitutlom
auociated with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Imp~men~tion of the Declaration on the Granting of IDClepelldence to Colonial Countries and Peoples bf the specialized agencies and the international mstitutiona
associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
Recalling its resolutions 2311 (XXII) of 14 December 1967, 2426 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968 and
2555 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, and its other
relevant resolutions,
Taking into account the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on southern Africa, in particular
resolution 277 (1970) of 18 March 1970 on the question of Southern Rhodesia and resolution 283 (1970)
of 29 July 1970 on the question of Namibia,
Taking into account the relevant reports submitted
by the Secretary-General,11 the Economic and Social
Council 18 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 111 concemin_g the implementation of
the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations,
Noting that, while several of the specialized agencies
and the other organizations within the United Nations
system have rendered considerable assistance to
refugees from the colonial Territories in Africa, many
have not extended their full co-operation to the United
Nations in the implementation of other aspects of the
relevant resolutions,
Conscious of the urgent need of the peoples and the
national liberation movements of several colonial Territories, particularly in the liberated areas of some of.
these Territories, for assistance from the specialized
agencies and the other organizations within tlie United
Nations system, especially in the fields of education,
training, health and nutrition,
Recognizing the need for further and more effective
measures to be taken for the speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council by all the
organizations of the United Nations system within their
respective spheres of competence,
Mindful of the need to keep under continuous review
the activities of the organizations within the United
Nations system in the implementation of the various
United Nations resolutions relating to decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Imple-

'

17 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
12, document A/8143.
18 Jbid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8003
and Corr.l), chapter XIII, section D.
19 fbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.l), chapter IV.

96

General Aaaembly-Twenty-fiftb Seuion

mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item, 19

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ~nd
to those specialized agencies and the other organtzations within the United Nations system which have cooperated in varying degrees with the United Nations in
the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
3. Urges the specialized agencies and the organizations concerned which have not yet done so to take
the steps required for the full imp~ementati~n of those
provisions of the relevant resolutions relating to assistance to the national liberation movements and to
the discontinuance of all collaboration with the Governments of Portugal and South Africa, as well as w~th
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern RhodeSia;
4. Affirms that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United Natio_ns
bodies of the legitimacy of the struggle of cololl!al
peoples to achieve freedom and independence entails,
as a corollary, the extension, by the United Nations
system of organizations, of all the necess~ry moral
and material assistance to the national liberat10n movements in those Territories, including especially the
liberated areas of the Territories;
5. Reiterates its urgent appeal to the specialilCd
agencies and the other organizations within the United
Nations system to render all possible m?ral and m~terial assistance to the peoples strugghng for their
liberation from colonial rule and, in particular, to work
out with the active co-operation of the Organization of
African Unity and, through it, of the national liberation
movements, concrete programmes .f<?r assisting the
peoples of Southern Rhodesia,. ~am1~1a a?d th~ Te~ritories under Portuguese admtrustratton, mcludmg m
particular the populations in the liberated areas of those
Territories;
6. Recommends that, taking into consideration the
suggestions contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneraI,20 the specialized agencies and the «;>ther ?rganizations within the United Nations system, mcludmg
in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, should take measures, within
their respective spheres of competence, to increase t~e
scope of their assistance to refugees from the colomal
Territories, including assistance to the qovernments
concerned in the preparation and execution of projects beneficial to these refugees,. a!1~ t~ introduce the
greatest possible measure of flex1b1hty m the relevant
procedures;
1. Invites all the specialized agencies ,md the other
international institutions concerned, in particular the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the Universal Postal Union, the International Telecommunication Union and the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization, to proceed to the urgent consideration of measures aimed at facilitating the effect•ve
implementation of the relevant prov,sions of the various
Security Council resolutions on colonial Territories in
southern Africa, especially paragraphs 9 ( b)' 11 and
23 of resolution 277 (1970) and paragraph 14 of
283
resolution
0 9 7o);
20 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
12, document A/8143.

8. Urges the specialized agencies and the other <?rganizations within the United Nations system to dlScontinue all collaboration with the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa as well as with the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and those of the Security Council relating
to the colonial Territories in southern Africa;
d h
9. Urges again the specialized agencies an t e
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in particular the International Bank f?r Reconstruction and Development and the Internat10nal Monetary
Fund, to take all the necessary steps to withhold
financial economic Lechnical and other assistance from
the Gov'emments ~f Portugal and South Africa until
they renounce their policies of racial discrimination
and colonial domination;
10. Invites the specialized agencies to examine, in
consultation with the Organization of African Unity,
the possibility of providing for participation, where
necessary and appropriate, in conferences, seminars
and other regional meetings convened by them, of the
leaders of the liberation movements in the colonial
Territories in Africa, in an appropriate capacity;
11. Notes with appreciation the action recently
initiated by States members of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
the implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant United Nations resolutions, and requests all
Governments to intensify their actions in the specialized
agencies and the other organizations within the United
Nations system of which they are members to ensure
the full and effective implementation of those resolutions;
12. Recommends that, in order to facilitate the
efforts of member States to comply fully with paragraph
11 above, the specialized agencies and the other organizations within the United Nations system should
continue to examine, on the basis of reports to be submitted by their respective secretariats, all the problems
which they might encounter in their efforts to give
effect to the present resolution and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Counn:ies . and Peoples,. ~ppropriate measures for the co-ordmation of the pohc1es
and activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
14. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item,
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
other organizations within the U~t~d Nations srs~e!D,
a comprehensive report descnbmg the act1v1hes
hitherto undertaken by the specialized agencies and the
organizations concerned in regard to the implementation of the various resolutions of the General Assembly
relating to the present item;
( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and the other organizations within the ,United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolu~ion and to _report t~ereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2705 (XXV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territorietl

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2556 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,21 prepared under the terms of General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Mindful of the need to provide increased educational
and training facilities, at all levels, for the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites Member States to make generous offers
of study and training facilities to inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those Member States offering scholarships and those which might subsequently do so to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made under this programme and, if possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
give widespread publicity in Territories under their
administration to offers of study and training facilities
made by Member States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves
of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
1. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2706 (XXV). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Mrica
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968
and 2557 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 concerning
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 22

21 Ibid., agenda item 70, document A/8162.
22 A/8151.

97

Referring to paragraph 14 of its resolution 2707
(XXV) of 14 December 1970 concerning the question
of Territories under Portuguese administration, in which
the Secretary-General is invited to develop and expand
training programmes for the inhabitants of those Territories,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December
1970 by which it decided to establish a comprehensive
United Nations Fund for Namibia,
Noting that the financial situation has improved only
slightly during 1970 and that available funds are therefore still far from adequate to meet the objectives of
the Programme,
Welcoming the information that the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2431
(XXIII), has commenced its work during 1970,
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is as essential as ever and that
it is therefore highly desirable further to strengthen
and expand the Programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
contributed to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa;
2. Strongly appeals to all States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa and within the terms of paragraph 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII), to take all ~ssible measures for the promotion of adequate contnbutions to the Programme;
4. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget of the United Nations for the financial year
1971, for an amount of $100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of
adequate voluntary contributions;
5. Notes with approval that co-operation between
the Programme and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has been further
strengthened and that it is the intention of the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation with a view to
further strengthening co-operation with them;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
progress of the Programme.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2707 (XXV). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 23
23 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Fourth Committee, 1888th, 1889th, 1892nd and
1897th meetings.
