S/PV.8207

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8207th meeting

Monday, 19 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Green

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-07497 (E)
*1807497*

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

and destitute — are too terrified to contemplate
returning home.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in today’s meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Jeanine
Bandu Bahati, Coordinator of the Encadrement des
Femmes Indigènes et des Ménages Vulnérables; and
Abbé Donatien Nshole, Secretary-General of the
Conférence Episcopale Nationale du Congo.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, members and non-members of the
Council alike, to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct
and to focus on key issues. Briefers are encouraged to
limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The picture I am holding shows
Mwasi Kallunga and her seven children, including her
18-month-old baby, Shabani. Members of the Council
all have the picture in front of them. They can see
that little Shabani has the distended belly of many
malnourished children. I met them last Tuesday in
Katanika camp, in Kalemie, in the stunning and rich
landscape surrounding Lake Tanganyika in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mwasi’s husband
and two of her nine children were killed when her
village, 50 kilometres away, was attacked and burnt
down by militiamen in January. They fled, walked for
two straight days and now live in squalid conditions
under a plastic sheet in a tiny so-called shelter in a
congested, cramped, unsanitary, hilly camp at constant
risk of fire and flood. Her children can no longer go
to school. Her entire family — traumatized, sobbing
2/23

19/03/2018

Mwasi and her children are among the 4.5 million
people displaced right now in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Humanitarian needs caused by internal
conflict have doubled over the past year. Thirteen
million people need humanitarian assistance. More than
4.6 million children are acutely malnourished, including
2.2 million suffering severe acute malnutrition. We are
seeing mushrooming epidemics including the worst
outbreak of cholera in 15 years.
There is also an epidemic of sexual violence,
most of it unreported and unaddressed, and much of it
against children. I am glad that Jeanine Bandu Bahati
has joined us as a briefer and to see Julienne Lusenge,
a strong and courageous defender of women’s rights
and an activist against sexual violence, in the Chamber
among the guests. Almost 746,000 Congolese have
fled to neighbouring countries, while the Democratic
Republic of the Congo itself hosts more than 540,000
refugees. Without a halt to the violence and a successful
political transition, these numbers will all increase.
What Minister Sigrid Kaag of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands — with whom I travelled — and I saw
last week requires our urgent action. There is despair,
but there is also hope. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are resilient and resourceful. I
am very impressed by the selfless solidarity of many
Congolese families. They have so little, yet they
welcome their brothers and sisters from within and
outside the country into their homes when those people
are displaced by violence.
Without humanitarian assistance, things would
be much worse. In 2017, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners reached more than 4.2 million
people with life-saving protection and aid. This year,
we aim to reach 10.5 million. To scale up the response,
we have reinforced our leadership, strengthened
our field presence and stepped up our advocacy.
Humanitarian agencies continue to deliver despite
persistent insecurity and bureaucratic impediments.
There have been kidnappings and hijackings of aid
workers in recent weeks in Tanganyika.
I had constructive discussions with the authorities
on tackling these challenges and on how the Government
can fulfil its responsibility for the provision of services
and protection to the affected population, and on what
they can do to facilitate humanitarian access through
18-07497

19/03/2018

S/PV. 8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the quicker issuance of visas and lower tariffs, fees
and faster customs clearance for aid supplies. Minister
Kaag and I also witnessed the signing of a cooperation
agreement in Tanganyika between the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator and the provincial Governor
to reduce local taxes and fees for humanitarian
assistance. The Government in Kinshasa told us that it
would support similar agreements in other provinces.
I also want to emphasize the importance of the
work of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
creating space for humanitarian delivery and protecting
civilians. Things would unquestionably be much worse
without the Mission.
Underfunding is the single largest impediment
to the humanitarian response in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This year, our appeal requires
$1.7 billion — nearly four times what we secured last
year. The Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates,
the European Union and the United Nations will, on
13 April, co-host in Geneva the first-ever high-level
humanitarian conference on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The goal is to secure immediate and
substantial financial contributions and to launch a
multi-year campaign in support of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I ask Council members today
to ensure that the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the agenda
of their Governments and to encourage high-level
participation and pledges on 13 April.
We also need solutions to address the root causes
of the worsening crisis, including by making progress
on the political front and fair elections. We need the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours to
behave responsibly as well. While the violence persists,
all parties must take steps to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is possible. Over the 15 years since I first visited
the country, infrastructure in many major cities has
improved, access to education has increased, child
mortality rates have fallen and immunization rates
have increased. We need to strengthen our support to
the Congolese people.
For Mwasi, the local Government and humanitarian
agencies provide aid for her survival. Her new

neighbours help with food for the children when they
can. I asked her about her hopes for the future. She
wants to be resettled, given a small plot of land to farm,
and get her children back into school. It is not much to
ask for, is it?
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati.
Ms. Bandu Bahati (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Netherlands for inviting
me to this very important meeting on the political
and humanitarian situation of women and girls in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, because the voice
of rural women is not often listened to.
I am a rural woman and the coordinator of the local
women’s non-governmental organization, Encadrement
des Femmes Indigenes et des Ménages Vulnérables
(EFIM), based in Goma, North Kivu province, in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today I
speak as a rural woman, a peasant woman, a grassroots woman, a displaced woman, a woman affected by
conflict and especially armed conflict.
My organization EFIM engages in the promotion
of peace, gender equality and development; in the
prevention of armed and community conflicts; and in
the protection of women and girl victims of violence.
Our vision is to strengthen community mechanisms that
protect children and women and promote human rights,
focusing on peaceful coexistence among communities,
the promotion of peace and the sustainable development
of my province. This morning, there are three issues I
would like to raise with the Council: the security and
humanitarian situation of women; the deterioration of
the socioeconomic situation of women and girls; and
the political participation of women.
First, the security and humanitarian situation of
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
increasingly deteriorating. It is tragic, catastrophic and
chaotic. The majority of those affected — especially
those living in rural areas where we work — are
traumatized and live without hope for the future. The
situation has been growing worse every year for more
than two decades.
There are myriad kinds of violations among the
salient problems negatively affecting and weakening
populations, and which are particularly experienced
by women and girls in Democratic Republic of the

18-074973/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo, especially in the east. These include massacres,
bloodshed, murders and killings, temporary and
permanent displacement, rape and sexual exploitation,
kidnapping for ransom, human trafficking, houses
burned to the ground, activism, the proliferation
of local and foreign armed groups, the looting of
natural resources, in particular from the mining and
agricultural sectors from which they could benefit,
restrictions to rural activities, insufficient incentives
to facilitate the participation and schooling of women
and girls, the possession of illicit weapons by several
people and humanitarian disaster. Such violations have
lead to increased poverty, unemployment, chronic
vulnerability, rural exodus, psychological trauma,
weapons proliferation, and so on. It is a time bomb that
will result in the extermination of women and girls
and of the entire population if no effective grassroots
measures are taken to prevent, protect and support
women and girls.
By way of example, last month, 54-year-old
Ms. Maombi, displaced and very vulnerable, with
nine children in her charge, was assaulted and shot by
armed men when she went to her field to reap crops.
Her daughter, who was under 18, was with her. She was
abducted, raped and returned a few days later. Another
woman, Dorothée, who witnessed the attack, stated:
“I was in my field. Attackers came and looted
goods, burned houses and killed women and men in
my presence. They kidnapped four children — two
boys and two girls. I am now taking care of a baby
left behind”.
It should be noted that international aid workers in our
areas of intervention are also the victims of attack.
Secondly, the deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation of women and girls is also one of the major
consequences of the humanitarian crisis that stems
from myriad chronic insecurity-related tensions. I am
referring here to North Kivu, but I should point out that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as a whole, is
affected and almost engulfed by the scourge. With less
than a dollar a day, it is almost impossible to live in
other areas. It is an intolerable situation for women and
girls. What is worse is that they spend entire days with
nothing to eat. Such extreme poverty deprives them,
men and boys, of prospects and opportunities, which
leads some young people to join armed groups and
perpetrate other abuses. I know a widow who, before
the war, would sell her goods in several markets. She
4/23

19/03/2018

was well-off , but due to the insecurity, she was robbed
and became very poor and vulnerable. She can no
longer feed her children or take care of her family. That
is just one example among many.
Finally, the level of women’s political participation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains low
for several reasons. First, the new electoral law is not
conductive to the participation of women and girls.
Secondly, few political parties are created by women.
Thirdly, very few women are appointed to leadership
positions in decision-making entities and women’s
organizations, in particular at the local level. With
regard to North Kivu, there are no women in leadership
positions in any of the six territories and three cities.
Despite all current and past efforts, women’s voices
are silenced. That, in a few words, describes the ordeal
women and girls face in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Notwithstanding the issues listed above, I assure
the Council that we have brave, intelligent, capable and
competent women. They simply require the Council’s
support and assistance in order to show what they can
do and produce. That is why we ask the international
community to support those women, as well as
young girls and boys without jobs, doomed to a life
of unemployment.
In conclusion, on behalf of my organization,
Encadrement des Femmes Indigènes et des Ménages
Vulnérables, and of the women of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we recommend that the Security
Council, the United Nations and its Member States
quickly assess security, protection, socioeconomic and
political strategies that would help the women, girls
and entire population of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; efficiently redefine indicators that can lead to
positive change; act promptly and positively to combat
impunity; launch an investigation to punish those guilty
of the revolting acts being perpetrated throughout my
country; protect women so that they can live and work in
a safe environment and provide support and assistance
to women and women’s organizations at the grassroots
level that would yield good results that improve their
humanitarian, sociopolitical and economic situation.
I thank the Council once again for the honour to
speak as a rural woman who endures the ordeals I have
described. The women of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo want to be taken into consideration,
protected, brought to safety and supported. They want
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to live with dignity and in decent conditions, with the
hope of a better tomorrow. They expect the Council to
respond quickly to their cries for help.
The President: I thank Ms. Bandu Bahati for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nshole.
Mr. Nshole (spoke in French): The humanitarian
tragedy taking place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is deteriorating to such a degree that its people
wonder if the situation is even being addressed by the
international community and by the United Nations.
I will provide a brief summary of the humanitarian
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, its root causes and the expectations of the
Congolese people.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is marked by a surge in violence
in Ituri province and a deterioration in North Kivu,
South Kivu, Maniema, Tanganyika and Kasaï. Since
17 December 2017, the situation in Ituri has been marked
by increased violence that quickly spread to several
areas and targeted the Hema community. The identity
and motivations of the attackers are not known. It is
certainly not an inter-ethnic conflict, as we sometimes
hear in the media. More than 100 people have been
killed and more than 2,000 houses and huts have been
burned. Public infrastructure has not been spared; some
100 schools and 5 hospitals, not to mention the Catholic
parish of Lita, have been ransacked. Approximately
338,000 displaced people have been registered.
The risk of an outbreak of epidemics due to
insufficient sanitary infrastructure is to be feared,
especially with the return of rain to the area. The
humanitarian needs are enormous and, to date,
the response capacity of humanitarian actors has
been limited, inter alia, by the difficulties faced by
humanitarian workers in reaching the areas of violence.
In Kasai, approximately 1.4 million people, more than
half of whom are children, have been forced by the
Kamwina Nsapu militias to flee their villages and to
wander the roads. Many families who have decided
to return home following the massacres have been
traumatized by the sight of their pillaged villages,
destroyed houses and ravaged fields, with nothing left
to eat.
In Tanganyika, the humanitarian situation continues
to be dominated by the massive displacement of people

S/PV. 8207

following the intercommunal conflict between the Twa
pygmies and the Bantus in the Manono and Kabalo
territories. The number of displaced people in that
part of the country is approximately 200,000. That
violence has also affected livelihoods. New waves of
internally displaced persons estimated at 105 displaced
households, or 525 people, have reached Kalemie since
the beginning of February.
The security context in North Kivu has been
dominated by repeated attacks by elements suspected
to be armed groups of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), which has led to the deaths of civilians in the
Beni territory. Those repeated incursions of armed
men have caused serious problems for the protection
of civilians.
In South Kivu, the security situation remains very
volatile and humanitarian access is precarious owing
primarily to the activities of armed groups and militias,
including Raia Mutomboki, and clashes with the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo.
Several displaced people have fled to the Shabunda
territory since February in search of security.
In the former Equateur province, the presence
of Central African refugees in the north-east of the
province continues to weigh on the host communities,
exacerbating the precarious situation of the local
populations. Four camps, set up in North Ubangi and
South Ubangi provinces by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, provide
shelter to more than 100,000 Central African refugees.
Today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there are 4.49 million internally displaced persons,
according to statistics published by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in late
December 2017. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is the African country with the most internally
displaced persons, more than 60 per cent of whom are
children and 55 per cent of whom reside in just three
provinces — 26 per cent in North Kivu, 15 per cent in
South Kivu, and 14 per cent in Tanganyika. However,
as of 31 December 2017, there were 623,059 Congolese
refugees in the neighbouring countries of Angola,
Burundi, Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia.
The causes of that tragedy are essentially the
unstable and precarious security situation due to the
incursions of suspected ADF; the activities of armed
groups; interethnic clashes, in particular among the
Twa and Bantu communities; and the manipulation

18-074975/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of certain negative forces that are interested in the
destabilizing our beloved country, as is the case in
Ituri. Furthermore, the sociopolitical and electoral
crisis that arose from the failure to hold presidential and
legislative elections in accordance with the time frame
set out in the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the New Year agreement is creating
discontent and a vacuum of State authority in certain
areas of the country, owing to the lack of legitimacy of
the main institutions.
With regard to the expectations of the Congolese
people, in the light of the foregoing and in order
to prevent the tragic humanitarian situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from becoming
worse, it is essential for the United Nations to become
further involved and urge the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to hold proper elections. The Congolese
bishops are convinced that only credible, transparent
and peaceful elections can give the Congolese people
legitimate leaders who are capable of addressing the
multifaceted crisis that is ravaging the country. Calls by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the full implementation of the provisions of the New
Year’s agreement, which is a prerequisite for the holding
of smooth elections, and compliance with the key dates
of the electoral calendar should be the priorities of the
day. Any complacency on those issues would be a time
bomb, since elections that bring us back to square one
would be a waste that the international community
must avoid.
The mandate of MONUSCO should be strengthened
to provide the Mission with the necessary legal means
and equipment to protect civilians, vulnerable people
and their property in areas where there are attacks
and recurrent violence. Populations that are victims
of insecurity and have been forced to flee their land
urgentlu need humanitarian assistance. It is also
essential to establish an economic development plan
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the elections.
The President: I thank Mr. Nshole for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock, as well as
6/23

19/03/2018

Ms. Bandu Bahati and Abbé Nshole, for their briefings,
which were as poignant as they were enlightening.
I would like to begin by commending the action of
the countries of the region, which have demonstrated
solidarity commensurate to the challenge posed and
bear the primary burden of welcoming Congolese
refugees. I also wish to pay tribute to the role of the
Congolese themselves, who provide relief and support
on a daily basis to the internally displaced persons and
refugees arriving in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. More than 11 million people, mostly women
and children, are now in forced displacement in the
Great Lakes region .
I will not cover the terrible and detailed findings
presented by the briefers, which represent a call to
action. The question we must answer is: How can we
respond and contribute to resolving that crisis?
First, we need to provide immediate financial
support. The humanitarian crisis facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls for renewed commitment
on the part of the partners in order to address it. The
donor conference to be held in April in Geneva will, I
hope, be an opportunity to provide a resolute response
commensurate with the needs of those affected by
the crisis.
Secondly, we must also tackle the root causes of
the current crisis. In the Kasais, a conflict between a
traditional chief and the authorities, which was at first
limited, has degenerated and triggered a wide-ranging
crisis. In other parts of the country — in Tanganyika,
Ituri and the Kivus — local conflicts aggravate
or relaunch tragic humanitarian crises. In all such
situations of intercommunal conflicts and activities
of armed groups, the political factor plays a crucial
role and contributes to fuelling tensions that are often
linked to the availability of resources. The prospect
of presidential, as well as legislative and provincial,
elections will make local competition stronger and
cause new tensions.
The Congolese Government, which has the primary
responsibility for organizing elections, must take the
necessary measures to ensure that the conditions for
free, open and peaceful elections are in place, starting
with the full implementation of the de-escalation
measures provided for by the New Year’s agreement.
It will also be the responsibility of each candidate to
ensure that their supporters behave respectfully in the
political debate and exercise restraint. These measures
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

are essential to preventing new clashes and population
displacements. They are in line with the objectives of
national reconciliation, tolerance and democratization,
which are part of the commitments undertaken by the
Congolese authorities under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
More generally, it is early action through dialogue
and mediation missions that will prevent the spiral
that has led to the current humanitarian crisis. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has an essential role to play here. The Mission’s
integrated approach to protecting civilians is designed
to address that issue. If properly implemented, the
approach can even become a peacekeeping model.
A whole-of-mission effort is necessary to prevent
conflicts and to be proactive so as to prevent tensions
from escalating. The Mission’s good offices, supported
by a tight community-alert network that enables early
identification of potential conflicts, will be particularly
crucial this year. France hopes that that aspect of
MONUSCO’s mandate will be strengthened in the
mandate that we adopt by the end of the month.
The two priority missions of MONUSCO — the
protection of civilians and election preparation — are
inextricably linked and mutually reinforcing. That is why
MONUSCO must have access to all necessary means
to accomplish its mission. But we must be realistic.
MONUSCO cannot do everything alone. Much will
depend on how the elections are organized. A peaceful
electoral climate, where everyone has confidence in
the process and each candidate enjoys free expression,
will contribute even more to pacification than anything
MONUSCO could do.
I also call on the countries of the region to
implement, without delay, the commitments made under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Results must quickly demonstrate those commitments,
which were renewed collectively last October.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The deteriorating political,
security and humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is indeed a matter of serious
concern. The continued instability in the country has
displaced many and caused a major humanitarian
crisis that requires serious attention. We thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock, Ms. Jeanine Bandu

S/PV. 8207

Bahati and Abbé Donatien Nshole, Secretary-General
of the Conférence Episcopale Nationale du Congo,
for their briefings on the latest situation, following
the visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
week by the Dutch Minister and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock.
The current humanitarian emergency in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be seen in
isolation from the political and security situation in the
country. We believe that the problem requires a longterm and sustainable solution, as stressed by the French
representative. The current humanitarian situation is
worrying because of the very large affected population,
which has reached a record high. We strongly support
the call for mobilizing more resources to save lives,
particularly vulnerable children and women in the
severely affected areas of the country.
We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian actors
on the ground who are supporting education, water
and sanitation as well as agricultural projects to meet
the needs of the displaced people. We are hopeful that
the humanitarian donor conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to be co-hosted by the European
Commission, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United Arab Emirates next month in Geneva, will help
raise the estimated $1.7 billion required to address
emergency needs in the country, including for the
4.5 million internally displaced people.
It will be very difficult to resolve the humanitarian
crisis and the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — the gravity of which has
been so ably and passionately described by Ms. Bandu
Bahati — without addressing the country’s political
and security problems. The continued instability in the
eastern, southeastern and central parts of Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to displace huge
numbers of people.
The implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement is absolutely imperative to address
the political impasse in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in a consensual and inclusive manner and
to ensure the organization of a peaceful, free, fair
and credible election. In that connection, we note the
measures taken by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the announcement of the
electoral calendar. However, we believe more needs
to be done in terms of confidence-building measures
The fairness and credibility of the election is a very

18-074977/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

serious matter, as Abbé Nshole stressed. Of course, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also faces armed
groups that are not known for being responsible.
The initiatives of countries of the region and the
efforts of the African Union to support the momentum
in preparations for the election deserve the support
of the international community. Enhancing the
coordination of the United Nations, the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other international partners is necessary to facilitate
coherent and effective support for the electoral process,
which is so critical not only for the peace and security
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also of
the wider Great Lakes region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing. We have listened to the remarks made by
Ms. Bandu Bahati and Mr. Nshole.
Located in the heart of the African continent, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
African country. Peace and stability there affect the
overall peace of the African continent. Over the past few
years, the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has remained complex and grave, characterized
in particular by security and humanitarian challenges
resulting from ongoing conflicts in some parts of
the country, including in the east. In our view, the
international community should focus its support and
assistance on the following three aspects.
First, it must ensure that the ownership of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in addressing its domestic problems fully respects the
country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The Government shoulders the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. The international
community should support the Government in beefing
up its security capacity. The Security Council is now
reviewing the mandate renewal for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). China supports
MONUSCO in continuing to discharge its mandate, but
also hopes that it will step up its communication and
coordination with the Government and see its relevant
mandate reinforced.
Secondly, the international community must
steadily advance the domestic political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It should continue
8/23

19/03/2018

to engage all parties in the country, pushing for the
peaceful settlement of differences through political
consultation, dialogue and mediation. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and other regional and subregional
organizations play a major role in mediating the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and merit necessary and continued support from the
international community.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide the country with humanitarian
assistance, helping it to overcome urgent challenges,
including food insecurity and internally displaced
persons issues.
Having said that, more attention should be paid
to helping the country to address economic and social
issues by scaling up input in agriculture, education and
infrastructure, among other areas, so as to effectively
improve the local economic and social development
conditions and provide guarantees for the rule of law
and lasting peace and stability in the country.
China has all along been steadfast in supporting the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have been actively engaged in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the country and have provided
the country with humanitarian assistance, including
medical supplies and food. We have also assumed an
active part in its economic and social development.
Alongside the international community, China stands
ready to continue playing a constructive role in the
achievement of peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Netherlands
for convening this meeting today to discuss the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as for shedding light on the human
suffering there. To that end, the Dutch Minister for
Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation made a
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to see at first hand the humanitarian situation on
the ground. We also appreciate the briefings delivered
by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affair; Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati,
Coordinator of the Encadrement des Femmes Indigenes
et des Ménages Vulnérables and Abbé Donatien Nshole,
Secretary-General of the Conférence Episcopale
Nationale du Congo.
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This meeting is important for us in terms of our
priorities because of the scale of the humanitarian
disaster that we are facing. We constantly stress that
of all the topics on the Security Council agenda, the
most critical are those directly related to the extent of
human suffering. Most of that suffering is the result
of a political tug-of-war, the repercussions of which
usually endanger the lives of civilians, lead to severe
shortages in food and medical supplies and cause low
levels of security.
There is no doubt that prevarication in the
implementation by the relevant parties of the political
agreement that was signed on 31 December 2016, has led
to the absence of security and stability and the severe
deterioration in the humanitarian situation that we see
today. The ongoing struggle among the armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has intensified
over the past two years, particularly in the northern
parts of the country, and has reached concerning levels.
That has directly contributed to the escalation of the
humanitarian crisis to catastrophic levels in some areas
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as described
in reports issued by international organizations.
Some 13 million citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo rely on humanitarian aid as a
main source of sustenance and survival, a 50 per cent
increase compared to 2017. Furthermore, 7.7 million
people suffer from severe food insecurity, a 30 per cent
increase in just one year. More than 2 million children
are suffering from acute malnutrition. Therefore, it is
no surprise that the humanitarian situation is being
described as catastrophic.
If we go back to recent times in 2017, we would
note that nearly 2.2 million new internally displaced
persons (IDPs) were scattered throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The total number
of IDPs has risen to 4.5 million, the largest internally
displaced persons on the African continent. Moreover,
approximately 680,000 citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries, which unfortunately has led to
some clear violations of human rights. In this regard,
we look forward to the outcome of the high-level
humanitarian conference that will be hosted by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and co-organized by the Netherlands, the United
Arab Emirates and the European Civil Protection and
Humanitarian Aid Operations in Geneva, in order to
raise funds to respond to the humanitarian situation in

S/PV. 8207

the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The conference
will take place on 13 April.
We fully believe that the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be resolved
only through a comprehensive political solution, with
continued efforts to enhance confidence-building
measures, the timely holding of the presidential
elections and bringing perpetrators of human rights
violations to justice. In this connection, we would like
to welcome the measures and actions currently being
undertaken by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to prepare for holding the three
elections — presidential, legislative and municipal — on
23 December 2018, in accordance with the elections
calendar. However, we hope that we do not have to
wait until then to see alleviation in the suffering of the
Congolese people, especially since the humanitarian
situation is being classified by relief organizations as
one of the worst in the world.
In closing, and with regard to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the mandate of which is due to
expire at the end of the month, we would like to reaffirm
the need to extend that mandate for an additional year.
We support the efforts of those working in the Mission
because it is an important contribution to the efforts of
the Government in preparing for the upcoming political
phase. We also note the importance of the continued
coordination between the Government and international
and regional organizations to support political stability,
which is the main component in the alleviation of the
suffering of the Congolese people.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the beginning, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative. I
express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his very comprehensive briefing.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to take the opportunity to thank
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati for her contribution, as well
as Abbé Donatien Nshole for his briefing, which was
quite moving. I thank them both.
(spoke in English)
Poland remains highly concerned by the dramatic
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation
of the Congolese people. Yet despite the efforts of the
international community, the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the

18-074979/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

humanitarian needs have doubled since last year. Poland
expresses high concern over the issue. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is recognized, for the second
consecutive year, as the country worst affected by
conflict-related displacement in the world.
In that context, I would like to underline the
importance of the preventive aspect of assistance
activities, in particular the need to address the root
causes of the conflict and forced displacement.
We believe that the holistic approach to preventive
actions, including the promotion of dialogue between
communities and facilitating community dialogue
about conflict, may significantly contribute to easing
tensions and improving the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Allow me now
to share a few thoughts on humanitarian rights and
international humanitarian law.
Widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including targeted
attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, constitute a protection crisis. The security
situation hinders humanitarian access to vulnerable
communities. The Congolese authorities have to
shoulder the responsibility for normalizing the situation
in the country by protecting the fundamental freedoms
enshrined in the Constitution and implementing the
measures envisaged in the 31 December New Year
political agreement.

19/03/2018

action plan to address grave violations against children,
but we still want to stress the importance of putting
an immediate stop to all violations of children’s rights
by State security forces and bringing all perpetrators
of such acts to justice, regardless of their affiliation or
rank. However, we should not forget that demobilizing
children is only a first step. The lack of reintegration
options for children who have been demobilized
increases the risk of their re-recruitment.
With regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), we would like to reiterate
that Poland views the protection of civilians as crucial.
That task should therefore remain one of MONUSCO’s
highest priorities, since the increase in armed
violence renders rebuilding a viable political strategy
for protecting civilians essential. MONUSCO’s
contribution to securing civilians’ security and creating
a space for humanitarian agencies has so far been vital
to preventing the current crisis from escalating further.
It should not be forgotten that many of the tensions and
conflicts at a local level are the result of historically
established reasons. The political stakeholders and
the international community must make real efforts
to address the drivers of these conflicts properly and
assure the local communities that they will not be left
to solve their problems alone.

Cooperation with civil society, in particular with
women’s representatives, at both national and regional
levels is crucial for women. We applaud the courage
of 20 million women who, despite poverty and the
violence during the registration procedures, queued up
to participate in the upcoming elections. We note with
concern that women are often targeted in the political
process to intimidate female candidates and voters. We
are also concerned about the acts of sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which increased
by 56 per cent last year. We call on the Government
to strengthen measures to improve security, fight
impunity for the perpetrators of sexual violence and
protect their victims.

In conclusion, we were pleased to note the visit
planned by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that it will boost the
confidence of all the parties involved in supporting
that country. We commend the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates
and the European Commission for their readiness to
hold a donor conference on humanitarian assistance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent
cuts to assistance from agencies, owing to the shortage
of funding, are extremely worrying and could result in
the further escalation of one of the world’s most serious
humanitarian crises.

The continued conflict and dire humanitarian
situation have also had a disproportionate effect on
children, 2 million of whom are at risk of starvation.
This requires a strong response on the part of the
international community. We note with appreciation
the continuing progress on the implementation of the

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We have taken note of the report
by Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and we are grateful for his
informative briefing and those of the other briefers,
which were also helpful.

10/23

18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We are concerned about the rapid deterioration in
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is sad that during the past year alone,
according to United Nations estimates, we have seen
the number of people in need of humanitarian aid grow
by 50 per cent, while the cost of the humanitarian
response plan for the country has almost doubled. We
agree with the view that the reasons for the worsening
humanitarian situation lie in the continuing inter-ethnic
clashes and the activities of armed groups in the northern
and eastern regions of the country. The situation with
regard to food security, sanitation and epidemics is
particularly worrying. A new wave of refugees will
have negative humanitarian consequences both for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours, many
of which are already dealing with acute humanitarian
crises, and the Great Lakes region as a whole.
These developments pose new challenges for the
humanitarian community that it is unlikely to be able
to cope with, considering the current funding available
for humanitarian assistance. It will be essential for
donors to step up their support for United Nations
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours. For its part, Russia will continue to
support such efforts. In particular, we are taking steps
to relieve African countries’ long-term debt. To date,
we have written off more than $20 billion of underlying
debt within the framework of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Country Initiative, as well as implementing debtfor-development swaps. We consistently contribute to
international assistance programmes for Africa through
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the International Civil Defence
Organization, and we also provide aid to the health
sector. We were one of the first countries to respond to
the Ebola epidemic, contributing more than $60 million
to combating it.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to those neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo who have been helping
Congolese refugees. We will continue to provide them
with appropriate assistance. Last year Russia sent
dozens of KAMAZ trucks to Uganda for use in United
Nations humanitarian operations there, and we plan to
transfer additional transport units for use in Uganda to
the WFP this year as well.
With regard to the country’s overall situation,
we hope that ensuring that the presidential elections

S/PV. 8207

scheduled for 23 December are held on time will help
to reduce tensions in Congolese society. We call on the
opposition forces to cooperate more actively with the
Independent National Electoral Commission, recognize
its proposed election dates and to refrain from any acts
of violence. We are opposed to any efforts to mentor or
impose recipes on Kinshasa regarding election issues.
Nor should MONUSCO’s role go beyond providing
technical and logistical assistance to the national
authorities in organizing and conducting the elections.
The primary responsibility for normalizing the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
belongs to its citizens themselves, and respect for the
country’s sovereignty is an absolute imperative. We
again urge the Blue Helmets to act in accordance with
the basic principles of peacebuilding and not to permit
any interference in Kinshasa’s internal affairs. Any
situation in which MONUSCO supports a particular
Congolese party is to be avoided at all costs. We
assume that the Mission’s main function is to stabilize
the security situation, which in itself would also help
to improve humanitarian access. In that connection,
we would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
renewed activity of illegal armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where civilians,
Government security forces and peacekeepers are
being systematically attacked. We are also concerned
about the reports that after years of quiet, inter-tribal
conflicts in the north-east of the country have broken
out again. Needless to say, we were all concerned about
the series of rebel attacks on peacekeepers at the end
of last year. All of those factors should be taken into
account during the work on the new mandate for the
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We see no justification for the proposals in the
Secretary-General’s report on the results of the strategic
review (S/2017/826) for reducing MONUSCO’s
implementation of its stabilization efforts and its
cooperation with Kinshasa in support of the camps
for ex-combatants. It will be impossible to ensure
long-term solutions to the problem of armed groups
without restoring State authority in the eastern part of
the country and resolving the issue of the repatriation
of former combatants. The implementation of the
protection through projection concept endorsed by the
Secretariat will hardly help to strengthen the security
of civilians or ensure humanitarian access.

18-0749711/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

At this meeting, we would also like to take the
opportunity to raise the issue of the working methods
of the Council. As the discussion has shown, it is hardly
worthwhile to discuss the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo separately from
the military and political context. We would draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that many of the
ideas proposed by participants at today’s meeting were
also heard at the meeting on 7 March (see S/PV.8198).
In that regard, we believe that it is important to prevent
briefings that largely overlap in order not to reduce the
effectiveness of the Council’s work.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting. We thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati, Coordinator of the
Encadrement des Femmes Indigenes et des Ménages
Vulnérables, and Abbé Nshole, Secretary-General of
the Conférence Episcopale Nationale du Congo, for
their briefings on the tragic humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Peru follows with particular concern the serious
situation in which millions of Congolese people and
refugees from neighbouring countries find themselves.
Violence, food insecurity and budgetary limitations for
humanitarian assistance have led to the largest number
of displaced people in the world today. Women, girls
and boys are particularly vulnerable.
We welcome the steps taken by the Congolese
Government to establish a legal framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons, including by
completing the internal process for the ratification of
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa.
We therefore encourage that it be promptly deposited
with the African Union Commission. We hope that
that will be reflected in the necessary respect for
international humanitarian law and the protection of
the human rights of millions of people. In addition, we
encourage the holding of fair, transparent and credible
elections.
Attention should also be paid to the situation of the
Congolese displaced to neighbouring countries, such
as Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda, who are forced to
flee and to seek refuge due to the increasing violence
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those people must be guaranteed safe passage
and access to humanitarian assistance.
12/23

19/03/2018

Peru believes that it is essential that the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to support
the various humanitarian actors through logistical
assistance and access to difficult areas in order for
them to be able to carry out their work and for a greater
number of people to have access to humanitarian aid.
We are particularly concerned about the increased
vulnerability of 7 million Congolese women and girls in
need of urgent protection and humanitarian assistance.
We regret that that number has increased by 50 per
cent over the past year. Child sex work and human
trafficking must be rejected and addressed. We are
also concerned about food insecurity. The violence has
caused the abandonment of agricultural lands and the
loss of harvests, exposing girls and boys to malnutrition.
The economic situation of the country is unstable. We
therefore deplore the reduction of financial support
from the international community for such necessary
humanitarian assistance.
We believe that it is imperative that the United
Nations, through its agencies and in cooperation with the
Government, the African Union and other humanitarian
agencies and sources of cooperation, work on a longterm strategy that addresses the root causes of the crisis
and envisages the possibility of a sustainable peace.
Among other measures for sustainable development,
that includes improving governance in agriculture
and supporting development and rural employment.
In that regard, we welcome the convening of a highlevel humanitarian conference at the initiative of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the United Arab Emirates and the Directorate-General
for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid
Operations of the European Commission.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We would
like to commend the recent visit of Mrs. Kaag, Minister
for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation
of the Netherlands, with Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and their drawing of international attention to the
urgent humanitarian situation in that country. We also
welcome the briefers of this meeting — Coordinator
Bahati and Secretary-General Nshole.
We join others in expressing our deep concern
about the dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo, which is aggravated by
the increasing violence, armed conflicts, poverty,
malnutrition, drought, forced internal displacements
and refugee flows.
We note the importance of the joint initiative of
the United Nations, the Netherlands, the United Arab
Emirates and the European Union to host the first-ever
high-level humanitarian conference on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to be held in Geneva on 13 April.
We call on donors for greater support in order to respond
to the needs of more than 13 million Congolese people.
The politically fragile and insecure situation
heightens the existing crisis. It is therefore causing a
vicious cycle of conflict and humanitarian tragedy,
with one triggering the other. We therefore call for
a political resolution of the crisis, adherence to the
Constitution and the holding of timely, free, fair and
credible elections, which could lead to stabilization
and the gradual building of State institutions. The
international community must support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in laying the foundations for
good governance, the rule of law and reform of the
security, law enforcement and judiciary sectors. The
Government needs to encourage women and young
people to participate in those processes.
Food security is also severely affected by the
ongoing armed conflict, forcing farmers to flee and
to miss the planting seasons. According to the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
UNICEF and the World Food Programme, only 400,000
of the 3.2 million severely food insecure people in Kasai
received assistance in December last year.
Women and children are the most vulnerable
category of the country’s population, leaving their
homes to escape the horrific inter-ethnic violence
and sexual abuse and, as a result, being exposed to
difficult living conditions. With humanitarian needs
having doubled since last year, more than 4.6 million
Congolese children are acutely malnourished, including
2.2 million severe acute cases. Moreover, epidemics are
spreading, making for the worst outbreak of cholera in
15 years.
Gender equality in all stabilization and
development processes is important. The role of women
in the political process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot be overestimated. The broad
participation of women in the upcoming elections and
further nation-building measures should therefore be

S/PV. 8207

encouraged. Women activists, organizations and civil
society networks must be guaranteed security.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) has a central role to play
in ensuring that protection is mainstreamed across
the humanitarian action. The caseloads of refugees,
returnees, internally displaced persons and host
communities are large and diverse. UNHCR therefore
requires adequate funding for its life-saving work.
We need to address the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by looking at it through the prism
of innovative strategy, as it influences the entire region
and its causes and repercussions are interconnected with
similar challenges in neighbouring states. Accordingly,
we encourage all international and regional partners
to actively engage in addressing the crisis through a
revamped regional approach. The security track is
closely interlinked with development through a range of
multifaceted, mutually reinforcing factors. Investments
in development are therefore critical as they validate
the often-demonstrated formula of strengthening the
security-development nexus, which is a key path to
achieving sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the wider region. We also commend
the tireless efforts of humanitarian organizations and
their personnel on the ground, while selflessly risking
their own lives for the sake of saving others.
We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to facilitate and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access across the
country. The role of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is absolutely strategic and
must reinforce operational and cost effectiveness,
thereby contributing to filling gaps, together with other
actors, especially with Government and international
development stakeholders. We are convinced that all
United Nations agencies should deliver as one United
Nations in providing assistance in a more coordinated,
transparent and efficient manner. We also emphasize
the crucial role of confidence-building measures, as
mentioned by the Permanent Representative of Kuwait.
Lastly, every human life is sacred, and people
are the main asset and resource of any nation. The
international community should make every effort in
addressing the suffering of the Congolese people in a
spirit of solidarity and sense of unity inspired by the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

18-0749713/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting and your country and
Minister’s engagement.
Throughout its turbulent history, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has seldom been far from the
Council’s agenda. Likewise, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is always present when our colleagues
in Geneva discuss humanitarian needs and appeals.
For that reason, it is easy to dismiss the latest crisis as
business as usual. However, as we have heard today,
we clearly cannot. The current crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is catastrophic in scale. Civilians,
particularly women and children, are bearing the brunt.
It is a man-made disaster. Surging levels of violence
fuelled by political instability and uncertainty are
leading to forced displacements, coupled with sexual
and gender-based violence, human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law — all of
which are driving the humanitarian crisis. The trends
and increasing rate in humanitarian needs are shocking
and unprecedented. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo is facing its worst humanitarian crisis in
modern times.
We therefore welcome the initiative of the
presidency and the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to bring the humanitarian situation in the country
to the attention of the Security Council. I also thank
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati and Abbé Nshole for their
sobering briefings before the Council today. Let me
also take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We look forward to hearing him
later. Sweden fully supports the work of Mr. Lowcock,
the United Nations and partners on the ground. As
we have heard, the challenge is great, and it must be
urgently addressed. Our response must be swift and,
as Abbé Nshole said, correspond to the scale of the
challenge. I will outline four areas that should be the
focus of our efforts.
First, responding to immediate humanitarian
needs will require a surge in funding. We welcome
the upcoming high-level donor conference and hope
that it will generate generous, reliable and flexible
funding, as well draw attention to the situation in the
country. Sweden will continue to provide significant
and increasing humanitarian support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to meet increasing needs. Our
contribution for 2018 is already $28 million. It is
important that we all play our part. In such a complex
14/23

19/03/2018

context, the need for an integrated approach that
addresses the nexus linking humanitarian, development,
human rights and peace and security is clear. In its
support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sweden has aligned its humanitarian and development
support. We encourage others to do the same.
Full, safe and immediate humanitarian access for
all those who are doing what they can with extremely
limited funding and facing serious challenges must be
ensured. The Government has a particular responsibility
in that regard. We welcome the agreement between
the United Nations and the Governor of Tanganyika
on an enabling environment for humanitarian action.
The security of humanitarian personnel is an essential
element of access. Cooperation with the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to guarantee safe passage to affected populations
is critical.
Last week, we commemorated the one-year
anniversary of the deaths of Zaida Catalán and Michael
Sharp, who were murdered. It was a sad reminder about
the lack of accountability involving their deaths and
how the security of United Nations personnel needs to
be enhanced.
Secondly, we must simultaneously step up
efforts to protect civilians who are increasingly at
risk. The roots of the violence are complex, but the
Government must shoulder its primary responsibility
vis-à-vis the population to stop the surging violence
and promote peaceful conflict resolution. In addition,
MONUSCO must be properly equipped to effectively
protect civilians.
Thirdly, in order to foster long-term stability and
peace, the holding of credible, transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections on 23 December, with the
ensuing democratic transfer of power in accordance
with the Constitution and the 31 December agreement
is imperative. That is something we must all support,
including local and regional actors, with whom close
cooperation continues to be essential. What happens
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has broader
consequences and risks jeopardizing the stability not
only of that country but of the Great Lakes region.
Measures to ensure women’s full and effective
participation in the elections are critical so that all
sectors of Congolese society can play their full part in
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the democratic process. As Ms. Bahati just said, women
and girls must be accorded significantly more influence
in every aspect of decision-making. That requires
political space. It is important that freedom of speech
and assembly be reasserted. In that regard, we welcome
the recommendation from the Government commission
of inquiry into the security forces’ actions in response
to peaceful protests to lift the ban on demonstrations.
Lastly, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as elsewhere, the root causes of the conflict must
be addressed if the country is to break free from a
vicious cycle of poverty, insecurity and violence. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers
a framework to curb the chronic vulnerability of
many Congolese. The Government together with the
assistance of the whole of the United Nations, as well
as other parts of the international community, must
now work together to make progress in alleviating
poverty, ending inequality and creating a society in
which all Congolese look to the future not with despair
but hope. That will require an investment from the
Government, including through increased mining
revenues channelled towards the good of the people. On
the part of the international community, there needs to
be a comprehensive, integrated and resourced plan for
sustained peace.
Mr. Green (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Haley for inviting me here, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and Ambassador Van
Oosterom for convening this briefing.
America sees the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an urgent priority
for several reasons. The first is fiscal. Many hundreds
of millions of dollars have been generously provided
to alleviate suffering and foster economic development,
but they are being robbed of their full value by crisis,
conflict and poor governance. Last year alone, America’s
foreign assistance to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo exceeded $546 million. Our humanitarian
contributions totalled more than $209 million. The
agency that I am privileged to lead — the United States
Agency for International Development — contributed
more than $130 million-worth of food assistance and
more than $130 million for health programmes. Our
taxpayers generously offered that assistance to help
ease the immediate suffering, as well as lay a foundation
for the eventual development journey to self reliance to
which every people aspires. Yet disaster — not natural
disaster like an earthquake or drought, but man-

S/PV. 8207

made disaster in the form of inhumane, authoritarian
governance — is destroying any chance that those
purposes will be met.
The second reason for giving high priority to this
crisis is that it is not solely a crisis of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is an international
crisis. Brutal policies, sweeping corruption, poor
governance and simmering conflict have displaced
millions — 4.5 million internally — and hundreds
of thousands have fled into neighbouring countries,
imposing new burdens and risking regional instability.
Thirdly, and most importantly, like all Council
members, the United States cares about this crisis
because of the breathtaking human suffering it has
inflicted. Some 43 per cent of children are chronically
malnourished, over 57 per cent of women have
experienced physical or sexual violence, and the
maternal mortality rate is among the world’s highest.
The messages we just heard from Mr. Lowcock,
Ms. Bandu Bahati and Abbé Nshole are heart-rending.
Now, some will argue that the challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are too complex and
too deeply ingrained for lasting solutions anytime soon.
But that does not excuse us from our responsibility to
act or from our responsibility to force steps in a new
direction. We may not have all the answers, but we do
know what is not working — the status quo.
On 18 January, the United Nations launched its
2018 humanitarian response plan, requesting nearly
$1.7 billion to assist the country’s most vulnerable. It
is the largest such appeal to date because the level of
suffering is the greatest seen in many years, and all of
us should be ready to respond, but none of us should
believe that merely expanding humanitarian assistance
is actually addressing the country’s greatest needs or
its principal causes of suffering. Boosting assistance
without also insisting upon concrete measurable
action from the Kabila Government is the opposite of
compassion. In some ways, it would make us all part
of the problem. We respectfully suggest the following.
First, we must demand that credible elections take
place this calendar year. Ambassador Haley has made
clear that United States support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is not inevitable, unlimited or
unconditional. It will be sharply re-evaluated if the
elections currently scheduled for December are delayed
yet again. Like many others, we have lost patience
with the excuses that have been offered. They are

18-0749715/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

increasingly disingenuous. To be clear, these elections
need not be technologically “state of the art”. Some of
the most important votes of our time have relied on
purple fingers and simple paper ballots. Countries with
challenges as great and circumstances as difficult as
those of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
held credible elections and lifted their futures. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must do the same,
or else we must rethink our support and our approach.
Secondly, we should demand that the Government
foster the conditions that make true democracy
possible. It must take immediate steps to make clear
that citizens will be free to express their will and
choose their own future. It could act this very day to
protect the fundamental rights of speech and assembly.
It could begin restoring basic services and rule of law
this week. Instead of protecting its people from harm,
which is the primary responsibility of any Government,
the Kabila Government has actually been implicated
in over 60 per cent of the nearly 7,000 human rights
violations reported in the last year.
Thirdly, an unshakable demand for the continuation
of assistance must be the safety of the courageous
humanitarian workers labouring under the most
trying of circumstances. Last year, there were 158
reported security incidents targeting humanitarian
workers — kidnapping, road ambushes, robberies,
and so forth. Two United Nations experts — one of
them American — were abducted and killed. There
is no excuse for this savagery or the failure of the
Government to prevent it.
Fourthly, the United States believes that other
countries must step forward and also do more to help.
To be clear, we are proud of the leadership role we
play as a humanitarian donor, but given all the needs
in so many parts of the world, we expect others to
come forward and do their part too. An international
crisis requires an international response. This demand
begins with the Government itself. It has done so little
to alleviate suffering, even as many of its leaders have
apparently been lining their own pockets. According
to the Congo Research Group, the Kabila family owns
either partially or wholly more than 80 of the country’s
largest businesses and more than 450 miles of diamond
concessions. At the same time, 27 per cent of primary
age children miss school because their parents cannot
afford the fees.
16/23

19/03/2018

We make these demands because they will offer the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo their
first real hope of a brighter future. We each represent
humane, compassionate people, but true compassion
requires more than providing money. It requires us
to use our collective influence to demand concrete
actions that will end cycles of misery. The crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is hopeless only if
we do nothing. These are steps we can take, beginning
with the demands we can make as donors. We can insist
upon timely elections, demand the freedoms that make
those elections credible, require protection for brave
humanitarian workers and ensure that everyone does
his or her part to ease citizen suffering, especially
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo itself.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation welcomes the initiative taken
by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, to organize a visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to learn about the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We also
thank Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator,
who also recently visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the country. Finally, the Ivorian delegation
thanks Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati and Abbé Donatien
Nshole for their poignant and informative contributions
on the experience of the populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It welcomes the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo at today’s meeting.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis being experienced by its sister
republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
because, in addition to the tragic briefings we have
just heard on the situation in the country, according to
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/174)
on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), there are at least 13 million people,
including 4.5 million internally displaced persons
and 670,000 refugees in neighbouring countries, in
particular Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, Angola and
Zambia, in need of urgent humanitarian assistance and
protection. The report also indicates that 7.7 million
people suffer from severe food insecurity and that more
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

than 2 million children are acutely malnourished, all of
whom require urgent assistance.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also
experiencing a major cholera crisis, with nearly 3,000
suspected cases reported. These figures call on us not
only to respond urgently to the continuing deterioration
of the security situation, but also to take into account
the necessary support of the international community
for the efforts of the Congolese authorities.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that it is important to combat
the insecurity prevailing in the country, caused by
attacks by armed groups against civilian populations
and by clashes among these groups. These attacks are
the main cause of forced displacement and mass exodus
of populations to neighbouring countries. Similarly,
the humanitarian crisis situation in the country has
been made more complex by inter-ethnic conflicts
and intercommunity violence in some of the country’s
provinces, fuelled by traditional rivalries between
communities and the difficulties of gaining access to or
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In view of the scale of the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we must act without
delay to provide for the basic needs of the populations
on the ground, which, according to the United Nations,
have grown twofold since the end of last year and are
estimated to be $1.7 billion for this year. In that regard,
Côte D’Ivoire calls on the international community to
support the efforts of the Congolese authorities and
local non-governmental organizations by increasing
assistance to displaced persons and refugees and by
strengthening actions to improve the security situation
in the country.
My country appreciates the efforts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s neighbouring States that are
hosting the flow of refugees, and encourages them,
in collaboration with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to create conditions
conducive to a voluntary and safe return to the countries
of origin.
My delegation welcomes the work undertaken by
international humanitarian organizations in a complex
and difficult environment, and invites them to maintain
their valuable support for refugees and internally
displaced persons, with special emphasis on women
and children, who are most vulnerable in conflict
situations. Côte D’Ivoire also encourages States
signatories to the Framework Agreement for Peace,

S/PV. 8207

Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Region to put an end to the recurring
cycles of conflict that fuel the humanitarian crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and jeopardize
the stability and development not only of that country
but of the entire Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, my delegation stresses the
importance of mobilizing the resources necessary to
remediate the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and to that end encourages
the international community and all bilateral and
multilateral partners to increase their support not
only to the Government of that country, but also to the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It invites the donor community
and funding partners to take active part in the very first
high-level international humanitarian conference for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which will be
organized by the United Nations, the European Union
and the United Arab Emirates on 13 April as part of a
rapid and adequate response to the humanitarian crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock; Abbé
Donatien Nshole, Secretary-General of the Conférence
Episcopale Nationale du Congo; and Ms. Jeanine
Bandu Bahati, Coordinator of the Encadrement des
Femmes Indigenes et des Ménages Vulnérables, whose
briefings illustrate and help us to better understand the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We also express our gratitude to the Netherlands
for having undertaken the initiative to hear these
briefings in order to focus the attention of the members
of the Council on the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are among Equatorial Guinea’s
priorities during its membership of the Security
Council. We are resolutely committed to supporting
and playing a constructive role in the peace process in
that sister country of Central Africa, the Great Lakes
region and southern Africa.
The full normalization of the political situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
complicated if the data on the humanitarian situation

18-0749717/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

remain so devastating. The number of internally
displaced persons now exceeds 4.5 million — the
highest number in all of Africa. More than 13 million
people depend on humanitarian aid to survive, while
more than 7 million live in severe food insecurity
and more than 2 million children are malnourished.
These figures are very alarming and should attract
the attention of the international community with a
view to providing urgent humanitarian aid. Failure to
do so will have even more catastrophic consequences.
The cases of human rights violations and abuses are
still alarmingly high. Most cases remain unpunished,
while their perpetrators campaign freely with a high
probability of repeating their offenses. The upsurge
in violence in Ituri province contributes greatly to
the deterioration of the situation. The authors of these
horrendous crimes must face justice.
Although there has been some progress, the security
situation in the country still presents some challenges.
The achievement of lasting peace, prosperity and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains an arduous task and has a long way to go. That
is an important aspect in remediating the deteriorated
humanitarian situation. It therefore needs the continued
support of the international community, especially in
financing the activities of humanitarian organizations.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea insists on the
guaranteed implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, formulated on 24 February
2013 in Addis Ababa, and that its signatories and
guarantors take the necessary steps to ensure its
effective implementation, to which the neutralization of
the armed groups that operate in the east of the country
is critical.
In accordance with the conclusions of the thirtieth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union of Addis Ababa
in January, and the communiqué issued following the
tripartite meeting, held in Kinshasa between Presidents
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Congo, João Lourenço of
Angola and Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 14 February, Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress that has been registered
in the political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with the commitment of President Kabila
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to complying with the electoral calendar
established on 5 November 2017 and the agreement
18/23

19/03/2018

of 31 December 2016. The progress made by the
Independent National Electoral Commission in
registering voters and acquiring voting machines are
steps in the right direction.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates once again its appeal
to both the Government and the main opposition
parties to resolve their differences through frank and
inclusive dialogue and to pool their efforts to achieve
peace, stability and development in the country. The
international community must provide constructive
assistance to those efforts and the path freely chosen
by the Congolese, while the sovereignty of the country
must always be respected. The countries of the
region — which we commend for their solidarity — must
also contribute to these efforts.
The important role played by the African Union,
alongside the United Nations and the European Union,
must be supported by the work of such regional
and subregional organizations as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Southern
African Development Community to achieve better
coordination.
In conclusion, I should like once again to underscore
the important work being done by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for peace, security and stability
in that sister country. We encourage it to spare no
effort at this time of great challenges leading up to the
elections scheduled for 23 December. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea unreservedly supports
the renewal of the Mission’s mandate.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
for their clear and detailed accounts. They have set out
why there has been such a rapid increase in humanitarian
needs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock reported,
the number of people in need of aid in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has doubled in the past year.
Today 13.1 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance — the same number as in Syria. The United
Nations has declared the worst level of humanitarian
crisis — level 3 — in certain provinces, putting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alongside only
Yemen, Syria and Iraq. Yet it is often absent from our
screens and daily briefings. We must not let it fall
further down our agenda.
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8207

We are extremely concerned about the impact of
the crisis on the most vulnerable, especially women and
girls, the disabled and children. The United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office reported that there was a
53 per cent increase in the number of victims of sexual
violence in 2017.

Secondly, it should reduce the bureaucracy for
humanitarian workers to obtain visas and for essential
relief items to be cleared at customs. Finally, it needs to
ensure that security across the country is maintained so
that humanitarian organizations have sufficient access
to those most in need.

I thank the representative of the Encadrement des
Femmes Indigènes et des Ménages Vulnérables for her
powerful testimony. Hope is a woman from Masisi, in
the east of the country, where 90 per cent of women
have been raped. Four men in military uniforms raped
her as she collected firewood for her family. The attack
left her pregnant and HIV-positive. She has since fled
to a temporary camp in Goma and can no longer feed
her eight children. They rely on humanitarian aid,
like 8 million other Congolese children. Two million
children currently face starvation.

The upcoming donor conference on 13 April is
an opportunity for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to demonstrate the progress
they have made on commitments to facilitate the
improvement of the humanitarian situation. It is also an
opportunity for the international community to pledge
our support to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to show them that the world remembers
Africa’s forgotten crisis.

Hope is one of 4.5 million internally displaced
people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
highest number in Africa. More than 2 million people
have been displaced in the past year alone. Just in
the past year, the number of people displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo matched the total
number of internally displaced persons in South Sudan.
There are an additional 740,000 refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in neighbouring
countries as a result of ongoing hostilities.
International support is vital to address the crisis,
and the United Kingdom will continue to play a key
role. We have committed to spending $285 million on
humanitarian aid between 2017 and 2020. That support
will provide more than 3 million people with life-saving
assistance, including food, clean drinking water and
essential health care. To improve the challenging and
limited access for humanitarian actors, the support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is crucial. While we welcome the commitments made
to facilitate the work of humanitarian organizations
and reduce tariffs for humanitarian imports, including
medicines and food, this Council and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must see concrete
and sustained action.
In particular, we urge the Government to take
the following three steps. First, it should improve the
administrative and financial registration procedures
required
for
international
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to operate lawfully in the
country, through consultations with NGOs themselves.

Let me be clear — humanitarian aid will provide
only temporary relief in this crisis. The key root cause
is political instability, which drives the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situations. Too often peaceful
protesters are met with violence for speaking out about
their political rights, in violation of their human rights.
A number of people have been killed in church-led
protests this year, which we must all condemn. Free, fair
and transparent elections must be held on 23 December.
With an estimated 46 million voters spread across the
world’s eleventh largest country, that is no easy task.
For the elections to be successful, the right conditions
need to be created now.
The international community must remain
focused and united in our support for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must remain
united in our expectations of its Government and in
our insistence on accountability and progress. We in
the Security Council need to work with the region and
subregion to do so.
Finally, it is with great sadness that we remember
the horrific, tragic murders of United Nations experts
Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp, killed just over one
year ago in the Kasaï region. The Council must continue
to push for accountability for their deaths. We call on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the
investigation is thorough and transparent and that all
those responsible are held to account. We should have a
full update on the progress on that investigation soon.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,

18-0749719/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for his briefing and commend him on his visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo last week.
We also thank the Coordinator of the Encadrement
des Femmes Indigènes et des Ménages Vulnérables,
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati, and the Secretary-General
of the Conférence Episcopale Nationale du Congo,
Abbé Donatien Nshole, for their briefings.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
paints a bleak picture of the security and humanitarian
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and provides a comprehensive overview of ceaseless
violence, including disputes over natural resources,
clashes among armed groups and between communities,
and inter-ethnic violence. Bolivia firmly condemns all
violence, including that during the protests in December
and January. But above all, we are concerned about the
threat of armed groups in various parts of the country,
as they are primarily responsible for the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation.
We also condemn all acts to exacerbate tensions
and incite violence and all acts of sexual exploitation
and sexual violence. We believe that all such allegations
must be investigated, including those reported to involve
possible participation of the national police or the
armed forces. In that regard, we laud the culmination,
on 13 December, of the trial concerning the rape of 38
girls, in which 12 of the accused were sentenced to life
in prison. It is an important step in the fight against
impunity, which should continue. The perpetrators of
that type of crime must be investigated, brought to
justice and sentenced by the relevant courts.
Regrettably, the consequences of violent acts
committed chiefly by armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have reached catastrophic
levels. Nearly 4.5 million people have been internally
displaced, including about 900,000 women and more
than 2 million boys and girls last year. Similarly, in
recent years, more than 680,000 Congolese have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries, including 100,000 in
2017. Approximately 8 million people face severe food
insecurity, which is an increase of 30 per cent relative
to the same period the previous year. It is estimated
that 13 million people are in need of protection and
humanitarian assistance this year — an increase of
50 per cent relative to last year. Special attention must
be paid to this situation, particularly in the Kasaï region,
Tanganyika and South Kivu, which has been classified
as a level 3 emergency, the highest level, according to
the Emergency Relief Coordinator.
20/23

19/03/2018

As a result of this deplorable humanitarian crisis,
the budget for the humanitarian response plan has
doubled to more than $1.6 billion for this year, only
4.3 per cent of which has been raised so far. In that
regard, we commend the joint work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates
and the European Union Commission in organizing
a high-level humanitarian conference, to be held on
13 April, in order to mobilize funds and respond to
the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We urge the international community to
continue cooperating in order to ensure that the plan
can rely on sustainable financing.
We call on all the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure unrestricted
access for humanitarian assistance. We commend
the work of the military and civilian personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the personnel of the humanitarian agencies, who,
despite a climate of insecurity and violence, risk their
lives on a daily basis in order to relieve the suffering
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to call on the parties to work to ease
tensions and comply with the agreement of 31 December
2016 by implementing its confidence-building measures
in order to hold credible and inclusive elections in an
effective and timely manner, bearing in mind that the
equal participation of women is fundamental to all
phases of the process.
Lastly, we believe it is important to think about
the current needs of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. MONUSCO and its regional
and subregional partners must work together and in
coordination in order to address the root causes of the
conflict, particularly the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. The principles of preventive diplomacy and
good offices should not be forgotten in the efforts to
achieve a negotiated political solution, since it is the
Congolese people and their institutions who should
take the decisions on the future of their country. We
support their decisions with regard to their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, with a view
to achieving peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I shall now speak in my capacity as
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

More than 6,000 people live in Katanika camp,
in eastern Congo. My Foreign Trade Minister Sigrid
Kaag visited the camp with Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock last week. There she met a woman whom I
will call Françoise. Françoise had lost her husband and
child in a militia raid. Ms. Kaag was deeply touched
by her ordeal. It is women like Françoise who continue
to bear the brunt of this crisis. It is for women like
Françoise that we come together here. Today, I will
highlight three points. The first is the need to step up
our immediate response; the second, to address the root
causes of the crisis; and third, to intensify engagement
with the region.
My first point concerns the importance of an
immediate response. More than 13 million Congolese
are in need. That number has doubled over the past two
years. More than 2 million children are severely and
acutely malnourished. They cannot be forgotten. They
need our help. We are also concerned about increasing
attacks on humanitarian workers. The security situation
directly affects humanitarian access. The Congolese
authorities and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) must protect humanitarian
actors against kidnappings and attacks on their assets.
This month, we have the chance to give MONUSCO
the mandate and the means it needs to be able to
prevent escalation. The Security Council must increase
its efforts, and we should discuss this situation more
frequently. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
strongly supports organizing a Security Council visit
this year. We must act now to prevent further escalation.
The situation in Ituri in particular has our full attention.
My second point is that we must address the root
causes of this man-made crisis. The escalation that has
occurred since 2016 is directly linked to the political
crisis. The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must regain hope and trust in their country. A
renewed commitment to the New Year’s agreement by
all parties is therefore urgently needed. Despite some
progress, the conditions conducive to credible elections
are not there yet. In the current circumstances,
hundreds of thousands of people will not be able to fully
participate in the elections simply because they are too
scared, because they are on the run from widespread
and unpunished human rights violations, or because
they are women — women like Françoise. Without
women’s meaningful participation in the elections,
nationally, provincially and locally, there will be no

S/PV. 8207

peace. We call on the Congolese authorities to ensure
women’s participation in the electoral law. All political
actors must increase their efforts to engage women in
the elections.
Thirdly, I want to discuss the role of the region.
The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
long ceased to be merely a Congolese issue, if it ever
was. It is the largest displacement crisis in Africa, and
it has direct consequences for the region. The peaceful
involvement of regional stakeholders is essential to a
sustainable solution. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
commends the efforts of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
individual Member States to find a peaceful solution.
We call on them to increase their efforts, as we call
on the Council to increase its efforts. We welcome
the presence today of so many representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours and
other countries in the region.
In conclusion, as our briefers have highlighted,
only the concerted efforts of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and their
neighbours and regional and international partners can
make a definitive difference for good. The relevant
humanitarian partners require $1.7 billion this year
alone, as Mr. Lowcock explained earlier. On 13 April,
therefore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together
with the United Nations, the European Commission
and the United Arab Emirates, will organize the first
ever humanitarian donor conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It will take place in Geneva.
Only a concerted effort will enable the mobilization
of sufficient humanitarian relief. We hope that all
States Members of the United Nations will support that
humanitarian conference. We must work together, all
of us, for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and for people like Françoise.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to once again remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18-0749721/23

S/PV.8207

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to convey the apologies of Mr. Bernard Biando
Sango, Minister of Solidarity and Humanitarian Action
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He will be
arriving in New York a little late today and will not
be able to attend today’s meeting despite his efforts.
He has asked me to assure Council members of his
solidarity and wish us success in our work.
Before I deliver my statement, my delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to organize this meeting on the humanitarian situation
in my country. We are also grateful to Ms. Sigrid
Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, who visited
the Democratic Republic of the Congo together in order
to see for themselves the humanitarian situation on
the ground.
In the absence of Mr. Biando Sango, who would
have briefed Council members in detail on the
situation, I will keep my statement short. The fact is
that my country has been dealing with a humanitarian
crisis affecting thousands of people for more than two
decades. This situation is the result of recurring armed
conflicts, mainly in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries, natural disasters
and other calamities, as well as various epidemics.
With regard to armed conflicts, it is the continuing
insecurity resulting from the activity of domestic
and foreign armed groups in the eastern part of the
country that is at the root of the massive and ongoing
displacement of formerly settled populations, who
lived mainly as farmers and livestock herders. There
is a similar situation in the greater Kasai area, where
there have been clashes with the traditional chief
Kamuina Nsapu’s militia; in Tanganyika province,
with the conflict between Bantu and Pygmies; and
currently in Ituri, with the armed groups operating in
that part of the country. At the same time, the conflicts
in neighbouring countries such as the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and Burundi have caused
an influx of refugees from those countries, not to
mention those who preceded them at an earlier period
from other neighbours such as Rwanda and Uganda,
following armed conflicts and political disagreements
among the Governments in power in those countries,
as was the case with the Allied Democratic Forces, the
22/23

19/03/2018

Lord’s Resistance Army and the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda.
This situation of armed conflict has been
compounded by natural disasters — torrential rains,
floods and landslides — and the resurgence of some
previously eradicated epidemic diseases, not to mention
food insecurity, which we should point out is mainly
due to a poor farming season resulting in lower crop
yields and a shortfall in maize production.
Despite the Government’s efforts to restore peace
in areas affected by armed conflict, the humanitarian
consequences are still enormous. We are working to
come up with solutions. It goes without saying that any
contribution on the part of the international community
to help us address the situation is very welcome. In that
regard, I should point out that my country continues to
benefit from international solidarity efforts. A number
of donors, United Nations agencies and international
and national humanitarian organizations continue to
support us in helping our vulnerable members of society.
As I said, my Government welcomed Ms. Kaag
and Mr. Lowcock’s visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and appreciated their discussions with
Government authorities. During their delegation’s
high-level meeting with the Government, led by the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Transport and
Communications, standing in for the Prime Minister,
it was agreed that the classification of my country’s
situation as a humanitarian emergency, which the
Government considers excessive, would be revisited.
While we recognize that we are dealing with emergency
situations, they in no way warrant a designation as
exaggerated as the international community claims.
We hope that the Council will take my Government’s
position on the issue into consideration.
With that in mind, and with a view to harmonizing
the views on this issue, before the conference to be
held in Geneva we have therefore decided to convene
a meeting of our national framework for consultation
on humanitarian action, the State body responsible for
coordinating our humanitarian response, which is also
a forum for dialogue where humanitarian actors can
exchange information and take independent decisions
with a view to reaching a common understanding on
the conduct of humanitarian affairs in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
While the intervention of the Government and the
international community is providing an effective and
18-07497

19/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

lasting solution to the humanitarian crisis in the parts of
my country affected by natural disasters, calamities and
epidemics, we do not believe that the same is true in the
areas where armed groups are operating. The Council
will agree with us that if we cannot eradicate all the
negative forces operating there, it will be difficult if not
impossible to put an end to the situation. That is why my
Government, which is committed to peace throughout
our territory, is relentlessly and resolutely pursuing
its efforts to completely neutralize and eradicate
all of these forces. Although our efforts are already
supported by the United Nations, through the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which already has
a robust mandate for that from the Council, we believe
that beyond the solutions my Government has proposed
and the contributions expected from the international

S/PV. 8207

community, it would also be helpful to consider, as one
of the possible solutions to the problems underlying
the worrying humanitarian situation, particularly with
regard to the foreign armed groups, a political dialogue
between those groups and their countries of origin,
especially in view of the results achieved so far.
I should not conclude without once again emphasizing
the significant and invaluable contributions made by
the financial sponsors and donors in responding to
our humanitarian needs in order to help the vulnerable
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My Government is truly grateful for their support. I
would also like to thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council for their consideration of the
situation in my country.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

18-0749723/23
