S/2015/572

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 28 July 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the twenty-second monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The present report covers the period from 23 June to 22 July 2015.
With respect to the destruction of the 12 chemical weapons production
facilities, all 5 underground structures have now been verified by the OPCW as
having been destroyed. One hangar has also been destroyed, using the explosives
that arrived last month.
There remain outstanding issues relating to the initial declaration of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team continues its work in that
regard and is currently in the Syrian Arab Republic undertaking its tenth visit.
Reporting on the analysis of samples taken during the Team’s previous two visits is
currently in process.
The continuing allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons have meant
that the work of the fact-finding mission, which is looking into those allegations, is
not yet complete. The fact-finding mission team that visited Damascus will soon
return to the Syrian Arab Republic in order to investigate additional incidents that
were brought to the attention of the Director-General by the Government.
Another fact-finding mission team, which investigated allegations of the use of
toxic chemicals as weapons in Idlib province, continues to examine all the
information gathered during the course of its work thus far. I take note of the
intention of both teams to submit their respective reports to the Director -General. I
further note that the results of the work of the two teams will be submitted to the
Security Council, as part of monthly reporting and pursuant to OPCW Executive
Council decision EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February 2015.
Although a great deal of progress on these issues has been and continues to be
made, the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic requires
the deepest reflection on how best to respond. I have repeatedly stated that those
responsible must be held accountable and that the use of chemical weapons, by any
party to the conflict and under any circumstances, cannot be tolerated.
I would be grateful if you could urgently bring the present letter and its annex
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon
15-12821 (E)

030815

*1512821*

S/2015/572

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions contained in decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and in Secu rity
Council resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to
the Security Council. My report covers the period from 23 June to 22 July 2015 and
also covers the reporting requirements of Executive Council decision EC -M34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/5

15-12821

S/2015/572

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.

In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1,
dated 27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the
Secretariat”) is to report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the
implementation of that decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United
Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat
is also to be submitted to the Security Council through the Secretary -General.

2.

The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and
Syrian Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated
15 November 2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that
the Secretariat should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its
reporting required by subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC -M33/DEC.1”.

3.

The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, also adopted a decision entitled
“Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1,
dated 4 February 2015).

4.

This, the twenty-second monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance
with the aforementioned Council decisions, and includes information relevant
to the period from 23 June to 22 July 2015.

Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.

15-12821

Progress within the reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:
(a)

The destruction activities at the 12 chemical weapons production
facilities (CWPFs) in the Syrian Arab Republic continued during the
reporting period. The Secretariat has now verified the destruction of all
five underground structures. Additionally, one of the seven aircraft
hangars has been destroyed using explosives, with some residual
destruction activities remaining. Progress in destroying the remaining six
hangars can be expected if the security situation remains stable.

(b)

On 15 July 2015, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
twentieth monthly report (EC-80/P/NAT.1, dated 15 July 2015) regarding
activities on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical
weapons and CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19 of EC -M-34/DEC.1.

(c)

The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation in accordance with the implementation of subparagraph 1(e)
of EC-M-33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013).

3/5

S/2015/572

Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.

As reported previously, all declared chemicals have been removed from the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, all declared stocks of the Category 1
chemicals have been destroyed, and all effluents that were produced by the
neutralisation process of sulphur mustard and DF on board the United States
vessel MV Cape Ray have been destroyed at the Ekokem facility in Finland and
at the GEKA facility in Germany. A total of 93.7% of the Category 2 chemicals
has now been destroyed, representing a combined total of 98.8% of all
chemical weapons declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, including the
isopropanol previously destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. With regard to
the destruction of the remaining Category 2 chemical, hydrogen fluoride (HF),
a total of 48.7% of the declared quantity has already been destroyed. In this
regard, Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC in the United States of America has
made progress in ensuring the safe temporary storage, and further processing,
of the 49 remaining corroded HF cylinders. The destruction activities are
expected to be completed before the end of 2015, and the Secretariat will
continue to brief States Parties in The Hague on these activities.

Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic

4/5

7.

In the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has continued
and nine OPCW staff members were deployed as part of that Mission as at the
cut-off date of this report. Ambassador José Artur Denot Medeiros of Brazil, in
his capacity as Special Adviser to the Director-General on Syria, travelled to
Damascus for meetings with senior Syrian officials and UNOPS staff from
13 to 15 July 2015.

8.

The Director-General has continued to communicate with senior
representatives of the States Parties hosting a destruction facility or providing
assistance with the destruction of Syrian chemical weap ons, and with senior
officials of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by the
Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated
7 March 2014), the Secretariat, on behalf of the Director -General, has
continued to brief States Parties in The Hague on its activities.

9.

The Secretariat and the Syrian authorities have continued to cooperate on
outstanding issues regarding the Syrian initial declaration, as encouraged by the
Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of EC-76/6, dated 11 July
2014). The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), having completed its ninth
visit to the Syrian Arab Republic as previously reported, issued a note entitled
“Fifth Status Report of the Activities of the Declaration Assessment Team,”
(EC-79/P/S/1, dated 1 July 2015), which was noted by the Council at its
Seventy-Ninth Session. The Secretariat also provided a follow-up briefing to
States Parties in this regard. The analysis by the OPCW designated laboratories
regarding the samples taken at three sites visited during the ninth mission, and
the samples taken at three locations during the DAT’s eighth mission, is in
progress as previously reported. Once the results are received by the
Secretariat, they will be shared and discussed with the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-12821

S/2015/572

10.

On its tenth visit, which is planned for 19 to 31 July 2015, the DAT will
continue with its technical consultations on the analytical results of the
samples taken during the DAT’s visits in December 2014 and in January/
February 2015, and with its interviews with key principals from the Syrian
chemical weapons programme. The DAT will also continue with its site visits,
which may include taking additional samples.

11.

Regarding the implementation of additional special monitoring measures in
accordance with Notes EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014) and EC-M40/DG.2/Add.1 (dated 20 July 2014), the special monitoring system equipment
has now been installed at the four underground structures for which
monitoring was originally planned and is functioning as expected.

Supplementary resources
12.

The total contributions of EUR 50.3 million in the Syria Trust Fund for the
Destruction of Chemical Weapons and the contributors thereto remain
unchanged from the previous report.

Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
13.

The last monthly report provided information regarding two separate missions
conducted by the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM). A team from the FFM visited
Damascus, where it conducted interviews with alleged victims and collected
other information relevant to its enquiry. Meanwhile, the Syrian Arab Republic
reported other incidents and asked the FFM to look into these as well.
Accordingly, a follow-up mission will be undertaken to the Syrian Arab
Republic in early August.

14.

Information collected by the two teams, including the one that investigated the
alleged incidents of use of toxic chemicals in the Idlib province, continues to
be examined. As soon as this work is concluded and the findings of the two
teams are compiled, their reports will be submitted to the Director -General. He
will subsequently share the results with States Parties and also include these in
the monthly reports that are submitted to the United Nations Secu rity Council,
as required under EC-M-48/DEC.1.

15.

The FFM assignments continue to be guided by the principle that all credible
allegations be examined, while paying due regard to considerations of safety
and security.

Conclusion
16.

15-12821

The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the six remaining
aircraft hangars. The DAT and the FFM will also continue their work in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

5/5
