United Nations

S/PV.6481

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6481st meeting
Tuesday, 15 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-23402 (E)

*1123402*

S/PV.6481

area; enhancing the OSCE’s role in the area of energy
security; and finally, promoting tolerance education
throughout the OSCE area.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure I invite Mr. Audronius
Ažubalis, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ažubalis.
Mr. Ažubalis: It is a great pleasure for me to
address the Security Council as Chairperson—inOffice of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). With 56 participating
States spanning the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
regions, the OSCE is the world’s largest regional
organization under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. We highly value the close cooperation that we
enjoy with the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The OSCE Summit, held in Astana last year, set
the strategic direction of the organization. In Astana,
OSCE Heads of State and Government recommitted
themselves to the vision of a free, democratic, common
and indivisible Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security
community, rooted in agreed principles, shared
commitments and common goals. This message was
echoed by the United Nations Secretary-General who
spoke eloquently at the Summit of the core principles
and common values on which both organizations are
based, and called for closer cooperation in order to
expand peace, advance human rights, generate
sustainable development and build a safer world.
Lithuania’s chairmanship of the OSCE will try to work
towards the realization of these goals.
Allow me now to present our chairmanship’s
priorities. These include tangible progress in
addressing
protracted
conflicts;
improved
implementation of media freedom commitments;
strengthened OSCE response to transnational threats,
including those emanating from outside the OSCE

2

Let me address some of this year’s central issues.
With respect to protracted conflicts, as Chairperson-inOffice I place high priority on seeking progress in the
resolution of these conflicts, fully respecting the norms
and principles of international law enshrined in the
United Nations Charter, as well as the Helsinki Final
Act. We will continue to pursue active OSCE
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict on the basis of full respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Moldova. During my recent visit to
Chisinau and Tiraspol, I met with the political
leadership on both sides of the Dniestr River to discuss
the settlement process. I remain cautiously optimistic —
especially after recent consultations with my
counterparts in Moscow, Kyiv, Berlin and Brussels —
that this year we will be able to resume official
negotiations in the five plus two format.
The OSCE role in pursuing a settlement of the
Nagorny
Karabakh
conflict
through
stronger
engagement by the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group will
be maintained. We invite the conflict parties and other
OSCE participating States to consider options for
confidence-building measures and to strengthen OSCE
monitoring activities, particularly in the light of
growing tensions on the ground.
The chairmanship remains committed to the
OSCE’s active engagement in the framework of the
Geneva international discussions to reduce tensions
and build trust among affected communities. Geneva is
a unique forum in the sense that three major
international actors — the European Union, the OSCE
and the United Nations — plus the United States and
Russia, are working closely together for security and
stability in the region. The full-fledged participation of
a representative of the United Nations is extremely
important to the success of this process. Therefore,
there is a vital need to find here in New York a
long-term arrangement ensuring continuous United
Nations representation at the Geneva talks. We will
urge all participants to take full advantage of the
Geneva framework to develop measures to improve
security and alleviate humanitarian needs. We will
work with the participating States to explore
possibilities for extending the OSCE’s activities on the

11-23402

S/PV.6481

ground, including
presence.

through

a

meaningful

OSCE

As Chairperson, I place media freedom in general
and the safety of journalists in particular very high on
the Chair’s list of priorities for 2011. As a former
journalist, I understand the importance of being able to
work in an environment free of intimidation. Working
with the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the
Media, in Vilnius in June we will organize a
conference on the safety of journalists. I look forward
to active United Nations participation in that event.
In my opinion, it was disappointing that OSCE
standards, including media and election standards,
were not met during December’s presidential elections
in Belarus. The chairmanship also regrets the decision
of the Government of Belarus to terminate the work of
the OSCE Office in Minsk. The Office has provided
valuable assistance to Belarus, its people and
Government
in
strengthening
institutions,
consolidating the rule of law and fostering relations
between the Government and civil society, in
accordance with OSCE principles and commitments. In
our view, this work is not complete. We remain
engaged in consultations with the Belarusian
authorities to explore ways in which the OSCE can
continue to support the Government and people of
Belarus.
During the Lithuanian chairmanship, programmes
to develop tolerance education and to combat hate
crimes and all forms of discrimination will be
encouraged and further promoted.
Crises and conflicts in the OSCE region over the
past several years have demonstrated the urgent need to
strengthen our organization’s capabilities to act
effectively across the entire conflict cycle. The OSCE
does this in a variety of ways, including through its
field presences, the work of its Vienna-based
secretariat, and its three specialized institutions. We
must provide early warning when there are signs of
smoke. Despite progress in recent years, some areas of
the OSCE — such as parts of the Caucasus, South-East
Europe and Central Asia — remain vulnerable.
Early warning must be followed by early action.
That is why we have been quick to respond to recent
events in Albania. In close coordination with the
European Union and other concerned parties, we have
engaged in a continuous dialogue with Government
and opposition leaders. We will continue, via the OSCE

11-23402

field presence and in cooperation with our international
partners, to monitor the situation and provide
assistance where we can. I trust that our efforts will
help to reduce tensions there.
Last year, the OSCE community was faced with a
crisis in the Fergana Valley. The situation has calmed
down to some extent, but tensions remain. The OSCE
Community Security Initiative, developed jointly with
Kyrgyzstan, is the key international response to the
violence in that fragile State. As we speak, OSCE
personnel are deploying to southern Kyrgyzstan. The
Initiative will help the Kyrgyzstan authorities to
address the specific security situation that evolved in
the country after the June events. In implementing the
Community Security Initiative, we stand ready to
cooperate with the United Nations to achieve the
maximum synergy from our efforts.
Let me now turn to OSCE cooperation with the
United Nations. A long-standing example of successful
OSCE-United Nations cooperation in the field is
Kosovo. There, the OSCE Mission (OMIK) continues
to implement its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) as an integral pillar of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. It is the Lithuanian chairmanship’s intention
to ensure that OMIK continues to play its agreed role,
working to ensure the security and well-being of all
communities in Kosovo. The chairmanship shares
United Nations concerns about reports of human organ
trafficking in Kosovo during the 1990s, and supports
the call for an independent investigation and
clarification of the facts.
Following the adoption by the General Assembly
in September of the Serbian- and European Unionsponsored resolution 64/298 on Kosovo, the BelgradePristina dialogue offers a concrete opportunity to move
forward on issues of mutual concern and to improve
the lives of ordinary people. The OSCE stands ready to
contribute to this process in areas where it has the
relevant expertise. In Astana, the OSCE’s participating
States agreed that in facing emerging threats, such as
terrorism, organized crime and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, greater unity of purpose
and action must be achieved.
Recognizing the leading role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, the Lithuanian
chairmanship is firmly committed to fruitful
cooperation with United Nations bodies in promoting

3

S/PV.6481

the universal legal framework against terrorism. At the
Astana Summit, the Secretary-General called upon the
OSCE to join the fight against proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Working with the participating
States, the chairmanship will facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also intend to step up our response to
organized crime. As a regional arrangement of the
United Nations, we can do more to help States
implement the Palermo Convention and its three
Protocols. We will also look at how to strengthen the
capacity of participating States to respond to emerging
challenges, such as cybersecurity. To this end, we
intend to hold an OSCE conference on this topic during
our chairmanship. Active United Nations participation
in that event would be most valuable and highly
appreciated.
Based on its own experience in the Baltic region,
Lithuania believes strongly in the value of regional and
subregional cooperation. We see cooperation at that
level as a tool to promote genuine security and
stability, to resolve conflicts and to achieve sustainable
economic development. In our interconnected world,
we must place special focus on cooperation between
the OSCE and adjacent regions.
In that spirit, the Lithuanian chairmanship will
intensify its work in support of United Nations-led
international efforts to stabilize Afghanistan, which is
an OSCE partner for cooperation. Our primary goal
will be to counter the transnational threats stemming
from its territory. We will work through concrete
projects, in close cooperation and coordination with the
Afghan authorities, our own Central Asian
participating States, the United Nations and other
international actors and organizations active in the
region.
The OSCE experience could also be an example
to other regions of the world, including among our
Asian and Mediterranean partners for cooperation. We
stand ready to share our experience and expertise
where they are needed, for example in the Middle East
and the Korean peninsula. Twenty years ago, the OSCE
played a key role in managing the challenges of
transition in Eastern Europe. In these times of dramatic
change in Tunisia and Egypt, perhaps the OSCE
toolbox, principles and institutions could provide
inspiration to others.

4

We will continue to share the wealth of OSCE
experience in cross-dimensional security with other
regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum and the Organization of American States.
I thank members of the Security Council for their
attention.
We look forward to ongoing practical cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations. The more
effective that the OSCE can be in promoting security
and cooperation in Europe, the more time the Council
will have to devote to other challenges in the other
areas of the world.
The President: I thank His Excellency Minister
Ažubalis for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Ažubalis to
the Security Council and to thank him very much for
his comprehensive briefing today.
As a member of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United States is
committed to working with other participating States
and the OSCE secretariat to advance the organization’s
work in its three areas of competence, namely, the
political-military, economic-environmental and human
dimensions. The OSCE’s comprehensive approach to
security and practical focus across all three dimensions
make it a valuable partner to the United Nations in
addressing global security challenges, both within and
outside the OSCE region. I would like to highlight four
areas of beneficial OSCE cooperation with the United
Nations.
First, in January’s debate (see S/PV.6472) on
post-conflict institution-building and in last week’s
debate (see S/PV.6479) on security and development,
the Council noted that the sustainability of a peace
process often hinges on strengthening key national
institutions in the immediate aftermath of conflict. This
is particularly vital in the areas of the rule of law and
security sectors. The OSCE has been an indispensable
partner of the United Nations in this regard.

11-23402

S/PV.6481

In the Balkans, as one of the pillars of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the
OSCE has played an important role in helping to build
and advise Kosovo’s institutions from the ground up.
We commend the OSCE’s work with the Government
of Kosovo to increase governmental transparency and
good governance, in particularly at the local level.
I would also like to note the contributions of the
OSCE to the international community’s efforts to help
stabilize Afghanistan, in particular in helping the
Afghan people to strengthen border security, fight drug
trafficking and promote development.
Women must have an equitable stake in postconflict peacebuilding and decision-making in their
communities. The United States supports further OSCE
efforts to increase gender mainstreaming and the issue
of gender-based violence in the security sector, as well
as to encourage more participating States to implement
national action plans.
As the United Nations looks for ways to make its
civilian response more effective in post-conflict
situations, we should consider whether there are ways
to better leverage the existing capacity-building
expertise of organizations such as the OSCE.
Secondly, the United States commends the
conflict prevention and conflict resolution role played
by the Chairperson-in-Office and the organization as a
whole. We appreciate the OSCE’s co-chairmanship
with the United Nations and the European Union of the
Geneva discussions that bring together Georgia, Russia
and participants from the de facto authorities in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The OSCE’s facilitation
of the Joint Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism for South Ossetia is important for
addressing ongoing security and humanitarian concerns
on the ground. We urge participants to meet regularly
to address practical issues and enhance confidencebuilding measures. The United States supports the reestablishment of an OSCE presence throughout
Georgia and the continued travel to Georgia by its
Special Representative on Protracted Conflicts. We
also note the OSCE’s quick response in the wake of
last year’s violence in Kyrgyzstan and the recent
efforts by the OSCE’s community security initiative to
support the Kyrgyzstan police in reducing tensions and
providing security for all communities in Kyrgyzstan.
Such efforts have helped prevent further violence and
contribute to long-term stability.

11-23402

Thirdly, we cannot separate the human dimension
from peace and security. True security in the OSCE
area can only be achieved with participating States’ full
implementation of OSCE commitments to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Towards that
goal, we particularly welcome the emphasis placed by
the Chairperson-in-Office on advancing freedom of the
media and of expression, especially where new media
and digital technologies are concerned.
Finally, we welcome the emphasis by the
Chairperson-in-Office on strengthening efforts to
counter transnational threats, including by promoting
the implementation of Security Council resolutions to
counter terrorism and proliferation. Strengthening our
common security involves not only countering new
unconventional transnational threats such as terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
but also organized crime and illicit trafficking.
The United States welcomes and encourages
OSCE efforts to strengthen its regional, subregional
and international cooperation. In that regard, we look
forward to further cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): May I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Lithuania, Mr. Ažubalis, to the Council
today. I thank him very much for his briefing.
The United Kingdom welcomes Mr. Ažubalis’s
assumption of his role as Chairperson-in-Office for
2011. We fully support the work programme that he has
set out for us this morning. In particular, we welcome
his human rights and good governance priorities,
alongside hard security issues. Implementing his
programme of work will not be an easy task. The
members of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) must work collectively
and with vigour to meet the many challenges we will
face over the coming years. The Commemorative
Declaration issued at the OSCE Summit in Astana last
December (see A/65/688) pointedly reaffirmed the
OSCE’s principles and commitments. Delivery will
require
close
cooperation
with
international
organizations, including of course the United Nations.
Progress on protracted conflicts has been elusive.
It is therefore right that Mr. Ažubalis has prioritized
this. We were disappointed at the failure at the Astana
Summit to agree language on protracted conflicts,
notably on Georgia. That prevented the OSCE from

5

S/PV.6481

agreeing an even more ambitious and comprehensive
framework for action. The United Kingdom welcomes
the role that Mr. Ažubalis has already played in
attempting to advance dialogue on the Transdniestrian
conflict, as well as his commitment to pursuing a
settlement in Nagorny Karabakh.
In Georgia, the OSCE has worked with the
United Nations and the European Union as a co-chair
of the Geneva talks. We remain convinced of the need
for an OSCE presence in Georgia, including in the
region of South Ossetia. We welcome the continued
efforts to explore all options to that end.

of Lithuania to the Council today. May I also thank
him for his comprehensive briefing setting out the
priorities of Lithuania as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2011.
Germany shares the Chairman’s priorities and
looks forward to working with Lithuania on the key
issues facing the OSCE. Let me briefly comment on
three aspects.

The response to the Kyrgyzstan crisis last April
was a demonstration of the effective cooperation
between the OSCE, the European Union and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. Those three bodies worked towards
resolving the situation and restoring peace and
stability.

First, we consider progress in the resolution of
protracted conflicts in Eastern Europe and Asia to be of
particular relevance. The OSCE plays an important role
as a facilitator in this regard. However, no success can
be achieved without the political will of the relevant
players on the ground. Unresolved issues in Moldova,
Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan have to be addressed
by partners in a consensual and peaceful manner and
on the basis of respect for human rights, including
minority rights.

Developing and strengthening key institutions
and civil society is key to sustainable conflict
resolution. The OSCE’s field operations conduct
crucial activities in those areas. We therefore regret
that the office in Minsk will close. Its mandate remains
relevant and important. Much more needs to be done to
ensure the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Belarus. We reiterate our call to the
Belarusian Government to reconsider its position.

Germany commends the OSCE’s active
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict. The Chairman-in-Office
has already conducted helpful consultations with the
parties involved. The recent formation of a coalition
Government in Moldova provides an opportunity to
move forward. We encourage parties to take up
discussions in the formal five plus two talks as soon as
possible.

Human rights and fundamental freedoms are an
essential element in promoting and maintaining peace
and security. That includes freedom of the media. Too
many journalists in several OSCE States work We also
commend the close cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

Germany welcomes the role of the OSCE in
pursuing a settlement of the Nagorny Karabakh
conflict within the framework of the Minsk Group, and
agrees
with
the
Chairman-in-Office
that
a
strengthening of the OSCE monitoring activities could
prove beneficial.

The prestigious role of the OSCE Chairmanshipin-Office brings with it important responsibilities to
promote and embody the principles of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, democracy, good
governance and the rule of law, on which the OSCE is
founded. The work programme set out for us
underlines that Mr. Ažubalis has a clear and pragmatic
vision for making progress on all of those areas. We
offer our full support to his efforts to achieve those
objectives.

On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of an OSCE presence as part of the
international monitoring of the situation. We continue
to support the active engagement of the OSCE in the
ongoing Geneva international discussions to reduce
tensions and build trust among affected communities.
We also stress the importance of the functioning of the
two incident-prevention mechanisms. In this context,
we urge the conclusion of a swift agreement
concerning the continued funding of the work of the
United Nations representative to the Geneva talks.

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming the Foreign Minister

Secondly, Germany wishes to express concern
regarding the closure of the OSCE office in Minsk by

6

11-23402

S/PV.6481

the Government of Belarus. We share the views
presented by the Lithuanian Chairman-in-Office on this
issue. The OSCE office in Minsk makes an important
contribution to strengthening institutions and the rule
of law in Belarus, and its work has not yet been
completed. Germany appreciates the efforts made by
the Lithuanian chairmanship to reopen the office and
ensure that it can continue with its mission.
Thirdly, let me underline that Germany attaches
great importance to close cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations. Cooperation in the fight
against terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and organized crime are important
examples of areas in which the international
community can benefit from close cooperation and
relations between the two Organizations.
As a regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE is, among
other things, a key instrument for post-conflict
rehabilitation in its region. We welcome the ideas of
the Lithuanian chairmanship to examine the OSCE role
in stabilization, reconstruction and peacebuilding in
more detail. The Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) may be considered a pertinent
underpinning for these deliberations and shows how
the two organizations complement each other in their
efforts.
To conclude, let me thank the Chairman-in-Office
once again for his briefing and reiterate Germany’s full
support for the Lithuanian OSCE chairmanship.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania,
Mr. Ažubalis, and thank him for his detailed briefing.
The Russian Federation is in favour of improving
and comprehensively developing cooperation between
the United Nations, the Security Council and regional
and subregional arrangements, among which the OSCE
holds an important place. Such cooperation should be
based on the strong foundation of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapter VIII, and take
into due account the comparative advantages of the
universal Organization and these mechanisms. There
must be no doubt about the fact that it is the Security
Council that holds the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

11-23402

As set forth in the declaration of the OSCE
Summit held in Astana, the basic mission of the
Organization is to ensure equal and indivisible security
for all member States. To that end, Russian President
Dmitry Medvedev is pursuing an initiative aimed at the
conclusion of a legally binding treaty on European
security.
We agree with the OSCE Chairman-in-Office’s
assessment of the Geneva discussions on security and
stability in the Transcaucasus, which are co-chaired by
the European Union, the OSCE and the United
Nations. That forum is an important platform for
dialogue for Abkhazia, Georgia and South Ossetia. We
agree on the importance of the full participation of a
representative of the United Nations in this work. That
was the objective of the decisions of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with United Nations practice, to
finance the Turunen group from the United Nations
regular budget.
We welcome the activities of the OSCE Mission
in Kosovo which, as the Minister mentioned, continues
to carry out its mandate in the framework of resolution
1244 (1999) and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Mission. We share his concern over incidents
of illegal trading in human organs, and we fully
support calls for an independent investigation. We
believe that the OSCE Mission in Kosovo should
provide assistance to such an international
investigation.
With regard to resolving the situation in
Afghanistan, we see the OSCE’s role in curbing the
illegal trade in Afghan narcotics as vital. Drug
trafficking has been identified as a threat to
international peace and stability in decisions of the
Security Council and General Assembly. An important
element here is the implementation of the OSCE
framework for combating the illegal narcotics trade
and trade in chemical precursors. The draft of that
framework was put forward by Russia, together with
Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, the United States of
America, Tajikistan and Turkey.
We welcome the intention of the Chairman-inOffice to establish cooperation with the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum, and the Organization of American States.
However, primary attention should be given to

7

S/PV.6481

developing cooperation with influential regional
organizations in areas under the direct responsibility of
the OSCE, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization,
the
Collective
Security
Treaty
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community,
which have useful experience and strong potential to
help ensure peace and security.
In our view, the establishment of normative
foundations for all its work is key to enhancing the
OSCE’s future effectiveness and to transforming it into
an intergovernmental organization. Our proposals
based on the OSCE Charter remain on the negotiation
table. We hope that the vision for the work of the
Lithuanian chairmanship set out today by Mr. Ažubalis
will help to overcome the crisis mentality of recent
years in the OSCE and adapt it to current realities.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I, too, would like to
welcome Foreign Minister Ažubalis to the Council and
to congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship-inoffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). We thank him in particular for his
lucid and insightful briefing on the Organization’s
plans and priorities for 2011, and we wish him a very
successful tenure.
The OSCE remains a key component of European
security. Its importance for building strong and
genuinely cooperative relationships among its 56
member States was quite evident from the briefing we
have just heard this morning. We are pleased that the
OSCE is not only making noteworthy progress as a
regional organization, but also enhancing cooperation
with the United Nations in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
this regard, we commend the collaboration between the
OSCE and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia that facilitated
the peaceful settlement of the 2010 inter-ethnic conflict
in the Kyrgyz Republic. We also commend the close
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Nigeria welcomes the high priority that the
Chairman-in-Office has placed on resolving protracted
conflicts in the region, including the renewed
Transdniestria settlement talks in the Republic of
Moldova and the efforts to resolve the Nagorny
Karabakh conflicts.

8

We also welcome the OSCE’s efforts to promote
cooperation in border security management in
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan and the deployment of a
good offices mission to defuse political tension in
Albania. We believe that concrete results could be
achieved within the Geneva international discussions
framework, and that the United Nations experience in
supporting regional conflict management will be
invaluable in this process. We therefore support the
Minister’s requests for full-fledged United Nations
representation at the Geneva discussions.
The emphasis Mr. Ažubalis placed on human
rights, women’s and civil society issues, freedom of the
press and the promotion of democracy on the agenda of
the OSCE deserves our encouragement, and indeed our
broad support. Our expectation is that the Vilnius
conference on journalistic freedom to be held in June
will serve as an important platform to genuinely
address the threats to journalistic freedom and
consolidate the progress under way.
It is also our expectation that the relationship
between Belarus and the OSCE will be restored on the
basis of shared goals and anticipated mutual benefits.
We believe that the OSCE efforts to promote tolerance
through education and student-exchange agreements
will guarantee long-term inter-ethnic harmony in the
whole region.
Going forward, pressing challenges such as the
ongoing tensions in South Ossetia, the pursuit of
freedom of the press and the safety of journalists and
the settlement of territorial disputes in the southern
Caucasus region present the Lithuanian presidency
with a unique opportunity to promote change in the
region. To achieve this credibly, the organization must
also address the stagnation in arms control, vigorously
engage in Afghanistan and confront the challenges of
energy security.
We share the Minister’s commitment to
effectively cope with transnational threats to
international peace and security, such as human
trafficking, drug trafficking and cyber security. Since
transnational crimes are not limited to territorial
boundaries, combating them requires complete
cooperation. For this reason, we urge the OSCE to
continue to create opportunities for cooperation and
information exchanges with regional security agencies,
including the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa.

11-23402

S/PV.6481

We believe that the need for coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the fight against global security threats was a point
that was vividly made by Mr. Ažubalis at last month’s
special meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council in
Vienna, and indeed in today’s briefing.

and the dialogue among cultures and religions, without
neglecting efforts to combat terrorism, drug trafficking,
human trafficking and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and small arms and light weapons, as
such efforts have a positive impact on international
peace and security.

Nigeria believes that the vision that the Minister
has outlined ensures a very promising future for the
organization. It is a vision that will promote regional
stability and international peace and security. Such an
agenda advances the work of the Security Council, and
is thus deserving of our support and endorsement. But
the OSCE must strengthen its role in the region. It must
retain its fundamental character as the most inclusive
Atlantic forum for consultation and joint action.

Moreover, given their common objectives,
Lebanon believes that it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. It is also necessary to work with other regional
organizations with a view to sharing information,
experience and capacities. In this respect, we would
highlight in particular the League of Arab States and
the African Union, as these organizations can make
very important contributions in the area of peace and
security in the Arab world and Africa. Lebanon
supports all efforts to strengthen international peace
and security, given that this is the main objective of our
Organization.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ažubalis and to
thank him for his briefing, which was focused on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.
The authors of the United Nations Charter
dedicated an entire chapter — namely, Chapter VIII —
to the role of regional organizations and the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
proof that the role of the United Nations complements
the role of regional organizations — hence the
importance of cooperation between these organizations
aimed at taking advantage of their relative strengths.
Lebanon welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in the various conflicts in Europe and Asia
with a view to establishing peace. The role of the
OSCE is directly linked to conflicts that are within its
area of competence and within its geographic area, and
that have common cultural and historical elements.
All of this means that the OSCE has a particular
understanding of the various events taking place in the
region and can consider ways to resolve these conflicts
through peaceful means. The OSCE today includes 56
member States, which can contribute to peace and
security in three stages: before a conflict, through early
warning and preventive diplomacy; during a conflict,
with a view to reducing tensions and containing the
conflict in order to settle it in a peaceful way; and after
a conflict, to contribute to peacebuilding.
Lebanon calls on OSCE to attach particular
importance to the rule of law, respect for human rights

11-23402

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lithuania and Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
Mr. Audronius Ažubalis, for his statement. We believe
his intervention included some very interesting
perspectives on the OSCE’s future and its cooperation
with the United Nations.
Colombia would like to highlight the common
identity and shared principles of our two organizations.
We also share a vision of the essential nature of
freedom, democracy and respect for human rights in
efforts to maintain security.
Likewise, we believe that security, which is at the
top of the list of the priorities of the Government of
Colombia, is a prerequisite for the consolidation of the
rule of law, peace and conflict prevention. We view
security as a requirement for the effective enjoyment of
citizen’s liberties, sustainable development and the
achievement of social prosperity under democratic
precepts. In this context, we value the work of the
OSCE as an example of the constructive potential of
interregional, regional and subregional cooperation in
promoting stability for nations and peoples.
In the context of respect for the principles and
norms of international law, sovereignty and the
self-determination
of
peoples,
dialogue
and

9

S/PV.6481

cooperation at all regional levels can contribute to
progress towards a safer and more harmonious world.
We also believe that the interaction between
organizations of this type and the United Nations —
and the Security Council in particular, in areas within
its purview — promotes a better understanding of
specific
situations.
Such
exchanges
promote
comprehensive approaches to security issues by
integrating human, political, economic, environmental
and military elements specific to the regional
dynamics.
With respect to cooperation with the United
Nations, we welcome the contribution of the OSCE
Mission in Kosovo to implementing the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. We will have the opportunity to address that
issue on the agenda tomorrow, but I believe it relevant
to express appreciation for regional efforts to move
ahead on areas of common interest, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
Furthermore, we applaud the firm commitment
noted by the Minister of Lithuania to the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
fighting terrorism. To the extent that regional areas
resolutely support overall frameworks and strategies to
address that transnational scourge in all its
manifestations, we will be able to make more effective
use of the relevant international instruments. Similarly,
we note with interest the planned increase in OSCE
support for actions led by the United Nations to
stabilize Afghanistan with a view to countering, in
coordination with national authorities, transnational
threats that could emerge from that country’s territory.
Colombia takes this opportunity to express its
solidarity with the Afghan people and to offer all
relevant experience in fighting such threats.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
importance of promoting smoother communication
between OSCE and other regional organizations,
including the Organization of American States, as the
Minister mentioned. Prosperity, democracy and peace
are the clear beneficiaries of dialogue and interregional
agreement on the fundamental value of security.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Audronius Ažubalis,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and
congratulate him on his assumption of the
chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security

10

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Let me assure the
Minister that Portugal fully supports his efforts to
promote the OSCE agenda, as well as Lithuania’s
endeavours to ensure that all three dimensions of the
Organization’s activities are taken forward in a
balanced manner. I also thank the Minister for today’s
very comprehensive briefing outlining Lithuania’s
priorities for the OSCE in 2011.
Portugal feels encouraged by the follow-up
process to the Astana Declaration, which will build on
the productive discussions that came out of the Corfu
process for a European security dialogue in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. The Astana Final
Declaration unequivocally confirms all dimensions of
the OSCE acquis, and includes clear tasks aimed at
further strengthening and defending the OSCE’s legacy
of a comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible
concept of security, including by starting to work on an
action plan.
Portugal
warmly
welcomes
the
OSCE
chairmanship’s intention to focus on concrete action,
addressing regional issues, early warning, conflict
prevention, arms control, and confidence- and securitybuilding measures, as well as the economic and human
dimensions. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
the importance that Portugal attaches to the promotion
of close cooperation between the OSCE and other
international organizations.
We attach special importance to the added value
that the United Nations and the OSCE can bring to
each other’s work in several regions. For example, the
close cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia is vital to diffusing tensions in that
complex region and deserves all our support.
Allow me to refer briefly to some of the main
issues on the chairmanship’s programme. All are
relevant to further cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations.
First, concerning the human dimension — a
crucial component of the OSCE’s comprehensive
concept of security — we welcome the clear reiteration
of fundamental commitments concerning the protection
of human rights, fundamental freedoms, democracy
and the rule of law, and the emphasis on their better
implementation. That is a goal to which we attach great
importance and that we are glad to see at the top of this
year’s OSCE priorities.

11-23402

S/PV.6481

Secondly,
we
welcome
the
Lithuanian
chairmanship’s support for further work to solve the
impasse in the field of conventional arms control in
Europe and its commitment to moving forward with
the improvement of the OSCE’s important confidenceand security-building regime.
Thirdly, we are well aware of the threat to
security that protracted, unresolved conflicts in the
OSCE space continue to present. In fact, such conflicts
continue to challenge the OSCE’s objective of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Eurasian space. That is an
area where United Nations-OSCE cooperation is both
useful and indispensable, as the joint participation in
the Geneva talks made clear.
Fourthly, the fight against transnational threats,
such as terrorism and the trafficking in persons and
drugs, as well as the welcome boost to the OSCE’s
profile in cybersecurity, are all areas where there has
been a fair amount of consensus. And as threats evolve,
so should the tools at our disposal to address them.
Also in that context, interaction between the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the OSCE has
enormous potential. The jointly organized July 2010
conference on international cooperation on crime in
Central Asia and Afghanistan is a case in point.
Fifth is the matter of non-proliferation in
connection with the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), with regard to which we can also explore forms
of cooperation between the United Nations and OSCE.
May I also underline the concrete and focused
contribution of the European Union to the OSCE’s
work in all of those areas, both conceptually and at the
operational level, and always on the basis of solid
support for the notion of comprehensive security. In
that sense, we are especially pleased to see that in the
coming two years, the organization will have two
members of the European Union, Lithuania and
Ireland, as its Chairs.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm Portugal’s
confidence in Lithuania’s leadership. We will continue
to support Lithuania, as Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in dealing with
old and new challenges, as well as in strengthening
cooperative relations between the OSCE and the
United Nations.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency

11-23402

Foreign Minister Audronius Ažubalis for his
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and its priorities in the months to come.
India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and their cooperation with the United Nations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Article 54 of the Charter
enjoins such organizations to keep the Security Council
fully informed of their activities in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the briefing by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
Minister Ažubalis touched upon a wide canvas of
issues, several concerning our immediate and extended
neighbourhood. Naturally, they are of great interest to
our delegation. We appreciate the work that the OSCE
has been doing to promote security in its political,
military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions. It has addressed a wide range of securityrelated concerns, including arms control, confidenceand security-building measures, human rights, national
minorities, democratization, policing strategies,
counter-terrorism, and economic and environmental
issues. They have significantly helped in managing and
resolving some of the most significant problems in the
post-Cold War world.
The countries of Central Asia and Eastern Europe
have particularly benefited from the OSCE’s
cooperation. In the past decade or so, the OSCE has
significantly expanded its activities in our
neighbourhood under the Asian Partners for
Cooperation and the Asian Contact Group. Annual
conferences in areas such as human security, regional
cooperation and comprehensive security in Central
Asia, anti-trafficking and the implementation of OSCE
confidence- and security-building measures in NorthEast Asia are important activities. The OSCE’s
cooperation with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Regional Forum, of which India is a member,
on matters related to confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy is appreciable. We also welcome
the OSCE’s partnership with Afghanistan in border
security management and its deployment of an election
support team during the elections in that country.
We wish the OSCE great success in its efforts and
activities to promote understanding and foster peace
and security among its member and partner countries.
We also extend our good wishes to the Lithuanian

11

S/PV.6481

chairmanship of the OSCE, and personally to Foreign
Minister Ažubalis. We hope that, under his
stewardship, the OSCE will continue its important
work.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
joins others in welcoming the Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Mr. Audronius Ažubalis, to the
Security Council. We wish to thank him for his briefing
on the work of the OSCE.
Last week, we received a briefing (see
S/PV.6477) from the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU) on the EU’s cooperation with the United Nations,
at which time we reiterated our strong view that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the area of peace and
security was a major priority for us. We welcome all
efforts in that regard.
Our support for such initiatives stems from our
belief that multilateralism is strengthened through
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Article 54 of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, under which the OSCE is
briefing the Council here today, envisaged strong
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We realize, however, that each regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges they
face in maintaining international peace and security
and the manner in which they address those threats.
Moreover, we do not believe that efforts by regional
organizations absolve the Council of its Chartermandated responsibilities as the guardian of
international peace and security. In fact, such efforts
complement each other. The briefing we just received
from the Chairman-in-Office confirms as much.
We have noted with appreciation the challenges
that the OSCE helps to address, from Kosovo to
Moldova, to Nagorny Karabakh and in Central Asia.
We welcome the sharing of experiences between the
OSCE and other regional organizations, in particular
the African Union, and hope that such cooperation can
be strengthened.
In conclusion, we would like to assure the OSCE
of our support for all of those efforts.

12

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Mr. Audronius Ažubalis, Foreign
Minister of Lithuania, for his briefing on behalf of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).
China attaches great importance to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In fulfilling its
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council needs the
important support and cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations. In particular, the Council
and those organizations should make use of their
advantages and complement each other in a common
effort to promote international peace and security.
The OSCE is an important regional organization
in Europe in terms of maintaining international peace
and security. It is also an important cooperative partner
of the United Nations. We commend the contributions
of the OSCE to preventive diplomacy, dispute
mediation, post-conflict peacebuilding and counterterrorism.
We encourage the OSCE to continue to make use
of its advantages and to play a positive role in
maintaining regional peace, security and stability. We
also support the initiatives of the United Nations and
the Security Council to cooperate more pragmatically
and effectively with the OSCE, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, in the maintenance of
regional peace and security.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Lithuania, Mr. Audronius Ažubalis, and thank him
for his detailed and very comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to extend our congratulations to him
and his country on holding the chairmanship this year.
These regular briefings by the Chairman-inOffice of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to the Council
underscore the importance of an effective partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in countering new and
evolving threats to international security.
Building comprehensive and lasting security is a
common strategic interest, and also one of the goals of
the OSCE. With its 56 participating States, the OSCE

11-23402

S/PV.6481

is a broad-based and credible forum where each State
maintains active relations based on its own interests.
Such a forum has a number of political and diplomatic
advantages, enabling States to resolve internal issues
and those of shared concern.
Furthermore, member States can engage in
dialogue on European security and cooperation on an
equal footing. As for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we will
continue to promote the same priorities in the work of
the OSCE, focusing mainly on counter-terrorism, arms
control, the protection of human rights and minorities,
freedom of the media, human trafficking, corruption
and all other forms of criminal activity.
In addition, we recognize and support the OSCE
as a forum and an organization with a mandate for the
early prevention of all conflicts. We are fully
committed to actively contributing to the early
prevention and neutralization of situations that could
lead to conflict in the OSCE region.
Lastly, allow me to briefly reflect on the OSCE
Summit held in Astana last December. The Summit
only confirmed our awareness of the urgent problems
that States are facing, including such transnational
threats as terrorism and trafficking. We recognize that
the OSCE is one of the adequate forums for analyzing
those issues and finding solutions. The Summit also
opened new paths for long-term cooperation among
member States and set high expectations for important
new decisions to facilitate such cooperation.
In addition, the adoption of the Astana
Commemorative
Declaration
(see
A/65/668)
reconfirmed the OSCE’s comprehensive approach to
security, which is based on trust and transparency.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports that
approach and the joint initiatives of member States
aimed at building a higher level of trust and
strengthening security in Europe.
In conclusion, I would like to once again
underline the importance and encourage further
enhancement of cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to welcome to the Council Mr. Andronius
Ažubalis, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania. We agree

11-23402

with the priority actions that he announced and we
congratulate him on his attention to further
strengthening the ties of cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE.
The 56 participating States of the OSCE have the
same goals in the areas of regional security, human and
economic development and respect for human rights.
The Astana Summit, held early in December 2010,
reaffirmed those common objectives and created new
avenues for cooperation.
The OSCE and the United Nations can be
complementary in many areas, as Mr. Ažubalis has
said. Transborder threats, the fight against organized
crime, energy security, counter-terrorism, freedom of
expression and freedom of the media are all challenges
that are also engaging the United Nations. In addition,
the Secretary General of the OSCE will present the
OSCE’s activities in the Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee next week, as a concrete example
of exchange and cooperation on an issue of common
interest.
Our two organizations also have much to
exchange in order that their efforts in some regions are
integrated. The Lithuanian Foreign Minister just
mentioned Afghanistan, which is a neighbouring
country to several OSCE participating States, where
the organization is putting in place border-monitoring
operations. In the Balkans, the OSCE continues to
support the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. Central Asia is also an important
area of operations for the OSCE, which has five
missions there. Its grasp of the local terrain has made it
able to effectively respond to the crisis that shook
Kyrgyzstan in June 2010, working with the United
Nations and the European Union. The Lithuanian
chairmanship would like to devote efforts to the fight
against transborder threats in Central Asia. We support
that regional initiative, which could be coordinated
with efforts by specialized international institutions.
We especially support strengthening cooperation with
the United Nations conflict prevention centre.
However, the OSCE and the United Nations have
seen some of their common efforts thwarted. For
example, the missions of both the OSCE and the
United Nations were forced to abandon Georgia after
the war in the summer of 2008, even though their
presence was bolstering stability. The situation in
Georgia remains a source of concern, especially in

13

S/PV.6481

Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as well as in the whole
Caucasus region. We therefore call upon all actors in
the region to refrain from any action that might
destabilize the current fragile equilibrium. We will
pursue our efforts in the Geneva discussions to work
towards a peaceful settlement of the Georgian dispute.
The situation in Belarus has also been a source of
particular concern for us since the presidential
elections in December. We have witnessed attacks on
freedom of the press and on basic principles of
democracy, with a number of opposition figures having
been arrested. The decision of the Belarusian
authorities to close the OSCE office in Minsk is
contrary to the values of the organization, to which
Belarus itself has agreed. Together we must therefore
call upon that State to respect human rights, and more
specifically civil and political rights.
The OSCE covers a vast area with shared values
that should be preserved and strengthened. It represents
a unique model of cooperation, based on the conviction
that the security of Europe goes hand in hand with the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. In that connection, we welcome the Lithuanian
chairmanship’s commitment to promoting journalistic
pluralism, to stopping hate crimes and to promoting
human rights. Participating nations have undertaken
significant commitments, such as protecting the
territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and rejection of recourse to the threat or use
of force. We should all stand firm in those principles;
indeed they are fundamental principles of our own
Organization.
As an OSCE participant, we would like to see it
develop ties with other regional organizations and
international organizations, as well as with the
European Union (EU). Cooperation with the EU is
already very good and could be further strengthened.
Like the OSCE, the European Union is indeed present
in the Balkans, the Caucasus and Central Asia, where it
plays an important role. Hundreds of European judges,
police and other law enforcement officials have been
deployed to the region to strengthen local capacity. The
more
interaction
among
different
regional
organizations — each with different experience and
specific expertise — the more we can work together to
be of use to countries that will benefit from our
presence. We wish Lithuania a very successful
chairmanship of the OSCE and we hope that we can

14

continue to strengthen and deepen cooperation between
our two organizations.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to join previous speakers in
warmly welcoming to the Chamber Mr. Audronius
Ažubalis, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania. I would like
to thank him for his detailed briefing, which outlines
the priorities of the OSCE under his country’s
chairmanship. I would like to address two issues
among the priorities of the Lithuanian chairmanship,
namely, the resolution of protracted conflicts and
strengthening the OSCE’s response to transnational
threats.
On the subject of the settlement of protracted
conflicts, my delegation shares the view of the Chair of
the OSCE, which is to move towards resolving those
conflicts, on the one hand so as to prevent their
protraction from contributing to instability and on the
other hand to reduce the costs associated with their
continuation. Along those lines, we welcome the
efforts of the OSCE to re-launch the 5+2 format
negotiations in order to resolve the conflict in
Transdniestria in Moldova while respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Moldova.
Strengthening regional organizations with a view
to making them more operational and more able to
confront various crises should remain among our top
priorities. That is why we are pleased that the OSCE
has taken that concern into account through its bodies,
mechanisms and specialized institutions. Moreover, we
believe that an early warning system to detect the early
signs of potential conflict is part of a better way to
prevent conflicts with untold human, material and
financial consequences. We also agree with the
Lithuanian chairmanship that an early warning system
should be based on clear capacity and will to act
promptly.
Accordingly, the mechanisms set up by some
regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States, to prevent
conflicts — particularly the Central African Early
Warning System and the Peace and Security Council of
Central Africa — would all benefit from the wealth of
experience of the OSCE. Likewise, the African
Standby Force, with its different components based in

11-23402

S/PV.6481

the five subregions of the continent, could in its
operations rely on the expertise of the OSCE. We are
encouraged by the commitment of the Lithuanian
chairmanship to continue strengthening the cooperation
of the OSCE and regional organizations of other
regions of the world, such as the African Union.
The contribution of the OSCE to the efforts of the
United Nations in promoting international peace and
cooperation in its theatre of operations speaks for
itself. The same is true for its commitment in Kosovo,
Georgia and Afghanistan, to cite only those few
examples. We welcome the focus of the Lithuanian
chairmanship on continuing and strengthening its
cooperation with the United Nations in combating
other challenges to international peace and security,
such as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, organized crime and drug trafficking. In
conclusion, we reiterate our support for the activities of
the OSCE and the road map set forth by the Lithuanian
chairmanship.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I wish to welcome Minister Audronius Ažubalis
and to thank him for his presentation. I congratulate
him on assuming the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
wish him a very successful tenure.
Brazil is convinced that regional and subregional
organizations can greatly contribute to further
strengthening the multilateral system, including in the
area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. I am certain that, under the Lithuanian
leadership, the OSCE will advance its dialogue and
cooperation with the United Nations. Collaboration
between the United Nations and the OSCE is a
concrete example of a partnership that has helped to
promote peace and security in Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia and to fight terrorism.
In Afghanistan, the OSCE has been actively
involved in efforts to foster political dialogue, increase
national capacities, and support the democratic
process. Brazil notes with satisfaction the close
coordination of OSCE with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in this regard. We
appreciate the assistance provided to the Afghan
Government in the fields of border security, police
training and the fight against drug trafficking.

11-23402

In Kyrgyzstan, the OSCE played a constructive
role last year, in close coordination with the United
Nations and the European Union, in the context of a
challenging political environment. Brazil recognizes
the work that was done, inter alia, to normalize the
situation in the country, ensure security and stability,
help the victims of violence, and assist the process of
national reconciliation. With the active engagement of
the international community, we hope that the people
of Kyrgyzstan will be able to overcome current
difficulties, strengthen democratic institutions, and
create more opportunities for social and economic
development.
I note the priorities outlined by Lithuania for its
OSCE chairmanship in 2011. We were pleased to learn
that, along with efforts to address protracted conflicts,
attention will be given to a renewed commitment to
democracy, the rule of law and human rights, as well as
to new ways to promote energy security, media
freedom and tolerance education. Tolerance and
diversity are two defining features of Brazilian society.
Having hosted last year’s Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil very much
welcomes OSCE initiatives in this regard.
Brazil joins in supporting the vision and priorities
established by Lithuania for the work of the OSCE in
the current year, and looks forward to a very fruitful
cooperation between that organization and the United
Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Minister Ažubalis to respond to
the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Ažubalis: I sincerely thank all Council
members for their unanimous support for our
chairmanship programme. It is obvious that the
consolidated political will of all nations concerned can
move things along. I hope that the supportive
statements made here today will be reflected in strong
political will that will lead to concrete actions and help
us to implement our programme.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15
