A/60/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

78

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 2 May 2006, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hamidon
(Malaysia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Agenda items 46 and 120 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/60/825)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a report of the Secretary-General entitled “Uniting
against terrorism: recommendations for a global
counter-terrorism strategy”, which has been circulated
in document A/60/825.
Statement by the Acting President
The Acting President: It is my pleasure to
preside over this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly today as we embark upon another step in the
efforts of the United Nations to fight terrorism.
Over the years, we have seen many terrorist
attacks around the world. The horrendous attacks of
11 September 2001 were a demonstration of the scale
of the death and destruction that terrorism can cause.
Last year, India, Indonesia, Egypt, Jordan and the

(Sweden)

United Kingdom were all targets of terrorist attacks, to
name but a few. Only last week, there were further
attacks in Egypt. On behalf of the General Assembly, I
would like to express my condolences to the
Government and the people of Egypt, and to the
families and friends of all those affected.
Those attacks remind us that the United Nations
must continue to pursue vigorously its efforts to
combat terrorism. While the negotiations on the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
are still ongoing, it is now time for us to elaborate a
comprehensive strategy to combat terrorism.
At the 2005 World Summit, our heads of State
and Government mandated us to develop without delay
the elements of a counter-terrorism strategy identified
by the Secretary-General. They asked us to do so with
a view to adopting and implementing a strategy to
promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent
responses at the national, regional and international
levels to counter terrorism. Today we take the first step
in that process.
Shortly, I will invite the Secretary-General to
present his report entitled “Uniting against terrorism:
recommendations for a global counter-terrorism
strategy” (A/60/825), which will serve as the basis for
our discussions on this important subject. Last month,
the two Co-Chairmen — Ambassador Yáñez-Barnuevo
of Spain and Ambassador Menon of Singapore —
circulated to all Member States their letter outlining the
intended work programme in that regard. The President
of the General Assembly would value the Assembly’s

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-33513 (E)

*0633513*

A/60/PV.78

active and constructive participation in the upcoming
informal consultations, and will count on its continued
efforts and support in our fight against the scourge of
terrorism.

the United Nations and other international
organizations, civil society and the private sector, each
using its comparative advantage to supplement the
others’ efforts.

I now warmly welcome Secretary-General Kofi
Annan to the General Assembly, and invite him to take
the floor to introduce his report.

In formulating my recommendations, I have built
further on the “five Ds”, the fundamental components
that I first outlined in Madrid last year. They are:
dissuading people from resorting to terrorism or from
supporting it, denying terrorists the means to carry out
an attack, deterring States from supporting terrorism,
developing State capacity to defeat terrorism, and,
finally, defending human rights. I believe all five are
interlinked conditions crucial to the success of any
strategy against terrorism. To succeed, we will need to
make progress on all those fronts.

The Secretary-General: At the outset, let me
join the Acting President in offering sympathy and
condolences to the countries, peoples and families who
have suffered from terrorism and have lost loved ones.
I deeply regret that, last week in the Fifth
Committee, Member States were unable to reach
consensus on the proposals I had put before the
Assembly on management reform. In spite of that, I am
convinced that all Member States remain committed to
reform in principle, and I urge the Assembly to work
together to rebuild the spirit of mutual trust that is
essential to the smooth functioning of the
Organization.
I am, as always, ready to help the Assembly in its
continued search for agreement on ways to pursue the
agenda set out in the outcome document of the 2005
World Summit (resolution 60/1). In particular,
members will recall that in that document their heads
of State and Government asked me to submit proposals
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system
to assist States in combating terrorism and to enhance
the coordination of United Nations activities in that
regard. Members will also recall that heads of State
and Government also urged the Assembly to develop
without delay the elements I had identified, with a
view to adopting and implementing a strategy to
promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent
responses at the national, regional and international
levels to counter terrorism.
Today, I have the privilege of presenting to the
Assembly my vision on that matter, as contained in the
document entitled “Uniting against terrorism:
recommendations for a global counter-terrorism
strategy”. Those recommendations stem from a
fundamental conviction that we all share, namely, that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes, is unacceptable and can never be justified.
Uniting around that conviction is the basis for what I
hope will be a collective global effort to fight
terrorism — an effort bringing together Governments,

2

Implementing a global strategy requires us to
dissuade people from resorting to terrorism or from
supporting it, by driving a wedge between terrorists
and their potential constituencies. We need to launch a
global campaign of Governments, the United Nations,
civil society and the private sector, with the message
that terrorism is unacceptable in any form and that
there are far better and more effective ways for those
with genuine grievances to seek redress. One of the
clearest and most powerful ways by which we can do
that is by refocusing our attention on the victims. It is
high time we took serious and concerted steps to build
international solidarity with them, while respecting
their dignity as well as expressing our compassion.
Denying terrorists the means to carry out attacks
means denying them access both to conventional
weapons and to weapons of mass destruction. That will
require innovative thinking from all of us about today’s
threats, including those that States cannot address by
themselves, such as bioterrorism. Similarly, it will
mean working together to counter terrorists’ growing
use of the Internet. We must find ways to make sure
that this powerful tool becomes a weapon in our hands
and not in theirs.
Our work in deterring States from supporting
terrorism must be rooted firmly in the international rule
of law — creating a solid legal basis for common
actions and holding States accountable for their
performance in meeting their obligations. That work is
intimately linked with the need to develop State
capacity to defeat terrorism.
In response to a request I received last December
from the President of the General Assembly, the

06-33513

A/60/PV.78

document I am presenting today elaborates on steps to
build State capacity and to strengthen the
Organization’s work in that field. The United Nations
system has a vital contribution to make in all the
relevant areas, from promoting the rule of law and
effective criminal justice systems to ensuring that
countries have the means to counter the financing of
terrorism; and from strengthening capacity to prevent
nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological materials
from falling into the hands of terrorists, to improving
the ability of countries to provide assistance and
support for victims and their families.
Finally, defending human rights runs like a
scarlet thread through the report. It is a prerequisite to
every aspect of any effective counter-terrorism
strategy. It is the bond that brings the different
components together. That means the human rights of
all — of the victims of terrorism, of those suspected of
terrorism, and of those affected by the consequences of
terrorism.
States must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law. Any
strategy that compromises human rights will play right
into the hands of the terrorists.
All States, in every region — large or small,
strong or weak — are vulnerable to terrorism and its
consequences. They all stand to benefit from a strategy
to counter it. They all have a role to play in shaping
such a strategy, in implementing it and in ensuring that
it is updated continuously to respond to challenges as
they evolve.
It is also essential that Member States conclude,
as soon as possible, a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. However, lack of progress in
building consensus on a convention cannot be a reason
for delay in agreeing on a strategy. By instructing their
representatives
to
adopt
and
implement
a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy, heads of
State and Government have given them a momentous
challenge and a historic opportunity. By rising to that
challenge, they will demonstrate the resolve of the
international community and lay the foundations of a
truly global response to that vicious global scourge. I
hope my recommendations will help them in that vital
mission.

06-33513

The Acting President: May I remind member
States that the first informal consultations on the
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy will be held
on Thursday, 11 May at 10 a.m. and at 3 p.m. Members
are requested to consult the Journal for the venues of
those meetings.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 46 and 120.
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/60/L.53)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 10
at its 63rd plenary meeting on 15 December 2005.
I call on the representative of Mongolia to
introduce draft resolution A/60/L.53.
Mr. Choisuren (Mongolia): I have the distinct
honour to introduce a draft resolution entitled “Support
by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies” on behalf of the sponsors listed
in document A/60/L.53. I would also like to announce
that, since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following 22 counties have become co-sponsors of the
draft resolution: Armenia, Australia, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Denmark, Djibouti, Gabon, Georgia, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Nepal, Nicaragua, San
Marino, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Yemen
and Zambia.
The international conferences of new or restored
democracies have been an important force in building
up the global momentum towards democratization.
Those conferences have served as a source of
inspiration for many fledgling democracies in their
struggle to establish modern and functioning
democratic societies built upon the principles of
pluralism, respect for human rights, freedom of the
press, and democratic governance; they have also
facilitated the exchange of views, experiences and
lessons learned amongst themselves and with more
mature democracies.

3

A/60/PV.78

The
intergovernmental
process
of
the
international conferences has a rich experience of
fruitful cooperation with the United Nations system. It
should, as such, play a role in translating into reality
the commitments made by world leaders at the 2005
world summit to support democracy by strengthening
countries’ capacity to implement the principles and
practices of democracy and to strengthen the capacity
of the United Nations to assist Member States.
The text before us reaffirms, therefore, the
commitment of the international community to
democracy and the important role of the United
Nations in providing timely, appropriate and coherent
support to the efforts of Governments to achieve
democratization and good governance within the
context of their development efforts. It encourages the
Secretary-General to continue improving the capacity
of the Organization to respond effectively to the
requests of Member States including, inter alia,
through the activities of the Democracy Fund at the
United Nations.
The draft resolution places strong emphasis on
the follow-up to the Fifth International Conference of
New or Restored Democracies, inviting all
stakeholders to inform the Secretary-General of the
actions taken to that end. That provision reflects the
significance that Mongolia, as host and Chair of the
Fifth International Conference, attaches to ensuring
effective
and
efficient
follow-up
to
the
recommendations adopted there.
As members are aware, among the major
activities being implemented by Mongolia in that
respect is the development of democratic governance
indicators for the country to measure its democratic
performance. That, along with a country information
note, will lay the basis for a national plan of action
aimed at helping consolidate democracy in Mongolia.
This programme will, we believe, facilitate the design
and piloting of methodologies which other new or
restored democracies can use for the preparation of
their national action plans, country information notes
and democracy indicator databases, as agreed under the
Ulaanbaatar Plan of Action.
Mongolia will also host an International Followup Conference on New or Restored Democracies in
Ulaanbaatar on 1 and 2 June this year with a view to
sharing its follow-up experiences with other countries.
That event will gather International Conference

4

stakeholders together with international democracy
experts to take stock of follow-up activities and engage
in discussions on how to institutionalize the
innovations into the International Conference
movement.
The
comprehensive
tripartite
conference
structure, which includes Governments, parliaments
and civil society, was pioneered at the Fifth
International Conference at Ulaanbaatar. It constituted
a major step forward in the progressive development of
the International Conference process by allowing for
the greater interaction and cooperation of various
stakeholders in the common effort of promoting
democracy. That aspect is duly reflected in the text in
the context of both follow-up of the Fifth International
Conference and arrangements for the forthcoming
Sixth International Conference.
The Sixth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies will be held in Doha, Qatar,
from 30 October to 1 November this year. The
importance of support by Member States, the United
Nations system, the specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations for the holding of that
Conference is therefore expressed in the draft
resolution. The Conference in Doha will be an event of
immense significance, since it will take place against
the backdrop of the World Summit Outcome and will
mark the first time that a conference of new or restored
democracies is held in the Middle East. Mongolia
wishes every success to Qatar as the next Chair, and
pledges its active cooperation in the lead-up to the
Doha Conference.
The draft resolution that we are to adopt today
was the subject of very careful examination by
Member States in four rounds of informal
consultations. I would like to take this opportunity to
express the sincere gratitude of my delegation to the
delegations that took an active part in the drafting
process and were with us throughout the consultation
and negotiation process for their valuable input and
constructive ideas, which helped us to shape the
present draft. That active participation and interest, as
well as the large number of sponsors of the draft
resolution, demonstrate the continued validity and
relevance of the International Conference process and
bode well for the success of the forthcoming Doha
Conference. I hope that many more countries will join
in co-sponsoring the draft resolution today, thus further

06-33513

A/60/PV.78

reinforcing its message on democracy promotion to the
international community.
On behalf of all of the sponsors, may I express
our hope that the draft resolution will, as in the past,
command the unanimous support of the Assembly and
be adopted without a vote.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/60/L.53.
The representative of Costa Rica has asked to
speak in explanation of position before a decision is
taken on the draft resolution. Before giving the floor to
that representative, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to speak in explanation of
position, in conformity with rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, before a decision
is taken on draft resolution A/60/L.53.
Since the 1988 Manila Declaration, Costa Rica
has closely followed developments in what is known as
the International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies. In 1994, we participated as observers at
the Second International Conference, held at Managua,
which our Minister for Foreign Affairs attended. That
was a clear signal of my country’s support for that
important initiative. We also participated as observers
in the Bucharest and Cotonou meetings, and, although
we were unable to attend the Conference at
Ulaanbaatar, we paid close attention to its outcome.
Our delegation’s interest in and support for the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies is thus clear and long-standing.
Costa Rica would like to draw attention to
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, which merely
“encourages” the Secretary-General to continue to
improve the capacity of the Organization to respond
effectively to the requests of Member States in the area
under consideration. My delegation unreservedly
supports that request and understands by it that, far
from simply “encouraging” the Secretary-General,
paragraph 4 sets out a requirement identical to those
set out in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the resolution, as we
explained during informal consultations.

entitled “Mandating and delivering: analysis and
recommendations to facilitate the review of mandates”,
in practice there has been a degree of ambiguity in
resolutions when it comes to setting up mandates, by
the indiscriminate use of words such as “requests”,
“calls upon” and “encourages”. The Secretary-General
tells us that such ambiguity may make it easier for
Member States to reach decisions, as is the case today.
However, as the Secretary-General states in paragraph
10 of the report,
“since the membership has indicated a wish to
use its review of mandates to examine
opportunities for programmatic shifts, it is both
necessary and desirable to identify a working
definition of the unit of analysis and delineate the
scope of the exercise.”
My delegation welcomes the recommendation of
the Secretary-General and agrees with him that it
“necessary and desirable”, especially at this stage in
the United Nations reform process, to learn from
experience and overcome formulas that have made it
difficult to take action and to assess such action within
Organization. Using precise terms of reference when
setting up mandates should be a priority for the
General Assembly.
Having made that clarification, Costa Rica would
like to reiterate its support for the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies initiative.
That is why my delegation is among those that have
called for the adoption of draft resolution A/60/L.53
without a vote.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the
representative of Mongolia for his leadership and
commitment. His delegation has been by our side since
the beginning of the negotiation process. We reiterate
our support for and solidarity with that delegation.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/60/L.53.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, the following countries have added their
names to the list of sponsors: Burkina Faso, Niger,
Paraguay, El Salvador, Cameroon and Maldives.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.53?

As the Secretary-General himself rightly pointed
out in his report contained in document A/60/733,

06-33513

5

A/60/PV.78

Draft resolution A/60/L.53
(resolution 60/253).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Cuba, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to explain its position on the
draft resolution that we have just adopted.
First, we would like to thank the delegation of
Mongolia for its professionalism and for the
outstanding manner in which the process was
conducted. It enabled us to reach a positive outcome
acceptable to all. The resolution contains various
elements relevant to international perspectives on
democracy, including the reaffirmation that democracy
is a universal value based on the freely expressed will
of people to determine their own political, economic,
social and cultural systems and their full participation
in all aspects of their lives.
It also reaffirms that, while democracies share
common features, there is no single model of
democracy, and that it does not belong to any country
or region; and reaffirms the necessity of due respect for
sovereignty and the right of self-determination.
However, we would like to express our concern
about two elements contained in the resolution; my
delegation would like to make its position on those
aspects clear.
First, with regard to operative paragraph 1, my
delegation wishes to state that it firmly rejects some of
the recommendations and proposals contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (A/60/556). It is my
delegation’s view that this paragraph does not in any
way endorse the proposals in question. We are
concerned that these recommendations made by the
Secretary-General indicate an intention to give official
recognition to international groups or movements that
promote the exclusion of developing countries from the
United Nations.

It is clear that such movements, unlike the
movement of new or restored democracies, apply
selective, discriminatory and exclusionary criteria that
are based on double standards, rather than on genuine
international cooperation in the area of human rights
and democracy.
With regard to the report’s perspectives on the
establishment of democratic governance indicators, we
wish to make it perfectly clear that we will oppose any
attempt to impose in future subjective indicators that
are politicized and discriminatory and that are drawn
up without the participation of the specialized
governmental agencies charged by the United Nations
with dealing with such tasks.
Secondly, with regard to operative paragraph 4
and the reference to the so-called Democracy Fund at
the United Nations, my delegation continues to be
concerned, as we stated at the time of the adoption of
the 2005 Summit Outcome document, that it is not
clear who will decide — and how — which countries
are able to access that Fund to establish or consolidate
their democracies.
We will make sure that the Democracy Fund is
not used as a kind of mechanism for certifying who is
or is not democratic. We are also concerned that, with
the Fund, we will witness a continuing erosion of
specific United Nations Development Programme
development plans and programmes through activities
that overlap with those that must be carried out by the
Department of Political Affairs.
Finally, we would like to thank Mongolia once
again for its very positive work.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
10?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I wish to inform the
General Assembly that the Assembly will take up the
reports of the Fifth Committee at a later date, to be
announced.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

6

06-33513
