UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
‘
th

L

MEETING: 23 MARCH’1968

”

”

””

;

‘I :,
I

’ “,

.,

NEW

YORK

:

:

.,I

,,
‘,
CONTENTS

”

‘*
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l406/Rev.l)
Adoption of the agenda

.........................

1

..... ......., ......,...,..............

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
(bl Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . . . . . . . . . . .

s/W.1406

,

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jQures Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Securiw Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
.I

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTH MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday,
President: Mr. Ousmane SocC DIOP (Senegal).

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The first
speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, on whom I
now call.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The day before yesterday,
Mr. President, I requested you to convene an urgent
meeting of the Security Council to examine the continuous
campaign of acts of violence and aggression pursued from
Jordanian territory against my country and my people. The
Security Council is now fully acquainted with the situation.
An illegal, aggressive war waged by the Arab States,
Members of the United Nations, against another Member
State, Israel; a large-scale, co-ordinated and organized
campaign of terror, sabotage and slaughter, carried on
incessantly and indiscriminately against men, woinen and
children, towns and villages, at night and in daylight-this is
the basic problem.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l406/Rev.l)

1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed’to thb President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(bJ Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486),
Adoption

23 March 1968, at 6.15 p.m.

4. The Security Council cannot, the Security Council must
not, remain silent on it. The people of Israel, who have
lived in the shadow of war for the last twenty years, turn to
you again in the hope that the Council will not ignore the
mortal perils created by the continuation of these Arab acts
of aggression, that it will not belittle our suffering, that it
will not refuse us relief from the offensive of destruction
and death which we face, The Arab representatives have
tried to win from the Council approval and licence to
continue with their warfare of assassination and sabotage
against my people. We await the Council’s response.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
/al Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
(bj Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
5. Will the result of our deliberations bring encouragement
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of ). to those who pursue war and s’ow death? Will it be
the Security Council (S/8486)
interpreted as disregard for Israel’s request that the present

threatening situation not be permitted to continue, not be
allowed to escalate to an even graver state?

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the Council’s earlier decision, I propose to invite
the representatives of the two countries which have
requested this meeting of the Security Council, Jordan and
Israel, to take places at the Council table for the duration
of the discussion on the question now before us. I also
propose to invite the representatives of the United Arab
Republic, Iraq, Morocco and Syria to take the places that
have been reserved for them at the side cf the Council
chamber, on the understanding that when it is their turn to
speak they will be invited to take places at the Council
table,

6. If in the mind of anyone there could have been doubt
as to the circumstances in which Israel was compelled to
take measures against the basesof aggression and terrorism,
the summary which I submitted yesterday to the Council
/1404th meeting/ on what we discpvered in the camps of
the raiders on the east bank and’ the reports published in
today’s press from eye-witnesses in Jordan should reveal
fully the extent of the menace and the magnitude of the
assault with which we are coping.
7. In this morning’s New York Times we find a striking
description of the terrorist organization, their training and
activities, and I should like to quote from the report:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y, Tekoah (Ismel) took places at the
Cortncil table, and Mr. M. A. El-Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr, A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima
lMorocco) and Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) took the places
reserved for them,

“Karameh camp was swarming today with men carrying
Soviet-made machine-guns and grenades and voicing pride
over the fight they put up ye$t,erday.
.
1

“
1

.

.

“A group of visiting reporters was turned back at
gunpoint today, but later a group of four accompanied by
a Jordanian Army captain spent twenty minutes in the
camp before they, too, were ordered to leave.
“A Jordanian policeman, one of about half a dozen in
the camp, identified the men as members of the
Resistance National Guard.
“But other Jordanians said freely that they were
members of El-F&ah, a Palestinian guerrilla group
dedicated to underground warfare against Israel.
“A Jordanian who was with the visiting reporters and
another who had been to Karameh earlier in the day with
King Hussein and Premier Bahjat al-Talhouni on an
inspection tour of the subsea-level valley, gave the
following account . . .
$6. . .
“ . . . the commandos moved into the ghost camp and
the Israelis apparently learned of their presence.
“When the Israel armour smashed into Karameh
yesterday, the commandos took to the hills, they said,
because their ammunition wasrunning low.
“Meanwhile, Israel helicopters landed ‘400 to 500’
troops near the foothills about half a mile east of the
camp. 1 here again the commandos fought them, resorting
finally to knives when their ammunition was exhausted,
they told the Jordanians.”
8. It is now evident that we are confronted by a fully
geared war machine that has been set up for the purpose of
launching against Israel a large-scale offensive in the hope
that the special methods employed would give it immunity
from any measures of self-defence that Israel might find it
necessary to take and from censure by the Security
Council.
9. It is with great expectation that the entire world awaits
the Security Council’s decision on the respective Israel and
Jordanian complaints: on one hand, a complaint against
continuous war, terror, incursions, destruction and murder,
a complaint against the sanctuary that Jordan openly grants
on its territory to terrorists, marauders and saboteurs; on
the other hand, a complaint on measures taken by Israel in
defence against this sinister type of aggression. I am certain
that all members of the Security Council realize how
heavily their stand and their decision will weigh upon the
prospects of peace and security in the Middle East.
10. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): I now call
on the representative of Jordan.
i 1. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I shall not burden the
Council with a lengthy statement at this late stage in our
deliberations, but certain points raised by the Israel
representative and repeated time and again and on every
occasion call for an answer. I do not think that the Security

Council took the Israel representative seriously when he
said that he had also submitted a complaint to the Security
Council and requested an urgent meeting of the Council,
Mr. Tekoah did not come to our Council with clean hands,
He came to this Council after Israel had committed a crime
and had admitted having committed a crime. So I think,
Sir, that you do understand the motives behind this
complaint. It is nothing but an attempt to divert the
attention of the Council from the real issue before it to
irrelevant and fabricated allegations. I had hoped that the
Council would not permit this complaint to be incorporated in its agenda. This is a tactic, an old pattern, well
known to the Council.
12. In July 1966, Syria submitted a complaint and
presented details of another serious crime committed and
admitted by Israel. Israel, following this same pattern,
presented a counter-charge to divert world public opinion
and the Security Council. At that time I objected to the
inclusion of that charge as a combined item with the
complaint of Syria. We had a lengthy debate in the Security
Council and it was decided that no combined debate would
take place, that the complaint of Syria would be considered
first, as item(u), and that item(b) would be considered
following the adoption of a resolution on item (a).
13. When there is a clear attempt to divert, to fabricate, I
think that it should be the duty of the Council not to
permit such distortion. It would not be in keeping with the
dignity of the Council-I do not speak of the dignity of the
one who presented the complaint in the circumstances.
14. The representative of Israel raised the question of who
lives in Karameh. He said that the Israel forces when they
committed their attack did not see the local inhabitants of
the west bank in Karameh. He has the ability to
differentiate between who comes from the west bank and
who does not. The people of Karameh were there; they
continue to be there. The claim of Mr. Tekoah is
contradicted not only by the reports of the United Nations,
the report of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency,
but by the many press visitors, journalists, dignitaries. I
need not mention many of them here, but .when I was in
Jordan Mr. Eugene Black was there. He came a day or two
after the crime of Israel on 15 February 1968; he met the
people, talked to the people, and the people were there.
They mentioned their names, where they came from, which
part of Palestine they came from. Now we hear Mr. Tekoah
saying that the people there were not the people of the
camp.
15. The claim that Karameh camp was a terrorist base is
again a new claim. We in the area are used to it. This is an
attempt to cover up, to give justification for killing every
young man in Karameh on the contention or allegation or
claim-that he is El-Fan& he is fedayeen, and he should be
either killed or kidnapped or taken to the occupied area.
16. This is not the first time we face such a contention
and such a claim. In October 19.56, when the Israelis
invaded Sinai, when the Israel forces occupied the Gaza
Strip, they came and entered Khan Yunis, a town in the
Gaza Strip. They killed-and the record of the United
Nations is there to testify to this-most of the young men

!
’

x
i

1
/

in Khan Yunis, saying that they were the fedayeen, the
commandos. The same thing is repeated today, Here they
are telling the Security Council that all those in Karameh
are not the people of Karameh; they are El-Fatah.
Therefore the Israelis can do what they like, commit
crimes, kill them, murder them, kidnap them, take them
back to the occupied area, and so on.

and tax-exempt donations, my country, small Jordan, was
intervening in the domestic affairs of the [Jnited States. I
submit that the contrary is true. It is these pressure groups
which are intervening in the domestic affairs’ and the
security of Jordan. They help a foreign non-American
authority politically and financially to invade my land and
expel my people. Through these tax-exempt donations,
Israel was armed to the teeth and thus was tempted to
OCCUpy’the west bank of Jordan. Thanks to fund-faising
and propaganda the Israelis adopted the policy of terror.
Thus I ask the question in all fairness and in all justice: Arc
those pressure groups not accomplices to this terror? And
an accomplice to an act of terror is a terrorist. The Security
Council is expected to condemn these terrorists and not to
point its finger at the rightful owners of the land who are
thrown across the Jordan river and thrown from their
homes to live in huts and cavesand tents.

17. Mr. Tekoa!! said yesterday that the local inhabitants
were armed. I wonder whether the Israel invaders were
expecting the Karameh people to receive them with ari arch
of triumph or greet them with bouquets of flowers. Or did
they think that the Karameh camp was a sporting club or a
picnic area for them to enter’?
18. As human beings they resisted; they did not surrender
to the aggressor, and they will never do so. When Israelis
come back to invade, kill and destroy the people of
Karameh are determined to be there and again to meet
them and ‘to defend themselves and their beloved soil. They
will resist aggression, they will resist the aggressor, with all
the means at their disposal. In this last Israel attack there
was hand-to-hand fighting. This is not unique behaviour, It
is the determination of a people who believe that no price is
too great for liberty and no sacrifice too dear for freedom.
This body, the Security Council, is the instrument which by
its action can prevent crimes of this nature, Resistance to
crimes of the Israelis is not unique. It is always the answer
when there is invasion, and the Security Council offers a
better and more effective deterrent.

23. Those are the people of Palestine, They are
liberty-seeking and freedom-loving; it is for that reason, and
in accordance with the Charter, that they are struggling.
No, I am not intervening in the domestic affairs of the
United States, a great Power. Jordan is a small country.
24. I now turn to a very important question, raised time
and again during our debates yesterday and the day before
yesterday. It is the question of peace and stability and
security. They are beautiful words, beautiful terms; but we
should examine the deeds. Some members spoke about
having observers on the so-called cease-fire line, In the first
place, let me say that there is no such thing as a cease-fire.
line. There are cease-fire resolutions and a cease-fire area,
but I know of no cease-fireline.

19. Mr. Tekoah referred to certain demonstrations in
Halwan and other parts of Cairo. He failed to say, however,
that all demonstrations wanted the immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal of foreign troops from all
Arab territories.

25, The Israel representative, for obvious reasons, referred
time and again to the so-called cease-fire line. We heard
other representatives, either intentionally or because of an
oversight, speak about a cease-fire line. Now we are asked
to consider the possibility of having observers on that
so-called cease-fire line, We welcome the stationing of
observers on both sides of, the armistice demarcation line.
That is the line recognized by the Security Council and by
the United Nations; that is the only line I am aware of
which is recognized by the United Nations as such.

20. The Israel distortions went so far as to say yesterday
that the people of the west bank are happy and that: it is
the Arab Governments which do not want peace. On this I
leave it to the members around this table, who are familiar
with the reaction of people under foreign domination and
their reaction to foreign invasion. All members around this
table have experienced foreign invasion in one form or
another. They all reacted in the only normal and natural
way. The people of the west bank, of Gaza, of Sinai and of
Syria are not exceptions to the rule.

26. We welcome the strengthening of the United Nations
machinery created for observing, that is, the Mixed Armistice Commission machinery; it is the only United Nations
machinery created for observing. We hope that Member
States will not create a situation which would enable the
Israelis to consolidate the fruits of their aggression and their
programme for new expansion. We want to see the
Armistice Agreement fully activated. That is what we want.
That is what Israel is evading.

21.’ I have with me a red book. It embodies thirty-seven
documents about the resistance of the west bank of Jordan
to the Israel occupation. This is a book which was issued by
the Institute for Palestine Studies, which is founded by no
less a person than His Excellency the President of Lebanon,
Dr. Charles Hilou, with a membership of Members of
Parliament, professors of the American University of
Beirut, and other dignitaries. This book contains thirtyseven documents pertaining to Arab resistance and protest
against the Israel occupation. It is available to any member
around this table who wants to know more about Israel
crimes and more about the resistance in the area.

27. Much has been said about a cease-fire, cease-fire
agreements, cease-fire machinery and cease-fire observers.
While we support the armistice machinery in the area, we
do not support anything new which would freeze the
so-called cease-fire line until such time as the Israel
programme of expansion is fulfilled. That is something
detrimental to peace in the area. We want immediate
withdrawal; then observers on the armistice demarcation
line, together with a strengthening of the United Nations

i2. I now turn to the statements of my colleague from the
United States, Mr. Goldberg. He seems to imply that in
raising the question of pressure groups in the United States
3

armistice machinery. That is the crux of the problem before
the Council in a separate item.

the war to continue, or do they long for peace to b
established at long last?

28. We speak about a line. We have to speak about
withdrawal, immediate withdrawal, to the line, the only
line, the United Nations recognizes.

37. The PRESIDENT (translated
the representative of Jordan.

from French):

I call o’

38. Mr. EL-FARRA
(Jordan): The song of peace t
something which we are used to coming from every Isrd
who takes that seat over there. When they speak abou
peace one wonders whether they really genuinely ani
sincerely believe in peace. Did they believe in peace aher.
in 1897, they decided at the first Zionist conference to takr
Palestine as a Jewish home and displace the people d
Palestine? Did they think in terms of peace in 1917 uvhel
they persuaded a British gentleman, Lord Balfour, tc
promise the land of Palestine to the Israelis, against the will
of the people of Palestine, to convey to them somethingllt
did not own? Did they think in terms of peace in 1941
when, through the pressure groups 1 mentioned earlier, the)
were able to persuade the former President of the United
States, Mr. Truman-and his memoirs are there to testifyk
what I am saying-to apply other pressure and bring about
the immoral decision partitioning a land against the will 01
its people, conveying a sovereignty which the United
Nations, like Lord Balfour, never owned? The United
Nations never had sovereignty to convey to a State coming
from Europe called Israel.

29. I should say that the Members which are committed to
protecting Israel cannot claim now that they cannot put
pressure on it to withdraw and observe the 5 June line.
They are morally responsible for its behaviour; they cannot
abdicate their role as parents of an authority now openly
defying every value enshrined in our Charter.
30. It was immoral and wrong to create a Zionist State in
our land against our will, support it beyond any reasonable
limit, arm it to the teeth, and then let it loose to attack,
plunder, kill, murder and destroy. It is wrong for the
Security Council to take action which shows that Israel is
on its own. It is wrong to say that peace, which is needed,
can be achieved only through new observers, not on the
armistice demarcation line but in the present cease-fire area.
31. We want all members of the Security Council to be
fair to the victim and stop accommodating the aggressor. Be
fair to a small Member of this United Nations which is the
victim of your inaction. Be fair to a friend who gets nothing
but headaches, disappointment and frustration from its
friends. Be fair to peace, to a peace-loving small country
that is subjected to daily attacks. Be fair, above all, to the
Charter, which provides that there shall be no fruits of
aggression.

39. Did they think in terms of peace when, in defiance01
the United Nations, they occupied many Arab towns whicL/
were supposed to be part of the Arab State of Palestine?/
Did they think in terms of peace when they occupied once
third more than what was allotted to the State by the
United Nations? Did they think in terms of peace wher
they invaded Sinai in 19.56, and Mr, Ben-Gurion rushed
there to find the first hill, call it the Mount of Moses ali
then say “This is part of Eretz Israel-Moses received tk
message here”? Did they think in terms of peace wllcn
they launched this vicious attack-this
war of June-thir
sneak attack, this surprise attack? Did they think in term
of peace when they occupied Gaza, Sinai, all of the west
bank of Jordan and part of Syria? Do they think of peacr)
now?

32. We want the Council not to let the arrogance of Israel
power influence its judgemcnt and sense of justice. You are
judged before world public opinion by your deeds vis-h-vis
the aggression, If you exploit our case for internal
considerations, we, to protect the dignity, safety, welfare
and security of our people, may look elsewhere for remedy.
33. One final reminder to all members of the Security
Council: no one should attempt to ride two horses at the
same time. The safety of every member lies in riding one
vehicle-namely, the Charter, its values and great cause. The
Charter was intended to serve peace with justice.

40. The road to peace is simple. Give up what you took bji
force. Force does not convey right. Force does not givt;
fruit. Aggressiongives no fruit for the aggressor,Law doe!
not give this. The jurisprudence of the European,the Latin
American, the Soviet, the Arab, the Asian and the Africar
all recognize this doctrine. Article 17 of the Charterof tk
Latin American States’ is very clear. They bring it out toi
showthe signsof peace.
I

34. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel in the exercise of his right of
reply, ”
35 J Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is not my intention to
prolong this meeting unnecessarily. However, Mr. El-Farra
tried to refute my statement that the Arab inhabitants of
the west bank desire peace, that they aie weary of war and
hostility and hatred instilled in them for twenty years by
the Arab Governments. I fully understand the difficulty of
convincing the representative of Jordan that this is so. After
all, he for years now has been a tenaciops exponent of
belligerency and conflict. However the west bank, like
other areas under Israel control, is open to all.

41. As I said in this Council earlier, peace meansSOIII~(
thing else to the Israelis. We both. agree on the word
“peace”, but we disagreeon the spelling. The spelling01.
“peace” by Israel is “p-i-e-c-e”. Our spellingis “p-e-a.ce”:;
They wanted a “piece” in 1.897, one in 1917, onein 1941,
one in 1956, one in 1967, and they are on the go. YetI1
hear membersof the Council speakingabout havingpeople
coming as observersto maintain stability. Peacerequiresa;

36. If he is in fact interested to learn of the present
attitude of the Arab people towards peace and war, let him
come and see for himself. Let him speak to those he wants
to speak to. Let him ask them: Do the Arab people want

1 Charter of the Organizationof AmericanStates,signed
al,
Bogotci,on 30April 1948.
4

change of heart, mind and behaviour, Peace must be
practised. They have to practise peace.

49. As to the idea of negotiations: One never negotiates at
the point of a gun. That is surrender. I think that the
United States of America did not negotiate after Pearl
Harbor. I think that Lord Caradon would agree with me
that the United Kingdom did not negotiate after Dunkirk. I
do not think that any European Power negotiated when
Nazi Germany occupied most of Europe. They all resisted
and they all worked for the liberation of their homeland
from the invaders. But the condition precedent to any
other move is withdrawal-immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal. That is to be preceded by the
acceptance of the resolution and its implementation.

42. As to the west bank of Jordan, these are documents
not signed by people outside the weJt bank, but signed by
the leaders; signed by the Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib, who was expelled two weeks ago by the Israelis;
signed by Mr. Anton Attalah, the former Foreign Minister
of Jordan who appeared before you here, and was expelled
and deported by force; signed by Ibrahim Baker, a
well-known leader who was also expelled by the Israelis;
signed by many of those who were expelled because they
signed those documents, because they resisted. Many others
are still there. I do not have to go to find out. I can ask
those who were expelled, those who are now across the
river.

SO. But to try to convey the impression that you are for
peace when you are for aggression is so obvious a distortion
that it needs no comment.

43. So no matter how much Mr. Tekoah sings the song of
peace, the world knows. Facts are there, they do not need
too much examination. All you have to do is to look at the
map, look at the practice, look at the behaviour, look at the
crimes and look at the attacks against Jordan every day. It
does not need much effort to find out who is for peace and
who is for war and aggression.

51. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel.
52, Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): It is so much more constructive
to be challenged on questions of peace than on questions of
war, and therefore I should like immediately to respond to
the question put to me by the representative of Jordan and
to say that we do accept the goal of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 to establish a just and
lasting peace by agreement, together with Jordan. That is
the basic provision, that is the basic aim of the resolution.
We still await that kind of confirmation on the part of the
Jordanian Government.

44. Also, we can look at the reports of the United
Nations. Mr. Gussing has something to say. You have the
report;’ it has not yet been examined by the Security
Council, but it is there. Other documents are there. We
expect our able and competent Secretary-General very soon
to send his special representative to go and examine these
crimes, the crimes committed in Sinai, in Rafah, in
El-Arish, in Khan Yunis, in Gaza, in Kuneitra and, above
all, in the west bank.

53. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Jordan.
54. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Now, I want you, Mr. President, and the other members who voted for the resolution
adopted unanimously to clarify this. Did you adopt a goal,
or is the goal in the Charter? Did you not adopt a
resolution with specific paragraphs calling for specific
deeds? The goal is in the Charter. If the statement we have
just heard proves anything, it proves defiance, arrogance,
complete ignorance, To come here and say that they accept
the goal is to ignore completely the will of the Security
Council. What is the goal? To score a point? The goal is
the Charter, and the Charter does not need resolutions.

45. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel.
46. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The only reason why I have
asked again for the right to make a brief observation is that
it is a rare moment when I find myself in agreement with
the representative of Jordan, 1 do agree with him that the
road to peace is simple. It is a very simple road and Israel is
ready to take it, to take it together with Jordan. We are still
waiting for a sign that, in accordance with the Charter
obligations of a Member State of the United Nations,
Jordan is ready to walk on this path towards peace together
with us-to meet, to discuss, to ‘reach agreement on a
peaceful settlement.

55. I repeat my question. Do the Israelis really and
sincerely accept the Security Council resolution? What is
more, do the Israelis, who defied the will of ninety-nine
Members of the United Nations on the question of
Jerusalem, accept that resolution of the General Assembly
L22.54 (ES-V)] supported by ninety-nine Members, with
the regrettable abstention of the United States and the
understandable abstention of Israel? I again challenge the
representative of Israel to tell this Council whether they
would agree to implement a resolution on the question of
Jerusalem adopted by ninety-nine votes in favour? What
has been their answer to this question? What has been their
answer with respect to the resolution? Their answer has
been: Jerusalem is not negotiable. These are facts, and facts
are stubborn things; neither Mr. Tekoah nor any leader in
the Israel Cabinet is in a position to cover up or hide them.
They are glaring, they are all known and they cannot easily
be distorted.

47. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Jordan.
48. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I challenge Mr. Tekoah of
Israel to come out before the Security Council, right here
and now, and say that Israel agrees to implement the
resolution adopted unanimously by the Security Council on
22 November 1967 /242 (1967)]. I challenge him to come
out right here and now and say that Israel accepts the
resolution and its implementation.
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Yeor, Supplement for October, November and December 1967,

document S/8158.

5

under European mandates. That was the time when secret
agreements were concocted, and one would think that such
a day was over. It is not over. That is what WC nrc
confronted with today. The Palestinian people has been
sadly neglected in these deliberations and here I come to
the crux of the point in answer to what Mr. Tekoah has
mentioned: that the Arab Governments have sown the
seeds ofhatred-perhaps I am paraphrasing-in the h%rtS OI
the Palestinians. If I may say so, he meant, I believe, tlu?
Palestinians. Nobody has to sow the seeds of hatted in the
hearts of anyone if you take his home, if ~011 take his land
and if you take away his patrimony.

56. The PRESIDENT (translated frum French): I have just
received a request from Mr. Baroody [S/8499/, the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia, to be allowed to
address the Council on this agenda item. As I hear no
objection, I shall now call on Mr. Baroody.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. h4. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table.

57. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President, and my thanks go to the members of the Council for
raising no objection to my request to take the floor.

62. It was Israel, it was the Zionists who sowed the seeds
of hatred in the hearts of the Palestinians, not the Arab
Governments. No Arab Government dated, and let this be
made clear. Time and again I mentioned it during my last
statement. No Government would dare to say to the
Palestinian people “Forget your land; come on, be good, we
will take some of you here and some of you there.”

58. I have listened very patiently to the debate since this
question was placed before the Council. I did not intend to
take the floor, but circumstances have made it necessaryfor
me to set the record straight. Certain statements were
judiciously made to divert the attention of the Council
from the question placed before it. I am not going to repeat
the substance of statements I made before the Council in
several interventions during 1966 and 1967. To do so
would indeed be to burden and encumber the Council’s
record with certain historical facts that speak for themselves.

63. What right have the Arab Governments to tell the
,Palestinian people, who consider themselves Palestinians,
that they should go and live somewhere else? Why did not
Europeans tell one another during the Second World War: it
does not matter. Well, all right, part of the Czech people in
the Sudeten area of Czechoslovakia were absorbed. So
what? They had a Second World War that started in Nazi
Germany.

59. However, I have noticed that the question as presented
by the representative of Israel makes it appear as if there is
a problem to be resolved between Jordan and Israel. It is
true that Jordan has paid a stiff price so far. A good part of
its territory has been dismembered and occupied. But no
one seems to have mentioned the Palestine people as a
nation. I was fourteen years old in 1920 when Palestinewhose population happened to be 94 per cent Arab-was
occupied by the British as the Mandatory Power. There was
a Palestinian people, a separate national entity, just as there
was a Lebanese people, just as there was an Iraqi people,
just as there was an Egyptian people, or a Syrian people. In
a dastardly manner they were all placed under mandate. I
am not going into the history of the mandates now, nor
into the Conference of Versailles.

64. We have heard of terrorists. They are Palestinian
freedom fighters trying to regain their homeland. You
cannot ask anyone to refrain from regaining his homeland.
It does not depend on Saudi Arabia or Jordan or Egypt or
Iraq or Lebanon or Syria. It depends on those people who
are themselves in their majority the owners of the land.
65. We all know that Zionism is a European movement; it
is not an oriental movement. Time and again I have said
that the Semitic Jews are our brothers and we have never
negated that. I am not going to go into the annals of history
to prove how the Jews fared because they were our own
people. We are Semites; the Arabs are Semites and the Jews
are Semites. But this movement started in Europe. It is an
incursion into the midst of the Arab homeland. It expropriated Palestine. The Bible says that the Jews will go back
there one day. Well, if we want to treat sacred books on an
equal basis, there is no such thing in the Koran, and the
Koran is the Holy Book of 600 million people. Do you
mean to say that the leaders of Israel are such funda.
mentalists in religion that they mean that Zion is a
geographical entity--or rather that it is something of the
spirit which is noble rather than a geographic occupation at
the expense of others? As I have said time and again in the
Past, who knows but that some of those Palestinian
indigenous people may have been Jews and may have been
proselytized or converted, or may have opted either for
Christianity or for Islam. They are the indigenous people of
the land. That is what we should bear in mind,

60. I must say that there is a Palestinian people; part of
them lived in Jordan. They had no choice but to adopt
Jordanian nationality. But they were Palestinians and they
are still Palestinians. There are Palestinians in Saudi Arabia,
there are Palestinians in Syria, there are Palestinians in
Lebanon, there are Palestinians in Egypt and there are
Palestinians scattered all over the world. Why? Because
they were sold down two rivers: the Thames and the
Potomac.
61, I do not know if it was a mistake at that time for the
Soviet Union to vote for partition. I must say this with
anguish. I was present at the 1947 meetings on partition.
Did anybody, did the representative of Israel take into
account that there is a Palestinian nation and that selfdetermination and the sovereignty of a people reside in the
people, and that you cannot take it away from them? Does
the representative of Israel consider that, because many of
them lived in camps-forcibly on seven cents a day--you
can just erase their loyalty to their land? Ninety-four per
cent were Palestinians. Forget that they were Arabs. They
were a people like the people of Lebanon, like the people
of Syria, like the people of Iraq, who were placed unjustly

66. Around this Council table nobody mentions the
Palestinian People. Why? They were under a mandate, they
were scattered. Should they be neglected, should they be
imored? Therefore, my last words are no exhortation on
6

my part, because it seems that the United Nationsespecially the Security Council during the last three or four
years-has become a body of consensus rather than one
trying to find what is just.
67. You cannot compromise the Charter-peace with
justice. Here in this host country if somebody violates the
Constitution or goes against it, there is the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court is the conscience of this country, You
cannot have a political solution when there is a people who
are not represented here and could not be repiesented here
because of the dastardly acts against them. The Palestinian
people are not represented here. But when we are dragged
into this matter as if to say that the Arab people and the
Arab States as such are having a dispute with Israel, in fact
it is the Palestinian people who have a dispute with Israel
which usurped their land, which usurped their homeland?
That is the crux of the question.
68. I remember 1947. I do not recall now what the exact
vote was, but 2 or 3 votes were needed. And, as my
colleague from Jordan mentioned, what pressure was not
brought to bear to get those votes for the partition of
Palestine. It played havoc with the people that lived there.
69. Do you think that if Jordan-or for that matter, Syria
or, as has been alleged, the United Arab Republic-wanted
to come to an agreement, the Palestinians in those
countries, scattered as they are in the camps all over the
Arab world, would remain docile and keep silent?
70. This is why time and again I have said that there will
be no peace in Palestine. This saddens me, because in the
United Nations we are all for peace. But when somebody in
this Council, in this very Council, speaks of trying to
exercise influence on this or that group of States, that
means we are sabotaging the United Nations. The United
Nations is predicated on transcending spheres of influence,
power politics, special arrangements and bilateral or multilateral treaties that are not based on the Charter and its
principles.
71, What are we in the Middle East? A piece of cloth to
be pulled by two great Powers, each one exercising its
influence? At least those who talk about influence give
that impression, that it is a piece of cloth that is being
pulled on the one side by one Power and on the other side
by another, and those Powers have their clients, If there is a
tear in the cloth, then each one darns that tear with his own
thread. Those tears are the conflicts. There will be many
tears, until no cloth is left.
72. Speaking humbly and from my own experience, I
would not be surprised if that quarter of Asia, that Arab
East-not Viet-Nam but that Arab East-is the theatre of
the third world war. Because the stakes are high. This is not
a religious movement. It is motivated by religion, just as the
Crusades were motivated by religion. But as we know now,
the Crusades were really for economic reasons. We know
that now; Schlumberger, the French historian of the
Crusades, tells us that, and other historians too. The
motivation was religious, but it was really to postpone
nationalism in Europe. At that time the Church was both a
religious and temporal power. And what happened? Do

you know that. the Christians fought in the Arab East by
the side of their brothers? They did not consider that the
Crusaders were Christians; they fought against them
because the Crusades were an incursion into their midst.
Then too, none other than our Ottoman brothers-who are
also Moslems, though that is not the question-came in and
occupied the Arab lands. It took some time. But where are
the Ottomans today? And then came our European-I do
not want to say brothers; cousins, because Europe is a
projection of Asia-our European cousins, and they gerrymandered the area into mandates. Our good friend Lord
Caradon wasin that Mandate; he was a magistrate there and
I enjoyed talking Arabic once in a while there with him.
Well, where are they now? Gone-not with the wind; with
the Second World War.
73. And now, who comes in? The Zionists. If they were
the Jews of our area there would be no problem. We lived
side by side with them for, I think, more than 2,000 years,
since they came down from Ur of the Chaldees. And when
did Abraham come? Who can tell? Abraham preceded
Moses from Iraq. But our problem is not with them; our
problem is with that incursion from Eastern Europe. And
who are those Jews? Most of them were converted to
judaism. In saying this I am citing the Jewish Encyclopaedia.: I wish I could order it brought here, and I know
where the page is, but the Library is too far from here. In
the first century, some tribes came from Europe and
occupied that area which we now call southern Russia.
They were pagans. After the Diaspora-the representative of
Israel knows about the Diaspora, when the Romans
destroyed the Temple-many Jews found their way to what
we call today the Balkans. Then, about the seventh or
eighth century, during the age of religious intolerance, there
were Christians and there were Moslems in that area, after
the Moslem religion spread into the North. Those tribes
were converted to Judaism-because neither the Moslems
nor the Christians wanted them to embrace either religion-so as to maintain the balance of power. I am not
going to go into details, but this is how they became Jews.
74. So then, this is an incursion from Europe, just as in
the case of the Crusaders or the case of the Mandatory
Powers, and the Palestinian people-and again 1 say, forget
that they are Arabs-are the victims. And yet they are
called terrorists, You are equat.ing them with terrorists in all
kinds of draft resolutions here. Is it not a shame even to
think that anyone who tries to regain his land is a terrorist?
Why are people not called terrorists in Europe when they
try to regain their land? Is it because they are Arabs that
you call them terrorists?
75. No, this double standard cannot go on in the United
Nations, lest the United Nations founder like the League of
Nations before it. I observed the League of Nations in
Western Europe during its existence, and that is why it
foundered-a double standard.
76. No, you cannot do this to the Palestinian people by
any arrangement made in the United Nations or elsewhere.
You cannot confront Jordan with any such arrangement, a
State that has valiantly fought for its survival. You cannot
try to make the Syrians bow their heads. The Syrians are
also mentioned in the Bible. You cannot do that to any

80. Let us suppose that I laugh when they say: No, we
should not condemn Israel. Whether you condemn Israel or
not, Israel will march on until they themselves get drunk
with power. We shall not give them rope to hang themselves, Personally, I do not feel like hanging anybody; but I
am afraid for the innocent among the Jew,s,whether or not
they are Israelis, They will give the rope to hang themselves
because they do not know where to stop. God has mercy
upon him who knows where to stop and stops there. I
would be really touched to see any human being, whether
he were a Jew or an Israeli, a victim of those Zionists of
Europe. After all, he is a human being; we do not
differentiate between human beings on grounds of religion.
But the trouble here is that the motivation is religious.

people, for that matter-not because they are Arabs but
because they are people. And if they are weak today, they
do not have to be tomorrow.
77. My last word is that I should like to have on record
that as long as the Palestinian people as a people is not
taken into consideration-by this Council, by the General
Assembly and by the world at large-every arrangement or
combination of arrangements, every treaty that may be
worked out by third parties, whether face to face or
through intermediaries, will boomerang.
78. Two million Palestinians: can you erase them from the
face of the earth and sit here smugly wondering how we can
arrange these words, and whether both engaged in violence? Of course anyone who fights the other fellow
engages in violence, But it has implications. Whom are we
fooling here? Are we fooling ourselves? I am reminded of
these words of Omar Khayyam:

81. I would not ‘have taken the floor had it not been that
all of you would be beating round the bush; and I would be
beating round the bush with you, were you to neglect and
ignore the Palestinian people from whom, I am afraid, you
will hear again and again, not only in words, but, I am sorry
to say, in deeds. I hope that I shall not see wider conflicts
develop, because after all, I, like you and everybody round
this table, am for peace.

Myself when young did eargerly frequent
Doctor and Saint, and heard great Argument
About it and about: but evermore
&me out by the same door wherein I went.

The copyright is no longer there. Edward Fitzgerald, the
English Persian scholar at that time, translated that.

82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
further speakers on my list. Having consulted the members
of the Council, I find that the majority would like the
meeting to be adjourned. We shall meet again tomorrow at
4 p.m.

79. I have been here for twenty years, and we have been
discussing all that time. We began at Lake Success and
ended here on the site of a slaughter-house. We come in
through the door, talk about the Palestine question, and go
out by the same door as in we went, with nothing.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

8

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtoined
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publicalionr
d&positaires

du

Notions

Unies,

KAK

llOJlY~MTb

des
monde
Section

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.

Unies
sont
Informez-vous

des venter,

New

M3,JAHHk-l

York

DES NATIONS

en vente
dons
les librairies
aupr&s
de votre librairie
ou

OPI-AHMSAIMH

COMO

ILlI
IlSIlIIIITO 110 Ji4pCCp
II3~PIIRl"I,
IIhlO-TIOllIi
IIM

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

in U.N.

Price:

ObIEAHHEHHblX
MOXIIO
CIIpUIIill

: O~~l'OlIIl3~l~llJI
XblICBil.

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

en venta
o dirijase

HAUWfi

liyllIITb
n I~IIXIIMY
31arammx
06 ll3~JUllIJIX
ll IlJIllJOlI
IiIlIlil~llO~

@k?~1111C11111~1X

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidos
est6n
en todas
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
(I IU librero
Ventos,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

et les agences
odressez-vous
b:

ov Gen&ve.

~I:I~UIIIII
0pra1111:1nr~nn
0Sacpr11el1111~1x
IIaqnir
I1PCIIT('TIIRS II0 WCS ]JaiiOllaX
WIpFl. &%lO&IlTC
HB~XLIllIC
Ilpo~aiIiC

UNIES

IrIll[Ilh,

II

COIi~IIJl

UO

en librerias
y cows
distribuidoros
o: Naciones
Unidas,
SecciBn

de

UNIDAS

in other

currencies)

35356-May

1971--2,100
