General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

214

39/121.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile

The General Assembly,
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur.
Stressing the obligation of Governments to promote and
protect human rights and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken by virtue of various international
instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 3219 (XXIX) of 6 November
1974, 3448 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/124 of 16
December 1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of
20 December 1978, 34/179 of 17 December 1979, 35/188
of 15 December 1980, 36/157 of 16 December 1981, 37/
183 of 17 December 1982 and 38/102 of 16 December
1983, relating to the situation of human rights in Chile, as
well as its resolution 33/ l 73 of 20 December 1978 on disappeared persons,
Recalling also the resolutions of the Commission on
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Chile,
in particular resolution 1984/63 of 15 March 1984, 129 in
which the Commission decided, inter alia, to extend for a
year the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Chile.
Deploring once again the fact that the repeated appeals
of the General Assembly, the Commission on Human
Rights and other international organs to re-establish
human rights and fundamental freedoms have been
ignored by the Chilean authorities, which continue to
refuse to co-operate with the Commission on Human
Rights and its Special Rapporteur,
Once again expressing its grave concern at the persistence of the serious situation of human rights in Chile,
which, as established by the Special Rapporteur, has continued to deteriorate, and at the fact that the Chilean
authorities have not been responsive to the concerns of the
international community, as expressed in resolutions of
the General Assembly and of the Commission on Human
Rights,
Observing that, according to the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur, the right to enter and leave one's country
freely is seriously restricted for Chilean nationals and that
this situation has been aggravated by the issuance of a list
of the names of thousands of Chileans who are not allowed
to enter their country without conditions.
Taking note with utmost concern of the re-establishment
of the state of siege on 6 November 1984, which has aggravated the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile, particularly by the increase in the number
of arbitrary mass arrests, of persons sent into internal exile
and the practice of torture and other forms of inhuman
and degrading treatment, as well as the additional restrictions on the freedom of expression and information,
assembly and association,
l. Commends the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Chile for his report, 134 prepared in
accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution
1984/63;
2_ Expresses its indignatwn at the persistence of and
increase in serious and systematic violations of human
rights in Chile, as described in the report of the Special
Rapporteur, and, in particular, at the violent repression of
popular protest in the face of the refusal to restore the
13 4 A/39/631, annex

democratic order and human rights and fundamental freedoms on the part of the authorities, which have in fact
committed further serious and flagrant violations of
human rights, with mass arrests and numerous deaths;
3. Reiterates once again its dismay at the disruption in
Chile of the traditional democratic legal order and its institutions, particularly through the maintenance of exceptional legislation, the institutionalization of states of emergency, the extension of military jurisdiction and the existence of a Constitution which does not reflect the will of the
people freely expressed and the provisions of which not
only fail to guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms but suppress. suspend or restrict the enjoyment and
exercise thereof;
4. Expresses us alarm at the fact that the repressive
activities of the police and security agencies and, in particular, the National Information Agency continue to go
unpunished, as pointed out in the report of the Special
Rapporteur;
5. Once again views with concern the ineffectiveness of
the remedies of habeas corpus or amparo and of protection, owing to the fact that the judiciary does not exercise
fully its powers of investigation, monitoring and supervision in this respect and performs its functions under
severe restrictions:
6. Once again requests the Chilean authorities to
restore and respect human rights in accordance with the
obligations they have assumed under various international
instruments and, in particular, to put an end to the regime
of exception and the practice of declaring states of emergency, under which serious and continuing violations of
human rights are committed, with a view to restoring the
principle of legality, democratic institutions and the effective enjoyment and exercise of civil and political rights
and fundamental freedoms;
7. Urges the Chilean authorities to terminate the state
of siege decreed on 6 November 1984 and the consequences of that state of siege;
8. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have disappeared,
mcluding those arrested for political reasons, and to
inform their families of the results of such investigation
and to bring to trial and punish those responsible for their
disappearance;
9. Once again emphasizes to the Chilean authorities
the need to put an end to intimidation and persecution, as
well as arbitrary or illegal arrests and imprisonment in
secret places, and to respect the right of persons to life and
physical integrity by halting the practice of torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
which, in some cases, have resulted in unexplained deaths;
I 0. Again requests the Chilean authorities to respect, in
accordance with article 12 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 135 the right of Chilean
nationals to live in and freely enter and leave their country, without restrictions or conditions of any kind, in parlicular to annul the list ofnames of Chileans whose right to
enter the country has been restricted and recent measures
affecting other individuals, and to cease the practice of
"relegation" (assignment of forced residence) and forced
exile;
11. Renews lls appeal to the Chilean authorities to reestablish the full enjoyment and exercise of trade union
rights, in particular the right to organize trade unions, the
nght to collective bargaining and the right to strike, and to
11 >See resolution '200 A {XXI), annex.

VI.

215

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committel'

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -----------------------tance of research and training for the advancement of
put an end to the system of repressing the activities of
women;
trade union leaders and their organizations;
12. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to respect
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to proand, where necessary, restore economic, social and cultural
vide support to the Institute, particularly in it~ fund-raisrights and, in particular, the rights intended to preserve the
ing activities, by encouraging voluntary contributions to
cultural identity and improve the social situation of indigthe Institute;
enous populations, recognizing especially their right to
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
their land;
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
13. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the Special
activities of the Institute;
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under considera8. Decides to include m the provisional agenda of its
tion the situation of human rights in Chile;
fortieth session a separate item entitled "International
14. Again requests the Chilean authorities to co-operResearch and Training Institute for the Advancement of
ate with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their comWomen".
ments on his report to the Commission on Human Rights
JO I st plenary meeting
at its forty-first session;
15. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth at its forty-first session the report of the Special
Rapporteur and to take the most appropriate steps for the
effective restoration of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile, including the extension of the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur for one more year, and requests
the Commission to report, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/122. International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women 136
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37 /56 of 3 December I 982 and
38/104 of 16 December 1983 on the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,

Taking note of the note by the Secretary-GeneraJl 37 on
recent developments regarding the activities and statute of
the Institute,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision 1984/
124 of 24 May 1984 on the statute of the Institute,
Bearing in mind that the entire operation of the Institute
depends solely on voluntary contributions,
l. Welcomes the statute of the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement ofWomen 138
as approved by the Economic and Social Council in its
decision 1984/ l 24;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the programme of
activities of the Institute, 139 which constitutes a valuable
contribution to an increased role of women in the development process at all levels and is carried out in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system;
3. Stresses the relevance of programmes related to
women and international economic relations;
4. Requests the Institute, in preparing its future activities, to take into consideration the trends in research and
training relevant to women and development;
5. Invites Governments and intergovernmental organizations to contribute to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, in view of the increasing impor136 See also sect. VIII, resolution 39/249.
137 A/C.3/39/6.
138 A/39/511, annex.
139 See A/C.3/39/6, sect. II.
14 0 Report of the World Conference of 1he ln1ernational Women ·s Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July /975 (Umted Nations pubhcation, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. I.

I 4 December I 984

39/123. The role of women in society
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, as well
as the importance of the Declaration of Mexico on the
Equality of Women and their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975, 140 the World Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year 141 and the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 142
Noting that just and lasting peace and social progress as
well as the establishment of a new international economic
order, require the active participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation and in the
process of development,
Bearing in mind that economic inequality, colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, acts of aggression
and interference in the internal affairs of others and violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms constitute an impediment to the achievement of real and genuine equality and to the integration of women in society,
Convinced of the necessity to secure for all women full
realization of the rights embodied in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 143 in the International Covenants on Human
Rights 144 and in other relevant instruments in this field,
Recognizing that the achievement of equal and full participation of women in all spheres of activity constitutes an
inseparable part of the political, economic, social and cultural development of all countries,
Aware that efforts to promote the status of women in all
its aspects and their complete integration in society go
beyond the problem oflegal equality and that deeper structural transformations of society and changes in presentday economic relations, as well as elimination of traditional prejudices through education and dissemination of
information, are required so as to create conditions for
women to develop fully their intellectual and physical
capacities and to participate actively in the decisionmaking process in political, economic, social and cultural
development,
Mindful of the necessity to enlarge the possibilities for
both men and women to combine parental duties and
141 /hid .. chap. II, sect. A.
142 Report of the World Confi-rence of the

l'mted Na1ions Decade Jiir
Women: Equality. Development und Peace. Copenhai:en. 14-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.JV.3 and rnnigendum). chap. I.
sect. A
14.l Resolullon 34/180, annex.
144 Resolut,on 2200 A (XXI). annex
