S/PV.9383

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9383rd meeting

Monday, 24 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21601 (E)
*2321601*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria; and
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director for Coordination,
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: For several months, we have been
urging and advising that the new diplomatic context
surrounding the Syrian conflict could act as a circuitbreaker — if there was substantive engagement. With
substantive engagement, diplomacy could begin to
see important issues addressed incrementally in a
manner that would move us along the path envisaged
in resolution 2254 (2015). I have sought to engage the
Syrian parties, the Arab, Astana and Western players
and the Security Council to build positively on that,
promote coordination, coherence and complementarity
on Syria and to urge everyone to be ready to offer a
genuine contribution.
The goals are clear: to resume the intra-Syrian
political process facilitated by the United Nations,
most particularly by reconvening the Constitutional
Committee and making incremental progress when
we do; and, also, to elicit from all the key parties
confidence-building measures — step-for-step and
step-by-step — in a reciprocal and verifiable manner,
consistent with my mandate in resolution 2254 (2015).
I have also consistently stressed that addressing the
dire and worsening humanitarian situation not only
is a humanitarian necessity, but also would provide
some confidence that progress on political issues is
also possible.
2/20

24/07/2023

As we remember, after the earthquakes, we did see
positive humanitarian gestures. I can therefore only
share the Secretary-General’s disappointment that the
Council could not agree to extend its authorization
of United Nations cross-border relief operations — a
lifeline for millions of Syrians. How are the Syrians
meant to believe that some broader progress is
possible, and how are they meant to be encouraged to
overcome their own deep differences, if consensus on
humanitarian basics among the international parties
is elusive? As the political Envoy, I profoundly hope
that all doors will be kept open to resolve that issue,
and that the Council and all stakeholders will put the
needs of the Syrians first. We must redouble efforts to
find a solution that ensures that the continued delivery
of cross-border and cross-line humanitarian assistance
continues. Nothing is more important right now for the
most vulnerable Syrians than that.
Let me also note that we need a redoubled effort
to secure sufficient humanitarian resources and rapid
disbursement, at a time when funding is more stretched
than ever. This year’s humanitarian response plan is
approximately 13 per cent funded, while the Regional
Refugee and Resilience Plan is less than 10 per cent
funded. I urge donors to step up and stand with the
millions of people in Syria and in the region in host
countries, who depend on life-saving humanitarian
aid and early-recovery and livelihood support, after a
decade of war. I also call on the sanctioning countries to
continue to mitigate any effects of sanctions that could
worsen the living conditions of Syrian civilians. I am
glad that the European Union and the United Kingdom
have extended their new humanitarian exemptions
on Syria, which they issued in the aftermath of the
earthquake. Such types of exemptions, together with
enhanced attention to countering over-compliance, are
much needed.
On the political front, let us be honest — thus far,
months of potentially significant diplomacy have not
translated into concrete outcomes for Syrians on the
ground, whether at home or abroad, nor into real moves
in the political process. I hope that they will soon,
because if not, that will be another missed opportunity
to help the Syrian conflict to come to a negotiated end,
at a time when the impact of the crisis is deepening.
Both a Syrian-Syrian track and a wider process of
steps-for-steps confidence-building are needed now if
we are to move forward.
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I welcome the fact that reconvening the
Constitutional Committee is a clear point of consensus
among many key players. But I am disappointed that
disputes over the venue — which have arisen entirely
owing to issues unrelated to Syria — have so far
prevented that from coming to pass. We need political
will to overcome the issues that have prevented it, to
date, from reconvening in Geneva and to ensure that it
resumes and makes credible progress.
Let me pause here to remind the Council why that
political will is important. While not all issues are solely
in the hands of the Syrians, one that can and must be in
their hands alone is their country’s future constitution.
That constitution will be the social contract that must
underpin Syrians’ ultimate reconciliation and that will
establish for a post-conflict future the powers and
duties of the State and the rights and obligations of its
citizens. This is why the constitutional basket is core to
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), which among
other things sets a constitutional process for developing
a new constitution. The Constitutional Committee
brings together nominees of the Government, the Syrian
Negotiation Commission and a middle third from civil
society on the basis they have formally agreed on in the
terms of reference of the Constitutional Committee, to
“prepare and draft for popular approval a
constitutional reform, as a contribution to the
political settlement in Syria and the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015)”.
In the eight sessions that have been held so far, there
is no denying that progress has been very slow. And
there are reasons for that, reasons I have brought up
in the past. But I am convinced, as I believe are most
stakeholders, that it is better for all the Syrian people
that the process resume, continue, deepen and gradually
build some trust and move forward on substance. That
last point — substance — is essential. My team and I
are fully engaged in the effort to unblock the impasse
and find a way forward.
A second area that I have long sought to unlock
is how to move forward incrementally towards a safe,
calm environment in Syria — something that would
obviously overlap in many areas with the question
of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs),
which has gained heightened attention in the region. At
present, the conditions for safe, dignified and voluntary
refugee returns are simply not in place. And the refugees
must be protected, including from refoulement — just

S/PV.9383

as all civilians inside Syria, including IDPs, must be
protected. That is why we need the Syrian Government
to do more to address the very real and continuing
protection concerns — something that is fundamental
and that I have continually underlined. At the same
time, we will continue to engage donors on doing more
to address the concerns that all Syrians have about
livelihoods. Such a step-for-step dynamic could begin to
change realities on the ground for all Syrians, including
the displaced — and could also build confidence and
political space for a broader set of issues related to
resolution 2254 (2015), bringing us closer to a safe,
calm and neutral environment. In that context, I have
continued to coordinate closely with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Let me stress that this is one of several topics where
a wider steps-for-steps discussion could be productive.
There are many others, as I have flagged in the past. We
need engagement on them because while diplomacy has
continued, many things remain entirely unchanged in
this war, as Syrian civil society constantly reminds us.
Syria remains territorially divided, and Syrian society,
too, is divided on many issues. Five foreign armies are
present in Syria, and we have seen an alarming rise
in tensions among them in the past month. Civilians
continue to be arbitrarily detained, tortured and forcibly
disappeared. They continue to be injured or killed,
amid violent clashes and regular exchanges of mortar,
rocket and artillery fire across north-east and northwest Syria. This month also saw air strikes attributed to
Israel, reports of Turkish drone strikes, reports of proGovernment air strikes north of Aleppo, and reports
from the United States saying that it carried out drone
strikes near Al-Bab on a leader of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Tensions in the south-west spilled
over into military escalation once again. The sustained
calm that can lead to a nationwide ceasefire remains
essential. In addition, the threat posed by listed terrorist
groups remains very real and must be addressed in a
cooperative manner.
Meanwhile, Syria’s economic crisis is deepening.
To give just one example, this month the Syrian pound
hit a record low, with the unofficial rate for the first time
exceeding the 12,000 Syrian pound mark relative to one
United States dollar. The impact of that on all Syrians,
9 in 10 of whom are living below the poverty line, is
extremely serious. Just to take one indicator, some
workers are now earning less than $8 a month when in

23-216013/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

June their monthly earnings were around $18, meaning
that their families can now hardly afford one meal a
day. Basic services and other critical infrastructure are
on the verge of collapse. In the scorching summer heat,
some households can access less than three hours of
electricity and primary water supplies a day on average,
while others have less access or even none at all. When
they are unable to secure basic needs, some families
adopt negative coping mechanisms, such as reducing
meals or resorting to child labour. And of course, as a
last resort, many simply find ways to leave Syria.
The tragedy of the detained, disappeared and
missing has also remained unchanged. At least on that
question, the General Assembly’s decision to establish
the Independent Institution on Missing Persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic through its adoption of resolution
77/301 is a sign of hope. I urge the parties to the conflict
to cooperate with the Institution, to share information
with families on the fate of the missing, just as they
would if action were taken to release detainees at
scale, and to cease the practices — about which there
are still many reports — of arrests of returnees and of
the forcible removal of children to military training
camps, as well as the torture of detainees, which has
led to deaths.
If we are to move forward, I would appeal to the
Syrian Government to work proactively with the United
Nations in the pursuit of a political path out of the
conflict. I will also continue to work with the Syrian
Negotiation Commission, with which my Deputy,
Ms. Najat Rochdi, met this month in Geneva. I thank
the many people in the region and beyond who have
sought to reinforce the core message of the United
Nations in that regard, and I continue to prioritize
working closely with the actors in the region. And as
we have all done, we will continue to consult widely
with Syrian civil society and Syrian women, including
through the Civil Society Support Room and the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board.
Shifting the dynamics requires engagement in
a spirit of pragmatism and flexibility, and a greater
sense of urgency and pace. It requires a constructive
and coordinated international diplomacy in support of
genuine confidence-building. And it requires regional
and international unity in support of a Syrian-led,
Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated political
process to restore Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity and meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. The more that Council
4/20

24/07/2023

members can work together despite their differences,
the more they can encourage and support the Syrians
to do the same.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: Let me begin with an urgent
and common concern, which is the continuation of
cross-border assistance to north-west Syria to provide
vital support to millions of vulnerable civilians. As has
been said so many times in this Chamber, cross-border
aid is a matter of life and death for those millions.
The future of cross-border assistance should not be a
political decision but a humanitarian one. And therefore
it was deeply disappointing, as the Secretary-General
said, when the Security Council was unable to reach
an agreement on extending its authorization of United
Nations cross-border relief operations in Syria.
The United Nations and its partners stand ready
to continue providing cross-border life-saving
humanitarian assistance through Bab Al-Hawa at the
scope and scale needed. We have taken note of the letter
from the Government of Syria granting the United
Nations permission to use the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
to deliver humanitarian aid in north-west Syria.
We continue to engage on the terms outlined in that
letter and the modalities that are fundamental to our
principled operations. Several Council members have
encouraged the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
Government of Syria to undertake bilateral discussions
on the modalities for humanitarian operations in northwest Syria. We will pursue that engagement to ensure
we have the working modalities to enable us to fulfil
our mandate in a principled manner.
In the meantime, United Nations personnel, relief
supplies and protection assistance continue to enter
north-west Syria via the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai
border crossings. Since 10 July, 18 trucks and 10
cross-border missions have used the two crossings to
replenish stocks, monitor programmes and assess needs
on the ground. Our essential operations are, for now,
taking place through the two crossings. In parallel,
most of the United Nations agencies are currently using
the humanitarian aid items that had been strategically
prepositioned inside north-west Syria prior to 10 July
in order to ensure continuity of the humanitarian
assistance. As we have already indicated, cross-border
operations in north-west Syria have always been,
and must continue to be, guided by the humanitarian
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence. The overriding objective is to ensure
safe and timely access to civilians in need at the speed
and scale required.
The United Nations cross-border operation is
among the most scrutinized humanitarian operations in
the world, and the future of any monitoring mechanism
at the border crossings will need to be explored to
guarantee the humanitarian nature of cross-border
consignments. Moreover, once assistance enters Syria,
the strong monitoring of aid delivery remains. It is done
at three distinct levels and is a critical component of
United Nations cross-border operations. I am hopeful
that the consent granted by the Government of Syria
to use the two additional crossings of Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai border crossings will be extended before
it expires on 13 August. The crossings will remain
indispensable for the foreseeable future.
Record levels of needs give even greater urgency to
facilitating humanitarian access through all available
routes, both cross-border and cross-line, in line with the
obligation to facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of
relief under international humanitarian law.
Some of Syria’s most vulnerable populations live in
the north-west of the country — 4.1 out of 4.6 million
people who live there need humanitarian assistance to
meet their most basic needs. Nearly 80 per cent of those
people are women and children. In order to address
those severe levels of vulnerability, we need greater
predictability, which a three- or six-month permission
does not provide. Such a short duration poses serious
challenges to our operations, funding, logistics and
procurement. And, in all likelihood, it could lead to
disruptions in the humanitarian response. Furthermore,
such short time frames do not provide us with the
minimum time needed for effective early recovery
programming, including support for livelihoods and
the rehabilitation of infrastructure damaged by the
earthquakes. We will continue our concerted effort to
scale up early-recovery activities throughout Syria.
I am also deeply alarmed by the intense hostilities
in north-west Syria in the past weeks, with air strikes
and shelling resulting in civilian casualties. The
hostilities have also left people in fear of more attacks
and could fuel further displacement. Altogether, since
the beginning of this year, at least 26 civilians have
been killed, including five women and six children, and
at least 74 civilians injured, according to monitoring

S/PV.9383

carried out by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. As the fighting and
hostilities continue, I urge the parties to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian law and to
take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
civilian harm.
As the Special Envoy just mentioned, throughout
Syria, socioeconomic conditions continue to deteriorate.
The rapid depreciation of the currency to a new record
low in July and other forms of economic deterioration
have resulted in significant food and fuel price hikes.
The price of essential food commodities has surged
by more than 90 per cent in the course of this year,
putting basic food items and other essentials out of the
reach of millions of families. Approximately 12 million
people— more than 50 per cent of the population — are
currently food insecure, and a further 2.9 million are at
risk of sliding into hunger.
Despite the severe vulnerabilities, the 2023
humanitarian response plan for Syria is only
13.3 per cent funded. I am extremely concerned about the
consequences of such acute underfunding, which means
that we will have to further prioritize our response and
make difficult choices once again this year. That will
likely compromise life-saving assistance and curtail
investments in livelihoods and essential services. They
will result in more drop-outs from school, more acute
food insecurity and fewer protection interventions. In
order to give members of the Council an example of
what that means in practice, the beneficiaries of food
assistance are currently receiving only 50 per cent
of the standard ration size. In addition, assistance to
up to 40 per cent of them, or 2.5 million people, has
been discontinued this month, owing to funding
shortfalls. One month after the Brussels Conference, it
is now critical that the generous pledges announced be
converted into early disbursals of funding.
We are now at a moment of inflection — one of
change, but also continuity. As the Secretary-General
regularly reiterates, in all our discussions, deliberations
and decisions, we must keep our collective focus on
addressing the urgent needs of the people of Syria.
That includes ensuring the delivery of comprehensive
and predictable life-saving humanitarian assistance
through the most effective means, advocating for the
funding required to do so and demanding that the
parties respect international law and renew meaningful
efforts to secure a nationwide ceasefire, a political
settlement and an end to the conflict. We cannot give up

23-216015/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

24/07/2023

on the people of Syria. The people of Syria are indeed
counting on us.

cross-line aid deliveries, remain a crucial part of the
whole-of-Syria approach.

The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for
his briefing.

As we know, Bab Al-Hawa has been the primary
hub for United Nations humanitarian operations into
north-western Syria, handling 85 per cent of deliveries.
We therefore note with concern that no United Nations
aid has entered through it since the cross-border
mechanism expired almost two weeks ago. That only
adds to the anxiety of the millions of people in need
in north-western Syria who do not know if they will
receive life-saving aid. We must not forget the human
price attached to that kind of uncertainty. We remain
hopeful that an understanding can be reached so
that the United Nations can resume using the border
crossing, and as co-penholders we stand ready to give
any necessary support.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I am speaking on
behalf of Brazil and Switzerland, the co-penholders of
the Syrian humanitarian file. I will speak afterwards in
my national capacity.
We welcome Syria, Türkiye and Iran’s
participation at today’s meeting. We thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for
their briefings.
On 13 July, the Permanent Mission of Syria
informed us of its Government’s decision to open the
Bab Al-Hawa border crossing for the United Nations
use for six months. We appreciate the increasing
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for the provision of life-saving humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people. While the decision by
the Syrian Government can be a basis for the United
Nations to lawfully conduct cross-border humanitarian
operations through Bab Al-Hawa, we have listened very
carefully to OCHA’s concerns about the 13 July note
verbale. We have also heard various other stakeholders,
both governmental and non-governmental, in that
regard. We welcome the willingness of both OCHA
and the Syrian Government to discuss the terms under
which humanitarian operations through Bab Al-Hawa
could continue.
We reiterate that whatever solution is found to
continue alleviating the plight of Syrians must fully
comply with international humanitarian law and be
fully consistent with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.
That means that aid must reach all in need without
any discrimination. According to international
humanitarian law, parties are under an obligation to
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief to civilians in need. Financing
instruments and monitoring are key issues to take into
consideration in any continued cross-border operation
by the United Nations. We would like to remind
everyone that all modalities for access, including
6/20

We remain concerned about the very low funding
for the humanitarian response plan. The United Nations
and its partners require greater support to address the
growing needs in Syria, particularly in the wake of
the February earthquakes. We echo the calls for more
humanitarian funding, including for early-recovery
and livelihood programmes in all areas of Syria. At
the same time, we recognize that donor countries need
predictability for humanitarian activities and trust in
the practicality and continuation of agreements for
uninterrupted funding. Monitoring and reporting on
the delivery of humanitarian aid plays a crucial part in
building that assurance. As co-penholders, Switzerland
Brazil have been guided solely by the humanitarian
imperative. We remain committed to working with
Council members, OCHA, Syria and other interested
stakeholders, as well as humanitarian actors. We have
been doing so from the start, we have continued to do
it since Tuesday, 11 July, and we will keep on doing it
to ensure that the ultimate goal of assisting the Syrian
population is fully met and that we can fulfil our role as
co-penholders as well as we possibly can.
I will now make a statement in my national capacity.
Brazil fully concurs with the Secretary-General in
his assessment that nothing would do more to alleviate
the suffering in Syria and stem the tide of humanitarian
needs than an inclusive, comprehensive and sustainable
political solution to end the conflict, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015). The significance of
resolution 2254 (2015) cannot be overstated, as it
provides a clear road map for a peaceful resolution
of the conflict, while respecting Syria’s sovereignty,
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

independence, unity, territorial integrity and dignity.
It will be crucial for all the parties involved to adhere
to and act in accordance with those principles. It is
also imperative to exercise maximum restraint, avoid
further escalation and fully comply with all obligations
under international humanitarian law. We condemn any
unilateral actions that promote further violence and
instability in the region. We firmly oppose terrorism
and all forms of violence that jeopardize the safety and
welfare of civilians.
A comprehensive ceasefire is long overdue. Some
may consider a negotiated solution unrealistic. In
Brazil’s view, what is illusory is the idea that a military
solution could bring true peace to all Syrians or be a
solid basis for the reconstruction and development
of Syria. Recent positive developments, such as the
country’s return to the League of Arab States, have
opened potentially important avenues to meaningful
progress that seemed impossible just a while ago. We
agree with the Special Envoy that it is essential not
to miss the opportunity for re-engagement created by
the current positive momentum. It will also be crucial
to resume a credible intra-Syrian political process
with tangible results in the short term, including the
reconvening of the Constitutional Committee. We
thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his continuing
efforts in that regard and his ongoing engagement with
relevant actors. We reiterate our call on all the parties to
be genuinely committed to finding a path to democratic
freedom, stability and development in Syria. Let us be
clear. They all owe it to their fellow citizens, inside and
outside the country.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings today.
Over the past month, the Council has met several
times on this issue, and we have done so because
the humanitarian needs in Syria are so great and the
stakes are so high. As we all know, the penholders,
Brazil and Switzerland, made every effort to reach a
compromise resolution on cross-border assistance, but
one permanent member stood in the way of Council
action. Let us be clear here. Russia is fully responsible
for the lapse in United Nations cross-border deliveries
of humanitarian assistance through Bab Al-Hawa.
Russia refused to negotiate in good faith, and its
veto was yet another reminder that Russia has little
or no regard for the needs of vulnerable people (see
S/PV.9371). Just today, reports indicate that Russia

S/PV.9383

has carried out another round of attacks on Ukraine’s
grain infrastructure. Russia continues to wage war on
the world’s food supply, which is having devastating
consequences, especially for people in Syria and in
countries across the Middle East and Africa.
The Al-Assad regime’s announcement that it
will allow United Nations aid deliveries through Bab
Al-Hawa acknowledges the need for cross-border
assistance, but it includes unacceptable restrictions that
would hinder relief and put humanitarians, including
United Nations personnel, at risk. I note that the regime’s
opening of Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Rai did not include
such restrictions. Additionally, the regime’s permission
is for only six months, half the minimally necessary
period recommended by the Secretary-General. As
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths continues to engage
with the Al-Assad regime on the parameters of future
United Nations operations, we must remember that
the regime has a record of impeding United Nations
humanitarian activities in Syria. We have seen that time
and again for more than a decade. The unacceptable
conditions and demands contained in the 13 July note
verbale are consistent with that troubling record. And
for that reason, the United States has joined other major
donors in making it clear that any cross-border access
arrangement must include five key elements.
First, it must preserve the independence of
operations. The United Nations should be allowed to
engage with all parties on the ground, consistent with
the way it delivers assistance around the world.
Secondly, it must maintain the whole-of-Syria
response architecture. The United Nations should
be able to continue to operate response hubs outside
regime-held areas. And the regime should not interfere
with access arrangements between the United Nations
and local authorities in non-regime-held areas.
Thirdly, access should be granted for as long as
possible and must not lapse in the middle of winter.
Guaranteed access is essential to providing the
predictability and efficiency needed by donors, United
Nations partners and the Syrian people. Given the
overwhelming and persistent humanitarian needs in
north-western Syria, there is no justification for shortterm, ad hoc access guarantees.
Fourthly, the delivery of assistance must remain
consistent with humanitarian principles, and the United
Nations should maintain its ability to determine its
allocation, including design and targeting, based solely

23-216017/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

on needs and consistent with the principles of neutrality
and impartiality.
Fifthly, any arrangement must maintain the crossborder monitoring operation originally established
under resolution 2165 (2014) and avoid new reporting
requirements for local partners or beneficiaries. All
five of those elements are critical. They will bolster
trust among donor nations and implementing partners,
reaffirm that United Nations operations will be
guided only by humanitarian principles, maintain and
strengthen protections for partner and donor funding,
and give humanitarian workers the predictability they
need to save lives.
We appreciate Under-Secretary-General Griffiths’
commitment to keeping the Council and donors apprised
of the progress of his talks with the regime, and we are
prepared for the Council to review any understanding he
reaches to ensure it contains those elements. Anything
less than what I have outlined today would necessitate
the Council to seek a mandate to reauthorize the crossborder mechanism.
More than 62,000 trucks full of life-saving
aid — food, water, medicine and other essentials — have
crossed into Syria since the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2165 (2014) in 2014. But today the
humanitarian crisis has never been more dire. Twelve
years of war and this year’s earthquake have pushed the
Syrian people to the brink. The Syrian people are crying
out for support and, more than anything, for peace. The
United States is deeply saddened but not surprised by
Special Envoy Pedersen’s briefing, which made clear
that the political situation in Syria remains bleak.
Make no mistake: the blame rests on Russia and
the Al-Assad regime. Russia and the regime have
put the Constitutional Committee on ice. They have
rebuffed Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to launch
a step-for-step process, and they have opposed or
obstructed most efforts to advance other aspects of
resolution 2254 (2015), including by voting against the
General Assembly’s decision to create a new apolitical
mechanism to address the fate of detainees and
disappeared persons.
The bottom line is this: given Syria’s shameful
record, the Council cannot trust the Al-Assad regime to
do the right thing on humanitarian access. The Council
must remain deeply engaged on humanitarian matters
in Syria. The United States is committed to doing just
that. Special Envoy Pedersen asked us to stand up and
8/20

24/07/2023

meet the needs of the Syrian people, and that is exactly
what we are trying to do. We will never waver in our
support for the needs of the Syrian people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Director of Coordination at the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Mr. Rajasingham, for their reports on the political and
humanitarian aspects of the situation in Syria.
Today the situation on the ground in our friendly
country of Syria remains fraught with tension. In
addition to the illegal military presence in the north of
Syria, including the presence of the United States and
its allies in the trans-Euphrates region, there are other
dangerous factors, such as arbitrary air strikes by the
Israeli Air Force against Damascus and surrounding
areas, the latest of which was carried out on 19 July.
Terrorist activities in the south of the country, under
the cover of the so-called security zone near Al-Tanf
arbitrarily established by Washington, are also cause
for concern.
We believe that the return of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the Arab family and the restoration
of relations with Türkiye will facilitate an overall
improvement in the atmosphere in the Middle
East region and an expeditious recovery from the
consequences of the Syrian crisis. In that context, we
consider the awkward and inappropriate attempts by
Western countries to obstruct those natural processes
to be counterproductive. Such unconstructive steps, in
our view, constitute interference in sovereign decisions
of States and the politicization of purely humanitarian
issues such as early recovery and facilitating the return
of refugees.
The Russian Federation has consistently and
unstintingly advocated for the process of a political
settlement in Syria that is both Syrian-led and -owned,
with the support of the United Nations in strict
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). At the same
time, we believe that the modalities for international
mediation must be based on respect for the principles
of the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian
people themselves, without external pressure, must
reach agreement on all outstanding issues related to the
future structure of their country.
The only platform for such a direct intra-Syrian
dialogue has been and remains the Constitutional
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Committee. Any attempts to impose other frameworks,
formulas and schemes on the Syrian people will only
lead the situation to a dead end. The work of the
Constitutional Committee will resume after the parties
have chosen a convenient venue, other than Switzerland,
for meetings. As far as we are aware, that process is
nearing a conclusion.
As for the humanitarian aspects of the situation in
Syria, only five days since the discussion of the issue
in the General Assembly, we have nothing new to add
to what was said last Wednesday (see A/77/PV.90
and A/77/PV.91). We are pleased that international
humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria will
now be carried out in the same way as in any other
country’s context — that is, with the consent of, and in
close coordination with, the internationally recognized
Government of that country. We trust that the United
Nations humanitarian team will take seriously the
establishment of a cross-border humanitarian supply
route to Idlib under the new conditions, through the
Bab Al-Hawa checkpoint, as is already the case with
the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai checkpoints. UnderSecretary-General Griffiths’ team has all the necessary
tools to achieve that. There is no need for any further
decisions by the Security Council to that end. Let us
not forget that assistance to those in need should be
delivered via all possible channels, including through
lines of contact.
We hope that OCHA will not do the bidding of
Western States, which seem to have lost sleep over the
prospect of the United Nations having to cooperate with
the legitimate Syrian authorities, as it should be doing.
Humanitarians now have an excellent opportunity
to begin with a clean slate and finally prioritize the
interests of those who need humanitarian assistance,
including those residing in territories controlled by
the Government, not just internationally recognized
terrorists who have entrenched themselves in Idlib
and their Western sponsors. That must be done as is
right and proper, with respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.
We have heard again today how the straightforward
and customary instrument that is the United Nations
humanitarian plan for Syria is so severely underfunded.
We urge those donors who place the interests of those
in need above geopolitical considerations to respond
to the call of the United Nations to help, inter alia, to
finance early-recovery projects throughout Syria.

S/PV.9383

To conclude, I wish to take this opportunity to ask
the representative of OCHA a number of questions.
First, what is the fate of the report of the United
Nations country team in Syria on the impact of unilateral
sanctions on the humanitarian situation in the country?
That issue should by no means be overlooked by the
humanitarian wing of the United Nations — after all,
we are essentially talking about a form of collective
punishment against millions of ordinary Syrians.
Otherwise, everything that we have agreed upon here
will be to no avail.
Secondly, under the new circumstances, what is the
status of the Secretary-General’s internal Secretariat
manual, entitled “Parameters and principles of United
Nations assistance in Syria”? As we know, that manual
in fact prohibits United Nations structures from
carrying out recovery work in Syria. This is the perfect
time to consign that shameful document to history.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and my own country, Mozambique.
We would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
the Director of Coordination at the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their important
presentations. We welcome the participation in this
meeting of the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
The political and security crises in Syria have
persisted for more than a decade. They are compounded
by the humanitarian crisis and the effects of last
February’s earthquake, which are still being felt. As
a consequence, more than 23 million people are
subjected to daily suffering. Humanitarian needs are
only growing, and the grief of the Syrian people is at
an all-time high.
In this context, the A3 once again welcomes the
Syrian Government’s decision to extend emergency
measures, including the opening of the two additional
crossings at Bab Al-Salam and and Al-Rai until
13 August 2023. We take note of the Government’s
decision to grant the United Nations and its specialized
agencies authorization to use the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
to deliver humanitarian aid to civilians in need in northwest Syria, in full cooperation and coordination with

23-216019/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian Government, for a period of six months,
starting on 13 July 2023. We are counting on the
determination of the United Nations and the Security
Council to do everything possible to stabilize and
improve the humanitarian and living conditions of the
Syrian people. We must continue our efforts to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid through all modalities
to those in need throughout the Syrian territories.
We note that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/464) underscores the importance of the crossborder operations. As many as 1,068 trucks have crossed
into north-western Syria from Türkiye via the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing. During the reporting period, 127
trucks re-entered Syria through the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai border-crossing points. The United Nations has
carried out 116 inter-agency cross-border missions in
the north-west since 14 February. These humanitarian
operations must continue without interruption, as
access to services and supplies to meet the most basic
needs and to ensure the survival of millions of people,
80 per cent of whom are women and children, depends
on them.
Syria is facing a number of challenges that deserve
to be highlighted: lack of reliable access to drinking
water in sufficient quantities throughout the north of
the country; chronic fuel and electricity shortages,
against the backdrop of a cholera pandemic; the total
collapse of basic social services, particularly for women
and girls; and such increasing protection problems as
gender-based violence, malnutrition and psychological
disorders among children. Given the scale of these
challenges, the international community must act
urgently to respond in an effective and coordinated
manner. The country’s humanitarian situation must not
be instrumentalized.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique note with interest
the achievement of the $398 million funding target
for the emergency appeal for the earthquake in Syria.
We also welcome the results of the seventh Brussels
Conference on Syria and the region, held on 14 and
15 June, which recorded financial pledges of over
$4.9 billion dollars for 2023 and over $1 billion dollars
for 2024. We renew our appeal to the donors to honour
their pledges.
On the political front, the A3 remains convinced
that only a concerted political solution will enable the
Syrian people to regain their peace, security, stability
and dignity, which implies the cessation of hostilities,
10/20

24/07/2023

the restoration of State authority over the entire Syrian
territory and an inclusive good-faith dialogue involving
all of Syrian society, including women, youth and
minority groups. The current divisions within the Syrian
political class and the crisis of confidence between the
parties make the prospect of an intra-Syrian dialogue
within the Constitutional Committee seem very remote.
We urge all parties to set aside their differences and
give fresh impetus to the political process. The A3 also
encourages the role and support of regional players and
all other States with influence on either side in the quest
for peace and stability. The strong commitment and
good faith of the countries in the region is fundamental
to achieving this objective. In this regard, we welcome
Syria’s return to the Arab League.
We are convinced that resolution 2254 (2015)
remains the main road map for achieving a political
solution to the crisis in Syria, while respecting the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. We remain deeply concerned by
the persistence of hostilities, particularly in northern
Syria. We reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire
in the interests of the Syrian people and the stability of
the region.
The parties to the conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in
particular by ensuring the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Cases of arbitrary detention by
parties to the conflict are a violation of fundamental
freedoms, and we urge all stakeholders to strictly
respect the right of all to the freedom of expression.
The A3 remains concerned about the presence
of foreign military forces on Syrian territory, which
undermines regional and international security. We
reiterate our position that Syria should not be used as a
battleground for geopolitical rivalries.
The A3 reaffirms its support for the Special Envoy,
Mr. Geir Pedersen. We appreciate his efforts to bring an
end to the conflict that has been tearing Syria apart for
over 12 years. The Syrian people continue to pay a heavy
price. All the parties involved, and the international
community as a whole, must do their utmost to tackle
the humanitarian situation, setting aside all political
considerations and guided solely by the interests of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Director Rajasingham for their briefings.
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

As we have just heard, the humanitarian demands
of Syria remain the largest worldwide. We anticipate
a dramatic increase in needs, exacerbating an already
immense humanitarian crisis resulting from more
than 12 years of conflict in Syria. The funding of the
humanitarian response plan is at an all-time low.
The cross-border authorization of Bab Al-Hawa
was the lifeline for more than 4 million people in
north-west Syria. The use of the veto by Russia on the
renewal of resolution 2672 (2023) was a terrible setback.
The sovereign decision of the Syrian regime, with
conditions, does not provide sufficient predictability
for the United Nations and humanitarian partners to
deliver humanitarian assistance in a timely and efficient
manner. Syria remains an emergency, and the Al-Assad
regime, with the complicity of Russia, has managed to
politicize every humanitarian aspect of the crisis. There
is no doubt — Russia is weaponizing humanitarian aid
for political gain.
In support of the humanitarian imperative, we
again underline the need to ensure humanitarian access
via all modalities, including cross-border and crossline humanitarian aid and early recovery. I reiterate
Albania’s firm position that humanitarian realities on
the ground must drive us to find a solution through a
Security Council resolution.
We deplore the lack of progress by the regime
to allow the political transition in Syria, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), which remains stalled despite
the tireless efforts by the Special Envoy. By preventing
the Constitutional Committee from reconvening and
making substantial progress towards the constitutional
framework for Syria, as Special Envoy Pedersen
underlined, the Al-Assad regime is reconfirming its
lack of goodwill and good faith.
We all know that the root cause of all suffering in
Syria is political, and it can be alleviated only through
a lasting political solution. Syrians have lost hope in the
political process, and there is tremendous uncertainty
about what the future holds. We remain convinced
that respect for human rights and justice and ending
impunity for serious crimes are indispensable for
lasting peace in Syria. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption, on 29 June, of General Assembly resolution
77/301, for the establishment of a new mechanism
dedicated to clarifying the fate and whereabouts
of missing persons in Syria and for addressing the
humanitarian imperative. We must prove to the people

S/PV.9383

of Syria that they have not been abandoned. They need
help now more than ever.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Rajasingham for
their contributions.
The war in Syria continues, as does the suffering
of the Syrian people. Twelve million people have been
displaced, millions of whom have found refuge in
neighbouring countries or elsewhere, and 130,000 have
disappeared. In that connection, France welcomes the
adoption, on 29 June, of General Assembly resolution
77/301, establishing an independent international
humanitarian institution to help the families of missing
persons in Syria.
France is also concerned about the regional
destabilization caused by the production and export
network of Captagon. That is now one of the main
financial resources of the Syrian regime, which has
now become a narco-State.
France and Europe express their solidarity with the
Syrian people in the face of this tragedy. Since 2011,
France, the European Union and its member States have
funded United Nations agencies and civil society actors
to the tune of €30 billion in Syria and neighbouring
countries. The seventh Brussels Conference on Syria,
held on 14 and 15 June, mobilized €5.6 billion for 2023
and beyond. I should point out that over 90 per cent of
the aid comes from Europe, the United States, Canada
and Japan. Russia, for its part, provides virtually no aid,
here or elsewhere. The countries of the region, despite
the challenge this represents, are taking in refugees. It
is our duty to help them.
Only a political solution can put an end to the
suffering of the Syrian people. While the earthquakes
of 6 February have only worsened the humanitarian
situation, Russia has not hesitated to take more than
4 million Syrians hostage by opposing the renewal of
the cross-border aid mechanism. We support the efforts
of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs to promote access to aid at a time when needs
have never been so high.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
position — the humanitarian response must not and
cannot replace a political settlement. A return to
stability in Syria and the region will be possible only
through a solution that meets the aspirations of all
Syrians. Resolution 2254 (2015) is a road map with

23-2160111/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

clear parameters. The Syrian regime must commit to
a political process as defined by that resolution, which
was adopted unanimously by the Council. The regime
must make concrete gestures so that a genuine political
process can begin. No normalization, reconstruction or
lifting of sanctions can be envisaged in the absence of a
political transition within the framework of resolution
2254 (2015). Incidentally, by blocking cross-border
access a few days ago (see S/PV.9371), Russia at the
same time blocked the mandate given to the United
Nations to engage in early-recovery activities. France
reaffirms its full support for the mediation led by Geir
Pedersen and calls on all players to support his step-forstep approach.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I associate myself with the statement made by our
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Brazil, and
our co-penholder on the humanitarian issue.
I would like to add a few points in my national
capacity on the political situation in Syria.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen — not only for his briefing, but also and
above all for his ongoing efforts in the implementation
of his mandate.
Switzerland regrets that the regional and
international dynamics that emerged in the aftermath
of the earthquakes on 6 February have not yet led to a
convergence of efforts to improve the political, security,
humanitarian or economic situation in Syria. On the
contrary, the current dynamics have unfortunately
failed to de-escalate the military situation, improve
humanitarian access or relaunch the political process.
We regret that the Council was unable to renew the
mandate for cross-border humanitarian aid. We recall
that not only allowing, but also facilitating the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian aid to civilians in
need is an obligation under international humanitarian
law. The United Nations and its partners must be able to
continue to provide assistance to those in need.
Despite the current dynamics, we welcome the
convening, on 16 August 2023, of the first meeting of
the Contact Group set up on the sidelines of the 7 May
meeting of the League of Arab States. We recall that
the States parties to the Contact Group have expressed
their willingness to support a step-for-step approach
towards a political solution, in coordination with the
efforts of the Special Envoy.
12/20

24/07/2023

Switzerland once again stresses the relevance of the
Council’s resolution 2254 (2015) to achieving a just and
comprehensive solution that ensures peace and security
in Syria and the region. The relaunch of the work of
the Constitutional Committee would give an important
signal of support for the search for a concerted approach
to peace. Switzerland remains ready to make Geneva the
Organization’s main headquarters in Europe, available
to host meetings of the Constitutional Committee, as
well as any other type of talks and initiatives aimed at
promoting a lasting peace in Syria.
It is vital that the ceasefire is respected at the
national level. Already affected by a humanitarian,
social and economic situation that has never been
so critical, civilian populations are still too often
the victims of this armed conflict. According to
the Secretary-General’s latest report on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363), Syria is one of the
countries with the highest number of verified serious
violations against children. All the parties to the
conflict have committed violations against children
such as recruitment, killing and maiming, as well as
attacks on schools and hospitals. Those violations
must stop immediately, and we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s ongoing dialogue with the various parties to
the conflict in that regard.
Switzerland calls on all the parties to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian law, in particular
measures to protect the civilian population. Respect for
human rights is also essential to protecting the dignity,
life and freedom of every individual. Switzerland would
like to reiterate its full support for the Human Rights
Council’s Independent International Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism, whose work is fundamental
to the fight against impunity.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the information provided
by Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and by the Director
for Coordination of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Mr. Rajasingham.
I welcome the presence of the representatives of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the Republic of Türkiye at today’s meeting.
We are concerned about the lack of unity in the
Security Council on the situation in Syria, at a time
when the humanitarian crisis has worsened as a result
of the protracted war and the effects of the February
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

earthquakes. My delegation reiterates the need to
maintain formal access to ensure predictability,
certainty and planning in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, as established in previous Council
resolutions on the humanitarian issue in Syria. We
support the efforts of the Secretary-General, through
the United Nations agencies, as the sole mediator
capable of establishing a strict monitoring scheme that
can contribute to increasing the transparency, efficiency
and accountability of operations on the ground. We also
support the dedicated work of the Special Envoy and the
specialized agencies and partner organizations working
on the ground. We call for ensuring that the treatment
of refugees and displaced persons always complies with
human rights law, especially with regard to voluntary,
dignified and safe returns.
On 19 July, during the General Assembly’s meeting
on the implementation of its resolution 76/262 (see A/77/
PV.90), Ecuador expressed its regret about the use of
the veto on draft resolution S/2023/506 (see S/PV.9371).
In that regard, we encourage the co-penholders,
Switzerland and Brazil, to continue their efforts and
deliberations to find a mechanism that would enable
the Council to adopt a resolution ensuring cross-border
humanitarian assistance and allowing the teams on the
ground to fulfil their mandates, in accordance with the
framework established by international humanitarian
law. OCHA’s figures reflect the urgency of returning
to a dialogue so that humanitarian supplies entering
north-west Syria can serve the 80 per cent or so of the
people who depend on it, nearly all of them women
and children.
We believe it is important to strengthen
cooperation and the coordination of regional and
United Nations actions to curb violent extremism,
terrorism and drug trafficking, which affect the civilian
population, especially women, children and people
with disabilities, and we hope that the Special Envoy’s
negotiation efforts will lead to the reactivation of the
Constitutional Committee.
We insist on the need for the Government of Syria
to provide answers on the fate of missing persons
and the situation of people who have been arbitrarily
detained. The Council must continue to implement
measures to put a definitive end to the violence, address
the enormous humanitarian needs of the population
and undertake inclusive political negotiations based on
the principles of sovereignty, independence, unity and

S/PV.9383

territorial integrity, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Mr. Rajasingham,
the Director for Coordination of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for
their briefings.
China supports the Special Envoy’s efforts to
continue advancing a Syrian-led and -owned political
process, as mandated by resolution 2254 (2015). We
welcome Syria’s return to the League of Arab States.
We support the Arab countries in their spirit of strength
through unity, playing a greater and more constructive
role in finding a political solution to the Syrian issue.
Countries outside the region must fully respect the will
and desires of the countries and peoples in the region,
cease all rhetoric and actions that stand in the way of
dialogue and reconciliation and create a favourable
external environment for engagement and consultation.
We are concerned about the security situation in Syria.
The international community should take a zerotolerance approach to all elements of terrorism on
Syrian soil. One country has recently ramped up its
illegal military presence in Syria, which is concerning.
The illegal presence of foreign armed forces in Syria
must be ended without delay.
China supports the international community
in providing assistance to all Syrians who have
humanitarian needs, provided that Syria’s sovereignty
and its Government’s ownership are fully respected.
We welcome the Syrian Government’s recent sovereign
decision to open the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing.
OCHA has confirmed that this permission by the
Syrian Government can indeed be a basis for the United
Nations to legally conduct humanitarian operations. We
encourage the United Nations to sort out any subsequent
operational issues with the Syrian Government through
dialogue and consultation. We also reiterate that the
cross-border rescue mechanism was a temporary
arrangement made under special circumstances, and
there is a need to speed up the transition to cross-line
assistance so that the cross-border mechanism can be
phased out and eventually discontinued.
Fostering Syrian-owned capacity to ensure its
socioeconomic recovery and development will go a long
way to easing the country’s humanitarian problems.
To that end, it is essential to ensure the availability of
adequate, balanced and sustainable funding to all parts

23-2160113/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

of Syria, further broaden the scope of early-recovery
programmes and support sustainable development
projects in key areas. Unilateral sanctions against Syria
must be lifted without delay or preconditions.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their briefings today.
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the
humanitarian situation that we have witnessed over the
past two weeks and its repercussions for our brother
people of Syria. The sudden and unexpected end of
the cross-border aid delivery mechanism to Syria was
shocking both for the international community and the
Syrian people. Although we expected the mechanism to
end eventually, given that it was always an exceptional
and temporary solution, we had hoped that it would be
terminated in coordination with the United Nations, so
that humanitarian workers on the ground would have
appropriate and sufficient time to plan gradually for
future humanitarian operations.
In the circumstances, it will be important for
the international community to take practical steps
during this transitional stage to ensure that assistance
is delivered to the Syrian people through all available
means. In that context, the United Arab Emirates once
again welcomes the Syrian Government’s decision
to grant the United Nations permission to deliver
humanitarian aid through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing for
a period of six months, especially considering that both
sides have continued their constructive discussions on
finding common ground and reaching an understanding
on several related issues. The interests of the Syrian
people must remain at the core of all humanitarian work.
In the meantime, we find it encouraging that aid
is flowing easily through the Bab Al-Salam and Bab
Al-Rai crossings. I also stress that the Council must
continue to discuss the humanitarian aspects of the
Syrian crisis, despite the fact that the mechanism has
not been renewed, with joint meetings on the political
and humanitarian dossiers. We believe that is important,
especially within the framework of the Council’s work
and its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. More than 15 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, half of them women and girls.
We also underscore the importance of the SecretaryGeneral’s reports, which keep the Council informed
about relevant developments.
14/20

24/07/2023

In view of the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian and security conditions in Al-Hol camp,
we stress the need to find a sustainable and prompt
solution to the situation there. We welcome Iraq’s recent
repatriation of a new group of about 200 of its citizens
from Al-Hol. In addition, we stress the importance of
supporting demining activities in Syria as part of earlyrecovery projects there, both to protect civilians from
the danger posed by mines and to create the conditions
necessary to ensure the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
Turning to the political situation, we hope that
the recent visits of Arab officials to Syria, especially
from neighbouring countries, will help strengthen
coordination and cooperation in addressing several
issues of common interest to the countries of the region,
including the return of refugees and the fight against
terrorism and drugs. We look forward to continued
Arab diplomatic efforts within the framework of
the outcomes of the Jeddah Summit, and in close
coordination with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, in order to pave the way towards a settlement
of the Syrian crisis, which has witnessed no tangible
progress for many years. We believe that empowering
women in Syria and strengthening their participation
at every stage of the peacebuilding process, especially
in mediation and dialogue, are critical to ensuring that
those efforts will be successful and sustainable.
While we stress the need to preserve the
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
we also stress the need for de-escalation across every
region of the country. De-escalation will contribute to its
security and stability and enhance regional security. As
for the security situation, it remains a source of concern
as Da’esh continues to carry out attacks in Syria, killing
and injuring civilians and obstructing the efforts and
imperilling the lives of humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, it is crucial to move from managing
the Syrian crisis to resolving it. Fragmented approaches
have been shown to be unsuccessful and will not achieve
the progress we all desire.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and Director of Coordination Rajasingham for
their briefings.
We agree with the sentiment expressed by the
Special Envoy when he says that if progress cannot be
made on ensuring the continued principled delivery of
humanitarian support to Syria, what hope do we have
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

when it comes to the international cooperation needed
on all aspects of the Syrian political file? The Council
is holding its monthly meeting on Syria today against
the backdrop of a failure to renew the humanitarian
cross-border mechanism on 11 July (see S/PV.9371).
All across the country, wholesale destruction, conflict,
a lack of basic services in education and health and
recent scorching temperatures and wildfires have
further exacerbated the mounting humanitarian needs.
However, while Syrians continue to face this cascade
of deprivation and hunger, which exposes women and
girls to disproportionate risks of sexual violence and
vulnerability, the ability of the international community
to deliver aid effectively has been called into question.
Russia’s veto of draft resolution S/2023/506, ending
the cross-border mechanism, and Damascus’s offer
of access to the United Nations with unacceptable
conditions attached are worrisome developments.
We continue to believe that such decisions create too
much uncertainty at the present juncture in such a
highly volatile context. Civilians and humanitarian aid
workers on the ground need all the support, stability and
predictability they can get right now, not unrealistic,
eleventh-hour arrangements. The conditional offer
of a short-term authorization by Damascus exposes
Syrians in the north-west to the same interference in
and manipulation of humanitarian aid they experienced
before the creation of the cross-border mechanism. It is
an attempt to obfuscate reality and contort international
law in order to achieve a political objective.
The text presented by Brazil and Switzerland
represented a well-crafted compromise. Following
weeks of negotiations, the co-penholders struck a
delicate balance that should have been acceptable to all
sides. The renewal would have expanded humanitarian
assistance, early-recovery projects, mine action and
cross-line aid, in addition to supporting rehabilitation
in various areas, enabling the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons, all of it done in full accordance with
international law and the humanitarian principles of
independence, impartiality, neutrality and humanity.
Malta reaffirms the need for the Council to come
together once again to renew the cross-border
mechanism in order to allow the continued delivery of
principled humanitarian assistance to the people most in
need in the north-west. We urge the Russian Federation
to engage in negotiations to find a workable outcome.

S/PV.9383

On the political front, Malta remains concerned about
the continued lack of progress on the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). While we have taken note of the
decision of the League of Arab States to invite Syria to
resume its participation in meetings, it is critical that
actions taken at the global level, including those agreed
on by the Council, be supported at the regional level.
Progress on resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way to
achieve a just political solution and lasting peace in
Syria. Malta once again calls for the Constitutional
Committee to reconvene. Meaningful progress must
be made to benefit the lives of the millions of Syrians
who have continued to endure more than a decade of
conflict. Amid the current situation across the country,
we reiterate that the conditions are still not in place for
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees.
It will be crucial for Damascus to cease its arbitrary
detentions, enforced disappearances, torture and ill
treatment of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the Council
has the ability — and the responsibility — to find a
compromise that can deliver for the Syrian people. We
also stress that the Council must do so while maintaining
the principles of humanitarian action, which safeguard
the operational independence of the United Nations and
of its specialized agencies and humanitarian partners.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director
of Coordination of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings.
It has been nearly two weeks since Russia vetoed
draft resolution S/2023/506, which would have extended
the cross-border mechanism for aid delivery. With
needs in Syria at an all-time high, such an outrageous
act politicizes humanitarian assistance and is a painful
betrayal of the Syrian people, including women and
children, for whom the continued provision of aid is
a matter of life and death. Japan continues to believe
that cross-border assistance provided under a Security
Council resolution is the best way to ensure the necessary
predictability, transparency and accountability required
by donors and humanitarian actors, including the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
all of which in turn facilitates the early-recovery
assistance that the people of Syria so desperately need.
The fact is that Council members have continued
to make every possible effort to adopt a new resolution

23-2160115/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

extending the mechanism under the coordination of
the co-penholders, Switzerland and Brazil, but so far
there has been no breakthrough. The United Nations
operations there remain suspended, and cross-line
assistance has not yielded sufficient results. As we stand
idly by, the situation on the ground worsens by the day.
In the circumstances, the delivery of assistance to the
Syrian people, who are surviving daily hardships, must
be the top priority. For that reason, Japan is extending
its assistance not only through the cross-border
mechanism but to all parts of Syria. We therefore fully
support Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths’
efforts to explore options with the Syrian Government
on specific modalities for the timely resumption of
assistance via Bab Al-Hawa, pending a new Security
Council resolution. We strongly encourage such efforts
so that aid can be delivered without constraints and at
the same scale and speed as before.
The recent decision by the Syrian Government to
allow United Nations cross-border aid via Bab Al-Hawa
includes impractical restrictions on humanitarian
actors. We would like to ask the Government to show
maximum flexibility in dealing with what is a purely
humanitarian issue. If an agreement on such modalities
can be reached between both parties and a certain
level of transparency ensured, including through a
monitoring mechanism, that would be an important step
for donor countries in encouraging them to continue
their assistance to Syria. In that regard, we want to
continue to receive the Secretary-General’s bimonthly
report. Furthermore, the United Nations funding
scheme for NGOs needs to be continued, pending the
Council’s adoption of a new draft resolution.
Lastly, we must also consider the country’s longterm future. While we are aware of Arab efforts in
the region to advance the political process based on
resolution 2254 (2015), the political track remains
frozen, including the Constitutional Committee.
Without a fundamental political solution to the Syrian
crisis, the impoverishment of almost 90 per cent of
Syrians living below the poverty line will continue
to deepen, and the issues of refugees, the internally
displaced and missing persons will remain difficult
to resolve.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
16/20

24/07/2023

I would like to start by thanking Special Envoy
Pedersen and Director Rajasingham for their briefings
and for the work of their teams on the ground.
Two weeks ago, Russia vetoed the nine-yearold United Nations mandate to provide humanitarian
assistance to the 4.1 million people in need in northwest Syria (see S/PV.9371). Those 4.1 million people
are now living in a state of limbo, not knowing if food
and medicines will reach them in the coming weeks and
months. As we have heard, during those two weeks not
a single truck has crossed the Bab Al-Hawa crossing,
where 85 per cent of United Nations assistance had
previously transited. Not one truck. Although Syria has
said that it has given the United Nations permission, the
conditions that Al-Assad has set out make it unsafe to do
so. The United Nations has been clear that the conditions
that Syria has set out are inoperable and unworkable.
They also undermine the neutrality, impartiality and
independence of the Office for the Coordination for
Humanitarian Affairs. The crossings at Bab Al-Salam
and Bab Al-Rai that the United Nations now has to use
instead are currently open for only another 21 days
and are not set up for the capacity that was using Bab
Al-Hawa. When I was there myself on 8 June I saw
60 trucks cross, which is in contrast to the total of
18 that the United Nations has managed to get across
in the past week. Russia and Syria’s claims that they
are driven purely by humanitarian considerations are
therefore simply not supported by the facts on ground.
North-western Syria is an active conflict zone where
all parties, including the regime and Russia, continue
to launch attacks, with civilians caught in the crossfire.
The United Kingdom supports the ongoing
discussions between the United Nations and Syria on
lifting the conditions and letting the aid flow. It is
critical for humanitarian access to be negotiated with all
conflict actors, and to ensure that aid can reach the most
vulnerable in accordance with humanitarian principles.
The lack of a Security Council mandate also affects the
longer-term early-recovery work that the Council has
agreed is essential across Syria. We therefore continue
to believe that action by the Council, with politics set
aside, is the best way to ensure that access can continue
to those who need it. Meanwhile, we urge Syria to live
up to its obligations under international law and engage
with the United Nations in good faith. Ultimately, the
people of Syria, and the wider region, need a sustainable
end to this conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
We therefore encourage a resumption of Constitutional
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Committee talks in Geneva, without further delay
or excuses.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Against the backdrop of the serious and
ongoing escalation in our region, Israel’s occupation
forces have continued their aggression against the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic and their criminal practices against our
populations in the occupied Syrian Golan. On 19 July,
they carried out a new air strike by launching a barrage
of missiles from the northern occupied Syrian Golan that
targeted areas around Damascus and resulted in injuries
to two soldiers and material damage. Furthermore, they
once again violated resolution 497 (1981) by planning
the demolition of the remaining homes in the village of
Ayn Fit — destroyed in 1967 by the occupying Power,
which forced its population to flee — and transforming
the area into a military position for Israeli forces.
Syria condemns all of those barbaric acts by Israel
and urges the Security Council to do the same and to
fulfil its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. It should act promptly to stop the crimes
committed by the Israeli occupation authorities and
launch a serious process for ensuring their accountability
and the prevention of such incidents in the future. It is
deplorable that the Council continues to be paralysed
when it comes to reacting to such violations, owing to
the protection that the United States provides to Israel.
The unconditional support it gives Israel should make it
responsible for such serious violations of international
law, international humanitarian law and the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.
While all of the Security Council resolutions on
Syria reiterate the need to respect Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, certain
Council members continue to seriously violate them.
In that regard, I would like to draw members’ attention
to the fact that my delegation has informed the Council
that a delegation of the French Ministry for Foreign
Affairs illegally and unofficially entered Syrian
territory and met with representatives of the so-called
self-administered Syrian Democratic Forces and their
separatist militia. The Syrian Arab Republic condemns
that irresponsible behaviour a flagrant violation of its

S/PV.9383

sovereignty and evidence of the direct involvement of
the Government of France, a permanent member of the
Council, in supporting terrorist groups and separatist
militias and their devastating role in Syria.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
Syrian Arab Republic is committed to guaranteeing
the provision of humanitarian aid to those in need
in the north-western part of our country. Given the
intransigence of certain members of the Security
Council and their refusal to respond to Syria’s legitimate
and repeatedly expressed concerns regarding the crossborder mechanism — thereby preventing the extension
of the implementation of resolution 2672 (2023) — the
Syrian Government made a sovereign decision to grant
permission to the United Nations and its humanitarian
agencies to use the Bab Al-Hawa crossing in order to
provide that part of the country with humanitarian
assistance for a period of six months starting on 13 July.
We affirm that we have not imposed any conditions.
We are fully open to cooperating bilaterally with
the United Nations generally, and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in particular,
with regard to establishing parameters for action
based on the permission we have granted. That should
ensure cooperation and coordination between the two
parties, based on the United Nations guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance and reiterated in General
Assembly resolution 46/182, and on strengthening
our partnership in order to improve the humanitarian
response, based primarily on respect for the sovereignty
of the State concerned and its approval. Complementary
actions via the three border crossings approved by the
Syrian Government, based on Syria’s sovereign decision
and the Syrian Government’s internal crossing lines
through Sarmada and Saraqib, will ensure the provision
of sufficient humanitarian assistance to meet the
people’s needs. However, that demands that maximum
pressure be put on the terrorist organizations and their
commanders in north-western Syria if we are to ensure
that the humanitarian aid can reach its destination. In
addition, necessary and predictable funding must be
provided for the humanitarian operations.
My delegation reiterates that improving the
humanitarian situation requires that sustainable
solutions for supporting the Syrian people be provided,
particularly following the devastating earthquake
of 6 February. They will reduce Syrians’ reliance on
life-saving humanitarian assistance and foster their
resilience, while creating the conditions needed for their

23-2160117/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

safe and dignified return to their towns and villages,
including by launching early-recovery projects,
funding efforts for demining and removing explosive
devices and immediately and unconditionally lifting the
inhumane and immoral unilateral coercive measures
imposed by the United States and the European Union
on Syria and its people. According to the report of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
the negative effects of unilateral coercive measures on
human rights, issued at the beginning of this month,
“The comprehensiveness of existing unilateral
sanctions regimes against the Syrian Arab Republic
and the growing overcompliance, in particular
following the imposition in 2019 of the Caesar
Syrian Civilian Protection Act by the United States
of America, have placed the country in a straitjacket
with serious adverse effects on a broad spectrum of
human rights” (A/HRC/54/23/Add.1, summary).
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/419) shows that the humanitarian needs of
the Syrian people have increased and that their access
to basic services is even more restricted, especially
with regard to the deterioration of medical care and a
serious water crisis that has been followed by a cholera
epidemic. The mission of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Damascus has informed us
that it was recently able to visit the Ghwayran prison
in north-eastern Syria, an area controlled by separatist
militias affiliated with the United States forces that
are present there illegally. The ICRC noted the gravity
of the situation in the prison, where a majority of the
detainees are suffering from acute malnutrition and
tuberculosis. The ICRC warned of the spread of disease,
not just within the prison itself and the surrounding
area but more broadly throughout Syria and beyond
its borders.
We are particularly concerned about the continued
suffering of our citizens in the city of Al-Hasakah
and all the populated areas along the Allouk water
station pipeline, caused by cuts to the water supply
carried out by the occupying forces, terrorist groups
and separatist militias along with their sponsors. The
cuts have deprived more than a million Syrians in the
area of drinking water. That is a war crime and a crime
against humanity. It poses a serious threat to public
health, especially owing to the current unprecedentedly
high temperatures. Syria calls on the United Nations
and its agencies to take immediate action to ensure a
resumption of water supplies from the Allouk station
18/20

24/07/2023

by allowing technical teams to reach the station and
supervise the work of ensuring that it is functioning
sustainably. It is an outrage that some delegations have
ignored those facts and have attempted to politicize
the discussion and undermine the Syrian Government
efforts rather than working urgently to resolve those
vital humanitarian issues.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates
its demand for an end to the illegal presence of foreign
forces, especially those of the United States, on its
territories. We insist that they stop interfering in
Syria’s internal affairs and supporting terrorist groups
that continue to pillage Syria’s natural wealth and
resources, especially oil. We also call for the complete,
immediate and unconditional lifting of the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people,
which constitute a flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Security Council’s
resolutions on Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Director Rajasingham for
their briefings.
The Security Council is meeting for the fourth
time this month to address the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Meanwhile, 4.1 million Syrians who depend
on United Nations cross-border aid to survive continue
their weeks’ long wait to see if that life-saving aid
will or will not continue to flow. As one of Syria’s
immediate neighbours and the main partner of the
United Nations for cross-border assistance, we would
like to emphasize once again that in the current
circumstances, the Security Council-mandated crossborder humanitarian mechanism is the most viable,
transparent, impartial and predictable method of aid
delivery to north-western Syria. We therefore regret
that the mandate expired two weeks ago and that the
Security Council has not yet been able to agree on its
renewal. Adding to our concern is the fact that this is
happening at a time when the humanitarian needs in
Syria, which the earthquakes exacerbated, are now
at their highest level since the conflict in the country
began. The cross-border mechanism is now more
essential than ever to addressing the humanitarian
situation in Syria effectively and to maintaining critical
regional stability.
23-21601

24/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

We share the concerns expressed by the United
Nations about the Syrian regime’s conditional and
time-limited permission for the use of the Bab Al-Hawa
border crossing. We underline that the absence of a
Council-mandated cross-border mechanism will affect
the predictability, accountability and effectiveness
of aid deliveries. The lack of predictability, which
defines the situation today, will make it harder to
secure funding for humanitarian activities in Syria.
Predictability is also key in the planning and execution
stages of humanitarian action, without which earlyrecovery and resilience projects, for instance, will also
be jeopardized.
The number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance in Syria is at its highest. Now is not the time
to risk the access of millions of Syrians to uninterrupted
and predictable humanitarian assistance in a safe,
transparent and accountable manner. We therefore
renew our call on the members of the Security Council
to engage in further efforts to reach a practical and
realistic consensus that would ensure the continuation
of the United Nations cross-border aid mechanism.
The deeply worrisome humanitarian situation in
Syria constantly reminds us of the increasingly heavy
toll of the ongoing conflict on the Syrian people. Efforts
towards the political settlement of the conflict urgently
need to be stepped up. The international community,
especially those countries with influence, should act
now and urge the regime to take concrete steps in
the political process. A lasting solution to the Syrian
conflict will be possible only with the participation of
all Syrian parties in the political track. Therefore, it
is essential that the Syrian opposition be included in
efforts towards a political solution to the conflict.
As Special Envoy Pedersen underlined, the
Constitutional Committee — the most effective
platform that brings together the Syrian opposition
and the regime — should continue its work in a way
that will produce tangible results. The revitalization
of the political process is also among the objectives
of our engagement. Similarly, we expect our friends
in the region to also keep in mind the importance of
the political process in resolving the Syrian conflict
as regards their engagement with the regime and to
provide encouragement in that direction.
Terrorism emanating from Syria is a major threat
that requires an urgent solution. Türkiye is among the
countries undertaking the greatest efforts in the fight

S/PV.9383

against Da’esh and was effective in ending its territorial
control in Syria. Türkiye also continues its fight against
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units
(PKK/YPG) terrorist organization with the same
determination. The PKK/YPG terrorist organization
has conducted more than 70 attacks on our borders,
in particular from Tell Rifaat, since the beginning of
this year alone. Like any country whose borders and
citizens are attacked, Türkiye will not remain silent and
reserves its inherent right to self-defence.
Before concluding, I would also like to draw
attention to the ongoing ceasefire violations in Idlib,
where an escalation coupled with current difficult
humanitarian circumstances may expose a new risk of
mass migration, which must be avoided. Therefore, we
would like to emphasize the importance of maintaining
the ceasefire in Idlib.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
thank Special Envoy Pederson and Mr. Rajasingham,
Director of Coordination at the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
updates and informative briefings.
The escalating humanitarian situation in Syria
demands urgent and impartial humanitarian aid. The
delivery of assistance to all regions of Syria, devoid of
any political influence, is paramount to saving lives
and reaching the most vulnerable individuals. Despite
the Security Council’s failure to reach an agreement
on a draft resolution for a cross-border mechanism, the
United Nations has continued to use all available access
modalities to reach people in need. In that context, Bab
Al-Salam, and Bab Al-Rai continue to be in use for the
cross-border movement of United Nations aid delivery,
which has significantly improved direct and efficient
access to affected individuals, enabling enhanced
humanitarian operations.
In the meantime, the Syrian Government, in a
sovereign decision on 13 July, granted permission for a
six-month period to the United Nations and its relevant
specialized agencies to utilize the Bab Al-Hawa
crossing point, thereby creating a legal basis for
delivering humanitarian assistance to the north-west
region of the country.
Respecting Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity throughout the process is crucial in addressing

23-2160119/20

S/PV.9383

The situation in the Middle East

the humanitarian crisis effectively. As such, preventing
the diversion of aid by terrorist organizations in the
north-west region and ensuring the transparent and
non-discriminatory distribution of aid are essential
aspects that need careful consideration.
Iran commends the tireless efforts of United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners in their
work towards alleviating the suffering of the Syrian
people. In addition to providing immediate relief,
aid operations in Syria must focus on infrastructure
restoration, reconstruction initiatives and overall
economic recovery. Such an approach has the potential
to create an environment favourable for the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced people to their
homes. Given the burden that neighbouring countries,
particularly Lebanon, have carried during the crisis,
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes in Syria should not be politicized or used
as leverage against the Syrian Government.
To that end, it is imperative that international
donors fulfil their obligations and provide the necessary
funding for the activities and programmes of the United
Nations. That support is crucial for the implementation
of projects outlined in the humanitarian response plan
and the strategic framework for cooperation between
Syria and the United Nations. Those projects are
aimed at revitalizing the economy and facilitating
the dignified and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced individuals to their homes.
The continuation of unilateral sanctions against
Syrians is a key impediment to improving Syria’s
humanitarian and economic plight. We firmly reiterate
our call for an immediate end to those illegal and
cruel measures, which have damaged the economy and
people’s daily lives while limiting the Government’s
ability to provide essential services. The recent report
by the Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of
human rights, dated 3 July 2023, sheds light on the dire

20/20

24/07/2023

situation in Syria resulting from unilateral sanctions and
overcompliance (A/HRC/54/23/Add.1). The findings,
based on Ms. Douhan’s visit to Syria from 31 October
to 10 November 2022, highlight the severe damage
caused to the economy, leading to grave human rights
violations and immense humanitarian challenges. The
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/419),
submitted in accordance with resolution 2672 (2023),
also underlined the devastating consequences of
sanctions on humanitarian relief delivery and access to
essential services.
Iran remains committed to cooperating with its
partners in the Astana process to achieve long-term and
sustainable normalization in Syria. We continue our
support for the ongoing Syria-Türkiye dialogue, while
recognizing its crucial role in those broader efforts. We
support the resumption of Constitutional Committee
meetings at the earliest opportunity to continue the
progress made towards resolving the crisis. In that
context, we remain committed in our support for the
Special Envoy’s efforts and his engagement with
all parties.
Iran once more condemns the continuous acts of
aggression and military attacks by the Israeli regime
against Syria, particularly those that target civilian
infrastructure, as well as the persistent occupation of
the Syrian Golan. The Security Council must address
the malicious activities and acts of aggression by the
Israeli regime, which clearly contravene international
law and international humanitarian law and violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Moreover, those malign activities not only
destabilize the region, but also exacerbate tensions.
In conclusion, Iran reaffirms its commitment to
continue supporting the Government and people of Syria
in overcoming the threat of terrorism. We stand ready
to assist them in rebuilding their country, ensuring its
unity and preserving its territorial integrity.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-21601
