148

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

and development effort required to implement such
recommendations, and indicate financia) requirements for
their implementation, together with a definition of possible sources for such financing,
l. Decides to consider at its forty-fourth session the
question of the convening of a United Nations conference
on the subject of the present resolution no later than 1992,
with a view to taking an appropriate decision at that session on the exact scope, title, venue and date of such a conference and on the modalities and financia) implications of
holding the conference;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, urgen ti y to obtain the views of Governments on:
(a) The objectives, content, title and scope of the conference;
(b) Appropriate ways of preparing for the conference;
(e) A suitable time and place and other modalities for
the conference;
and to submit those views to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session, through th~ Economic and So~ial
Council, and to make them available to the Govermng
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
at its fifteenth session;
3. A/so requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Executive Director, to obtain the views of
appropriate organs, organizations and programmes of the
United Nations system and relevant intergovemmental
and non-governmental organizations on the objectives,
content and scope of the conference, and to submit those
views to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, and to make
them available to the Governing Council at its fifteenth
session;

4. Further requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Executive Director, to prepare a statement
of the financia) implications of preparing and convening
the conference, and to submit that statement to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social Council, and to make it available to the
Governing Council at its fifteenth session;
5. Invites the Goveming Council to consider the documents referred to in paragraphs 2 to 4 above and, on the
basis of that consideration, to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Economic
and Social Council, its views on the matters referred to in
the present resolution, in particular its views on the objectives, content and scope of the conference.

Referring to the target of O. 7 pe~ cent of th_e gross national product of developed countnes for offic1al development assistance, adopted by the General Assembly m
resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 on the International Development Strategy for the Seco_nd_ United Nations Development Decade and reaffirmed m 1ts resolut10n
35/56 of 5 December 1980 on the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,
Concerned that total official development assistance, as a
percentage of the gross national l?ro?uct of developed
countries, has stagnated at a leve! s1gmficantly below the
target of O. 7 per cent,
Stressing the need to continue to improve the quality of
official development assistance,
Recalling the increased demands on multilateral development institutions to play a major role in addressing the
development problems of developing countries,
l. Reaffirms the agreed target of O. 7 per cent of the
gross national product of de~elop~d countries f<;>r official
development assistance contamed m the Internat10nal Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, as adopted;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those donor countries
that have airead y achieved the target of O. 7 per cent, or
have increased their official development assistance with a
view to achieving that target, and urges them to continue
their efforts;
3. Appeals to donor countries that have not yet
reached the target of O. 7 per cent to make their best efforts
to reach itas quickly as possible by pursuing specific measures that will make their efforts more effective, taking into
account the necessity of improving the quality of official
development assistance;
4. Stresses the importance of achieving the target of
O. 15 per cent of the gross national product of donor countries for official development assistance for the least developed countries, or doubling official development assistance to those countries, in compliance with the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries4 and the conclusions of the midterm global review of progress towards the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action; 58
5. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation to include information on compliance with the present resolution in his
report for the triennial policy review of operational activities for development.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/198.
43/197.

Fulfilment of the target for official development
assistance

The General Assembly,
. 'nting that the problem of increasing poverty in developing countries can only be solved effectively through
policies aimed at sustained economic growth and development and that transfers of financia) resources to developing countries are important for achieving those objectives,
Stressing, in this context, that official development
assistance plays an jmportant role for developing countries, particularly for the poorest among them,

Externa! debt crisis and development: towards a
durable solution of the debt problems

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 41/202 of 8 December 1986 on
strengthened international economic co-operation aimed
at resolving the externa) debt problems of developing
countries and 42/198 of 1 I December 1987 on furthering
international co-opcration regarding the externa! debt
problems,

sx Re,olution 40/20'.\. anné~

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling Trade and Development Board resolutions 165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978, 59 222 (XXI) of
27 September 198031 and 358 (XXXV) of 5 October
1988f2 and the relevant recommendations of the mid-term
global review of progress towards the implementation of
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the l 980s
for the Least Developed Countries, 58
Recalling the Final Act adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh session, 27
Recognizing that the deteriorating economic situation
faced by those developing countries with a heavy debt burden, which constitutes a major obstacle to their economic
growth and sustained development, can be a threat to their
economic, social and política! stability,
Emphasizing that the world-wide impact and the wide
range of implications of indebtedness of developing countries on today's increasingly interdependent world
economy can be a threat to the política! stability of those
countries,
Recognizing that, in the present circumstances, adjustment efforts are needed on the part of ali countries, collectively and individually, each country contributing to the
common objective in accordance with its capacities and
weight in the world economy, while concern remains
about the political and social implications associated with
the structural adjustment programme in indebted developing countries,
Welcoming the increasing acceptance of further diversifying the range of options that, in ter alia, reduce the stock
and service of debt and con tribute to the achievement of a
durable solution to the externa! indebtedness of developing countries,
Acknowledgingthe continuing need for strengthening effective international co-operation in order to resolve the
problem of externa! indebtedness of developing countries
on a durable, equitable and mutually agreed basis, in particular through improvemen1 in the international economic environment,
Noting that, although efforts have been made by the international community to deal with the debt problem, it is
essential, owing to the gravity of the problem, to reaffirm
the shared responsibilíty of ali parties involved,
Deeply concerned that debt-service obligations remain
high, that the factors determining the capacity to pay have
not moved in consonance with the debt-service obligations
ofthe majority of developing countries, and that prospects
for reducing the adverse effects of the debt burden on the
development process in developing countries continue to
be uncertain,
Noting with concern that the net outflow of financial resources from developing countries as a whole, exacerbated
by the debt crisis and the deterioration in the terms of
trade, deprives those countries of resources needed for financing their growth and development,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his involvement in the debt issue and for his report entitled "Towards a durable solution ofthe debt problem";60
2. Stresses that the debt crisis in an increasingly interdependent world economy has a wide impact, often with
política! implications, having a bearing not only on relations between creditors and debtors hut also on prospects

59 Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thirty-third Session,
Supp/ement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. 1, part two. annex l.
r,o A/43/647.

149

for the world community as a whole, thereby requiring a
hroad approach with política! ímpetus and continued
close co-operation;
3. Expresses deep concern that the overall indebtedness
of debtor developing countries has persisted and often increased, that their growth and development are severely
limited, and that their economic and social prospects continue to be a cause of serious concern;
4. Stresses that a supportive international economic
environment, together with a growth-oriented development approach, is needed for supporting the efforts of
debtor developing countries in dealing with their externa!
indebtedness and alleviating the political and social costs
of structural adjustment programmes and adjustment fatigue, thus contributing to the restoration of their economic growth, development and credit-worthiness;
5. Urges the international community to continue to
search, through dialogue and shared responsibility, for a
durable, equitable and mutually agreed growth-oriented
and development-oriented solution to the externa[ indebtedness of developing countries;
6. Invites the multilateral financia! institutions to continue to review conditionality criteria, taking into account,
ínter alia, social objectives, growth and development priorities of developing countries and changing conditions of
the world economy, and stresses further the need for increased co-operation between the International Monetary
Fund, the World Bank and other multilateral financial institutions, which should not lead to cross-conditionality;
7. Reaffirms that a major objective of any debt strategy
should be that debtor developing countries achieve an adequate leve! of growth sufficient to enable them to satisfy
their social, economic and development needs, which will
in turn enhance their ability to service debt, and urges ali
concerned parties to develop new ways and means to sustain effectively policies aimed at attaining such a leve! of
growth;
8. Recognizes that efforts to resolve the debt problem
should include policies in creditor countries and debtor
countries that are supportive of export growth and diversification in the latter;
9. Recognizes that there is need to broaden further the
range of approaches that, in ter alia, reduce the stock and
service of debt, including expansion of the scope and implementation of currently utilized financia! techniques;
JO. Recognizes that the externa! indebtedness of sorne
other countries with !>erious debt-servicing problems gives
rise to considerable concern, and invites ali those in volved
to take into account, as appropriate, the above provisions
in addressing those problems;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, through a process of high-level consultations, as appropriate, with heads of State or Government and other
parties concerned, to contribute to a common understanding on a solution to the external indebtedness of developing countries in the context of their growth and development:
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take any
other appropriate measures for the implementation of the
present resolution and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its for1y-fourth session.
83rd plenary mt'cting
20 Decem ba l 988
