S/2021/650

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
during the period from 20 February to 18 June 2021
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous report, dated 9 March
2021 (S/2021/240), including on the provisions of resolution 2539 (2020).
Outstanding obligations remain for both parties under resolution 1701 (2006). There
was no progress towards a permanent ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations In terim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), in particular along the Blue Line, remained tense, exacerbated by
developments in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory in May. During this
period, rockets were fired from southern Lebanon towards Israel on three oc casions,
twice impacting in Israel and prompting response fire on two occasions. On 13 May,
UNIFIL personnel stationed near Qulaylah and at UNIFIL headquarters in Naqurah
(both Sector West) heard four loud sounds consistent with the firing of rockets and
observed two flashes in the sky. Subsequently, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed
to UNIFIL that several rockets fired from Lebanon had landed in Israeli waters.
UNIFIL visited the suspected launch site north of the Blue Line on 19 May. The
Lebanese Armed Forces showed UNIFIL the traces of four rockets fired in a south westerly direction towards Israel and informed UNIFIL that they had found one
unlaunched rocket, although it and the remnants of the used launch pads had been
removed by the Lebanese Armed Forces and could not be inspected by UNIFIL.
3.
On 17 May, UNIFIL detected six rockets being fired from north of the Blue Line
near Kfar Shuba (Sector East), which flew over the Israeli villages of Metulla and
Misgav Am and impacted near the Lebanese villages Rabb al Thalathin and Markaba,
as well as near a UNIFIL position near Udaysah (all Sector East). Shortly thereafter,
UNIFIL observed the Israel Defense Forces firing 12 artillery rounds, including five
illumination shells, from south of the Blue Line towards the north-west of Shab‘a

21-09721 (E)

210721

*2109721*

S/2021/650

(Sector East). The following day, UNIFIL, with the Lebanese Armed Forces, visited
the suspected launch site, where the Lebanese Armed Forces showed UNIFIL six
launch pads for 122-mm rockets with timer devices and batteries, as well as one intact
rocket set to launch towards Israel.
4.
On 19 May, UNIFIL personnel heard four loud sounds consistent with the firing
of rockets, emanating from near Siddiqin (Sector West). UNIFIL detected one rocket
that impacted south of the Blue Line, about 40 kilometres from its point of origin, as
later confirmed by the Israel Defense Forces. The Israel Defense Forces informed
UNIFIL that another rocket had been neutralized by the Iron Dome defence system
over Israeli airspace, while two other rockets had fallen into the sea. UNIFIL
subsequently recorded 13 rounds of artillery being fired from south of the Blue Line,
which impacted an open area between Naqurah and Bayyadah (Sector West), causing
UNIFIL to order its personnel into bunkers as a prot ective measure. UNIFIL
dispatched to the suspected launch site, where the Lebanese Armed Forces showed
UNIFIL four used rocket launchers and one intact 122-mm rocket.
5.
Throughout the period from 13 to 19 May, the UNIFIL Head of Mission and
Force Commander was in continuous contact with the Lebanese Armed Forces and
the Israel Defense Forces to clarify the situation, facilitate a coordinated operational
response and prevent escalation. The parties reiterated their continued commitment
to the cessation of hostilities and worked closely with UNIFIL to contain the situation.
UNIFIL has launched investigations into the three incidents.
6.
From 14 to 25 May, UNIFIL observed large gatherings along the Blue Line,
including near Marun al-Ra’s, Marwahin, Udaysah and Sarda (all Sector East), with
the Lebanese Armed Forces present at all locations. On 14 May, demonstrators in
vehicle convoys displayed Palestinian, Lebanese and Hizbullah flags at several
locations along the Blue Line, including near Markaba, Udaysah, Kafr Kila and Arab
al-Wazzani (Sector East). Near Arab al-Wazzani, approximately 100 protesters
disembarked from some 30 vehicles and 20 motorcycles and moved towards the Blue
Line, with at least 10 protesters crossing the Blue Line across from the Israeli village
of Metulla. Seven of the individuals cut through the Israeli technical fence and
crossed into the Metulla area, where they planted Palestinian and Hizbullah flags,
threw stones and lit a brushfire. UNIFIL then observed Israel Defense Forces soldie rs
firing 10 single shots from assault rifles followed by rounds of automatic fire,
prompting the demonstrators to return north of the Blue Line. UNIFIL also heard four
detonations and saw dark smoke. At the urging of UNIFIL, the Israel Defense Forces
ceased fire to allow the Lebanese Armed Forces, in cooperation with UNIFIL, to
evacuate civilians from the area. In identical letters dated 17 May addressed to the
President of the Security Council and to me, (A/75/890-S/2021/482), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon stated that “on 14 May 2021, during a rally of civilians in
solidarity with the Palestinian people near the technical fence in the Ibil al-Qamh area in
the town of Sarda, Israeli enemy soldiers opened fire in their direction into Lebanese
territory. That led to injuries to Husayn Sulub … and Muhammad Tahhan … Mr. Tahhan
died from his injuries shortly thereafter”. UNIFIL has launched an investigation into
the incident. Preliminary findings indicate that the demonstrators, in breaching the
Blue Line and the technical fence and throwing stones and incendiary items that
ignited a fire on the Israeli side, violated resolution 1701 (2006). In addition, the
firing of live ammunition across the Blue Line by the Israel Defense Forces against
the demonstrators constituted a violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and was not
commensurate with the threat posed to Israeli soldiers.
7.
On 15 May (Palestinian Nakbah day), demonstrators in Udaysah threw stones
and Molotov cocktails at the Israeli T-wall and removed the old technical fence at
Panorama Point, south of the Blue Line. Despite efforts by the Lebanese Armed
Forces to prevent the protesters from crossing the Blue Line, several protesters
2/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

climbed the Israeli T-wall and vandalized the cameras attached to the wall. UNIFIL
heard small arms fire on two occasions. On 17 May, also at Udaysah, UNIFIL
observed five illumination flares that were fired from south to north of the Blue Line.
On 18 May, UNIFIL observed the Israel Defense Forces firing approximately 15
smoke grenades, which impacted north of the Blue Line in Udaysah after protesters
had thrown stones and Molotov cocktails at the Israeli T-wall. In Sarda, on 18 May,
demonstrators threw two flares southwards; the Israel Defen se Forces threw two
flares northwards in response. All four flares landed north of the Blue Line. On
23 May, protesters in Shab‘a broke through a Lebanese Armed Forces cordon,
advanced past UNIFIL peacekeepers and crossed south of the Blue Line to the Isra eli
security fence, where they placed Palestinian and Hizbullah flags. After the Lebanese
Armed Forces tried to apprehend them, the protesters threw stones at the Lebanese
Armed Forces and UNIFIL, injuring one Lebanese Armed Forces soldier and
damaging one UNIFIL vehicle.
8.
Throughout the demonstrations, UNIFIL coordinated with the parties to
implement measures to prevent escalation. The Lebanese Armed Forces established
mobile checkpoints along roads leading to the Blue Line to restrict assemblies in the
area and took crowd control measures during protests close to the Blue Line. UNIFIL
deployed at key locations along the Blue Line, maintained aerial surveillance and
increased its patrols and counter-rocket-launching operations in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, while remaining in close contact with both parties. UNIFIL
urged the Lebanese Armed Forces to prevent spillover of demonstrations across the
Blue Line and urged the Israel Defense Forces to exercise restraint. Underscoring the
seriousness of these incidents, UNIFIL has asked the Lebanese Armed Forces to
investigate and share its findings with UNIFIL.
9.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL continued to observe illumination rounds
that were fired by the Israel Defense Forces in response t o what the latter asserted
were suspicious activities. On 1 March, UNIFIL observed 11 illumination rounds
being fired from south of the Blue Line in the vicinity of Arab al-Wazzani, 7 of which
landed north of the Blue Line. On 21 March, UNIFIL heard approximately 108 rounds
of fire and five explosions and observed nine illumination rounds being fired from
south of the Blue Line in the vicinity of Hula (Sector East). Subsequently, the
Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL that they had apprehended three
individuals in the area. The following day, UNIFIL found remnants of illumination
rounds north of the Blue Line, as well as a hole in the Israeli technical fence. UNIFIL
observed the Israel Defense Forces firing four illumination rounds on 3 April and one
round on 16 April from Ghajar, all of which landed north of the Blue Line. One such
round landed on the roof of a UNIFIL position, without causing damage. On 17 April,
UNIFIL observed 12 illumination rounds being fired from south of the Blue Line in
the vicinity of Hula, all of which landed south of the Blue Line. On 14 May, UNIFIL
detected five illumination shells that were launched from south of the Blue Line
towards Sarda. Two days later, the Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL of an
unexploded 155-mm illumination round found in the area. On 16 May, UNIFIL
detected 11 illumination rounds that were launched from south of the Blue Line, also
in the vicinity of Sarda, all of which impacted north of the Blue Line. On 6 June,
UNIFIL observed six illumination flares being fired from south of the Blue Line and
falling near a UNIFIL position near Alma al-Sha‘b (Sector West).
10. While the Lebanese Armed Forces initiated works to redirect the trajectory of
the dirt road that crossed the Blue Line close to Udaysah (s ee S/2021/240, para. 5),
tensions remained heightened, with incidents of weapons being pointed by both
parties across the Blue Line, requiring UNIFIL to interpose between the parties on
five occasions. During each incident, UNIFIL observed groups of individuals in
civilian clothes next to the Lebanese Armed Forces north of the Blue Line. On
21-09721

3/18

S/2021/650

17 March, individuals in civilian clothes snatched a camera from UNIFIL personnel
and removed the memory card before returning the camera. UNIFIL also observed
five incidents of weapons being pointed across the Blue Line in Mays al -Jabal,
Aytarun, Alma al-Sha‘b and Hula. In identical letters dated 17 May addressed to the
President of the Security Council and to me (A/75/888-S/2021/477), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon stated, with respect to the incident at Aytarun, that Israel
Defense Forces soldiers “pointed their weapons at the Lebanese Army soldiers several
times” and condemned “these flagrant Israeli violations of its sovereignty in the
strongest possible terms”.
11. Pursuant to the recommendations made in the assessment of the continued
relevance of UNIFIL resources (S/2020/473) of June 2020, welcomed by the Security
Council in its resolution 2539 (2020), UNIFIL initiated preparatory engineering works
to install cameras inside several UNIFIL positions along the Blue Line. Local media
issued a series of articles misrepresenting the project and questioning its purpose. On
four occasions, between 1 and 9 April, individuals in civilian clothes protested against
the preparatory works at UNIFIL positions in Kafr Kila, Mays al-Jabal and Markaba
(all Sector East) and threatened to use force to prevent the installation of cameras. On
20 May, individuals in civilian clothes cut the concertina wire at a UNIFIL position
in Hula, climbed on top of the perimeter barrier and took photographs of the
preparatory works for the installation of a new signal tower. Seven individuals then
forcefully entered the position before being escorted out. UNIFIL has launched an
investigation and remains engaged with the Lebanese Armed Forces, which have
requested time to address local concerns before the camera installation proceeds.
12. The Israel Defense Forces continued to enter Lebanese airspace in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. From 20 February to 18 June,
UNIFIL recorded 260 airspace violations, totalling 412 hours and 43 minutes in
overflight time. Drones accounted for approximately 80 per cent of the viol ations.
The remaining airspace violations involved fighter aircraft or unidentified aircraft.
13. On 29 March, Lebanese media reported that a shepherd had found an Israeli
drone north of the Blue Line near Kfar Shuba and handed it to the Lebanese Armed
Forces. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that they had lost a drone due to
a malfunction. On 27 April, the Israel Defense Forces tweeted that it had “downed a
Hezbollah drone that crossed from Lebanon into Israel”. The Israel Defense Forces
informed UNIFIL that they had located another “Hezbollah drone” that they had
brought down a few weeks earlier. UNIFIL did not observe the reported incidents.
14. Amid reports of alleged Israeli airstrikes into the Syrian Arab Republic on
8 April, UNIFIL is investigating the possible impact of a projectile near Hula in
southern Lebanon.
15. From 20 February to 18 June, in addition to ground violations committed during
the aforementioned demonstrations, UNIFIL recorded 431 ground violations by
Lebanese civilians crossing south of the Blue Line, including 289 violations by
shepherds and farmers, mainly in the Shab‘a Farms area, as well as 97 violations by
civilians on their way to the Shu‘ayb well near Blida (Sector East). On 6 April,
UNIFIL observed Lebanese Armed Forces personnel crossing south of the Blue Line
in the vicinity of Mays al-Jabal while monitoring an Israel Defense Forces training
activity. On 8 May, UNIFIL observed Israel Defense Forces personnel chasing goats
from north to south of the Blue Line, near Kfar Shuba. On 2 March, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, in coordination with UNIFIL, facilitated the return of a
Lebanese citizen who was apprehended on 28 February by the Israel Defense Forces
after he had crossed south of the Blue Line. The UNIFIL investigation into the
incident continues.

4/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

16. The occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line by
the Israel Defense Forces continued. While the Government of Lebanon has welcomed
the UNIFIL proposal of 2011 for the facilitation of the withdrawal of the Israel
Defense Forces from the occupied area, the Government of Israel has yet to respond.
17. As part of efforts to keep the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River
free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons, UNIFIL, in coordination
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, maintained 16 permanent and an average of 122
temporary checkpoints and conducted 335 counter-rocket-launching operations on
average each month. In addition to the aforementioned rocket-firing incidents,
UNIFIL observed unauthorized weapons in the area of operations on 271 occasions.
Of those, all but the following three incidents involved hunting weapons. On 13 May,
a UNIFIL patrol following up on the reported rocket-launching in Qulaylah on
13 May (see para. 2) was stopped by six individuals in civilian clothes carrying
automatic rifles. On 14 May, UNIFIL observed two individuals in civilian clothes
near Dayr Qanun (Sector West) carrying two automatic rifles. On 19 May, UNIFIL
observed two individuals in civilian clothes, one of whom was carrying an assault
rifle, near Shama‘ (Sector West). UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces of
these incidents.
18. Pursuant to resolution 2539 (2020), UNIFIL maintained its high operational
tempo and visible presence throughout the area of operations, conducting on average
14,022 monthly military operational activities, including 6,555 patrols. Some 5 per
cent of the mission’s military operational activities included at least one woman
peacekeeper. UNIFIL vehicular, foot and air patrols maintained an operational
footprint in municipalities and villages in the area of operations. Air reconnaissance
patrols continued over areas to which ground patrols have limited access, including
private property, land contaminated by explosive remnants of war or anti -personnel
mines, and wadis. The proportion of UNIFIL operations conducted in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces remained at 16 per cent . UNIFIL
conducted 233 training sessions for the Lebanese Armed Forces, including a large
firing exercise from 7 to 11 June.
19. Despite repeated requests, UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several
locations of interest, including some Green without Borders sites. While the freedom
of movement of UNIFIL was generally respected, the mission did encounter some
restrictions to its movements (see annex I).
20. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued maritime interdiction operations
throughout the maritime area of operations, hailing 2,319 vessels. Of these, the
Lebanese Armed Forces inspected and cleared all 403 vessels referred to them by
UNIFIL.
21. UNIFIL continued to support the capacity-building of the Lebanese Navy,
conducting 320 training sessions and exercises and jointly practising common
operational standards for commanding, monitoring and hailing activities. This
included nine advanced maritime interdiction operation integration training sessions,
which gradually increased in duration from 24 to 72 hours. The UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force and the Lebanese Navy also conducted 10 search and rescue exercises and
two helicopter deck landing exercises. Since 6 April, training sessions requiring in person attendance have gradually resumed, while respecting coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) precautionary measures.
22. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued their engagement within the
framework of the strategic dialogue process. In a virtual meeting co -chaired with
UNIFIL on 13 April, the Lebanese Armed Forces informed international community
representatives that construction works for the model regiment headquarters at
Sribbin (Sector West) commenced on 10 March. The Lebanese Armed Forces also
21-09721

5/18

S/2021/650

noted that the reconstruction of the Beirut Naval Base, the extension of the Jounieh
Naval School and the building of a joint rescue and coordination centre continued.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
23. UNIFIL convened tripartite meetings on 7 April and 3 June, in a curtailed format,
owing to COVID-19 restrictions. UNIFIL was in regular contact with both parties
during moments of high tension, as noted above, urging maximum restraint on both
sides and calling for the parties’ full cooperation with UNIFIL to prevent escalation.
24. Following the resumption of the Blue Line marking process, with the
verification by the Lebanese Armed Forces of their 21 pending Blue Line markers on
21 December (see S/2021/240, para. 20), the Israel Defense Forces completed the
verification of their 8 pending markers on 1 June. UNIFIL completed refurbishment
of 204 existing Blue Line markers on 30 April.
25. Despite the agreement of Israel to the proposal in 2008 for a UNIFIL liaison
office in Tel Aviv, the establishment of the office remains pending.
26. In accordance with the commitments on protection of civilians of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and its implementation strategy Action for Peacekeeping Plus,
UNIFIL, through quick-impact projects and civil-military cooperation initiatives
funded by troop-contributing countries, continued to provide capacity-building
support to national authorities, such as the Internal Security Forces, and implemented
some 460 civil-military cooperation initiatives, including donations of medical
equipment and training of medical personnel, to support local efforts to prevent
COVID-19 transmission.
27. UNIFIL continued to support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, including through the training on gender
mainstreaming of 4,737 UNIFIL military and civilian personnel, including 247
women. UNIFIL launched quick-impact projects to enhance sustainable livelihood
opportunities for women and provided computers to support online schooling for
economically disadvantaged girls.

C.

Disarming armed groups
28. No progress was achieved with respect to the disarmament of armed groups.
Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it maintains military capabilities.
The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other
groups in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) continues to restrict the State’s ability
to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory.
29. In identical letters dated 17 March addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (S/2021/272), the Permanent Representative of Israel stated that
Hizbullah “continued its military entrenchment and presence in Lebanon … This
dangerous situation poses a threat not only to Israel and its citizens, but also to the
people of Lebanon, which Hezbollah uses as human shields to prot ect its arsenal of
over 130,000 rockets and military infrastructure”.
30. The Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces made three terrorism related arrests from 20 February to 18 June, including of suspected affiliates of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
31. In eastern and northern Lebanon, multiple personal disputes escalated into
shootings, resulting in 20 fatalities and 112 injuries. At least nine personal disputes
in Baalbek-Hirmil, eastern Lebanon, involved the use of rocket-propelled grenades.

6/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

32. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps across Lebanon remained
largely stable, despite demonstrations within the camps, as well as along the Blue
Line as mentioned above, in protest at developments between Israel and the Occupi ed
Palestinian Territory from 10 to 25 May. Separately, two people died following armed
clashes arising from a personal dispute in Rashidieh camp on 6 June.
33. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
34. Allegations of arms transfers to non-State armed actors continued and remained
of serious concern. If confirmed, such transfers would constitute a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (see annex II). While taking allegations of arms transfers
seriously, the United Nations is not in a position to substantiate them independently.
35. In identical letters dated 29 March addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (A/75/835-S/2021/313), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
stated that “on 22 March 2021, four Israeli warplanes violated Lebanese airspace …
This violation occurred just as air strikes were being carried out against military
positions in the city of Hama, in Syrian territory”. In identical letters dated 1 June
addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me ( A/75/913-S/2021/537),
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon stated that “on the night of 7 –8 April 2021,
Israeli army warplanes violated Lebanese airspace and fired several missile salvos at
the area surrounding the Syrian capital, Damascus”.
36.

Reports of Hizbullah military engagement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued.

37. Despite the continued closure, with limited exceptions, of the land border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic to prevent the spread of COVID-19,
the smuggling of fuel and goods through unofficial crossings continued to be reported.
Lebanese authorities arrested 72 Lebanese and 33 Syrian nationals in 45 countersmuggling operations.
38. On 23 April, Saudi customs officials intercepted arou nd 5.3 million Captagon
pills hidden in a pomegranate shipment from Lebanon. Saudi Arabia subsequently
imposed an import ban on fruits and vegetables from Lebanon from 25 April. On
26 April, the President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, requested the country’s se curity
and customs agencies “to take strict measures to prevent smuggling … in order to
preserve the relations, safety and stability of all States, particularly Arab states”.
Lebanese authorities have arrested two individuals in connection with the inciden t.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
39. UNIFIL cleared 6,718 m 2 of land in its area of operations, disposing of 948
anti-personnel mines. The Mine Action Service conducted 46 quality assurance and
quality control monitoring visits, four accreditation events and six risk awareness
briefings to 66 UNIFIL military personnel, including seven women. Three mine-related
incidents occurred within the UNIFIL area of operations, injuring two shepherds and
a deminer.

F.

Delineation of borders
40. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. There was no progress in relation to the

21-09721

7/18

S/2021/650

issue of the Shabʻa Farms area. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel have yet to respond
to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed in my report of 30 October
2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (see S/2007/641, annex).
41. On 4 May, representatives of the Governments of Israel and Lebanon held a fifth
round of talks to discuss their maritime boundary. The United States of America
mediated the discussions, hosted by the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon at UNIFIL premises in Naqurah, South Lebanon.

G.

Political and institutional stability
42. Ten months have passed since the resignation of the Diab government in the
wake of the Beirut port explosion. Eight months have passed since Saad Hariri was
designated to form a new government. However, during the reporting period, despite
the country’s dire economic and financial situation, the political leadership has still
not agreed on the formation of a new government. The reporting period was instead
marked by increasingly heated rhetoric between the political actors in Lebanon.
43. The overall security situation remained relatively calm, notwithstanding a spike
in protests and roadblocks in March following a steep devaluation of the Lebanese
pound, which has traded for over 15,000 pounds to the United States dollar on the
black market. On 8 March, the President declared that “financial, judicial and security
measures must be taken to address the situation because what is happening is
dangerous in terms of repercussions on social and national security” and tasked “the
military and security agencies to prevent roadblocks while taking into consideration
the safety of protesters, citizens and public and private property”. On 10 March, the
Lebanese Armed Forces reopened roads following dialogue with demonstrators.
44. On 8 March, the Lebanese Armed Forces Commander, General Joseph Aoun,
shared publicly his internal address to army unit commanders in which he described
the situation in the country as “very dangerous”, while recalling that “we as an army
are part of this people” and that soldiers were suffering alongside their fellow
Lebanese citizens. To mobilize resources for the Lebanese Armed Forces, the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon co -chaired with the Lebanese
Armed Forces a meeting of core donors, the United Nations Develo pment Programme
and UNIFIL, on 17 March. Following an official visit by General Aoun to France on
25 May, France hosted a virtual ministerial conference, co-chaired with Italy and
supported by the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebano n, on
17 June, to mobilize emergency support for the security forces of Lebanon. The
meeting was attended by 18 countries, the European Union and UNIFIL.
45. On 19 May, the International Support Group for Lebanon issued a statement in
Beirut, in which it urged the “formation of a fully empowered government” to carry
out indispensable reforms, noting that “responsibility for averting a deeper crisis rests
with the Lebanese leadership” and calling for “elections to take place on time in order to
preserve Lebanon’s democracy”. Also on 19 May, the caretaker Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Charbel Wehbe, resigned. Zeina Akar was subsequently appointed to assume
the functions of the caretaker Minister for Foreign Affairs, in addition to her roles as
caretaker Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence.
46. In its report Lebanon Economic Monitor: Lebanon Sinking (to the Top 3),
published on 1 June, the World Bank indicated that the economy of Lebanon had
shrunk by 20.3 per cent in 2020 and was projected “to contr act by a further 9.5 per
cent in 2021”, adding that the “social impact of the crisis, which is already dire, could
rapidly become catastrophic; more than half the population is likely below the
national poverty line”. On 12 March, Parliament had approved a $246 million World
Bank loan for a three-year Emergency Social Safety Net Project. As at 18 June,

8/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

however, the Government had not yet met the World Bank’s effectiveness and
disbursement conditions, notably the verification of recipients.
47. With the country’s foreign reserves dwindling, and at the prompting of the
Central Bank, the caretaker Government commenced the development of a
rationalization plan to reduce subsidies, except on wheat and some medicines,
accompanied by a proposed dollar denominated cash card for approximately 750,000
vulnerable households, to offset the anticipated rise in the price of basic commodities.
Meanwhile, Parliament approved a $200 million emergency loan to the State -owned
electricity company, Electricity of Lebanon, on 29 March. In its aforementioned
report, the World Bank underscored that “urgent action … is needed to avoid the
[electricity] sector’s complete collapse in the immediate future”.
48. On 7 April, the President condemned the lack of progress on the forensic audi t
of the Central Bank, despite the suspension of the banking secrecy law (see
S/2021/240, para. 44). On 30 April, following reports of a Swiss investigation into
transactions allegedly involving the Governor of the Central Bank, Riad Salameh, and
his brother, the Lebanese public prosecutor was also reported to have launched an
investigation. It was reported that French prosecutors opened a preliminary
investigation into money laundering allegations concerning Mr. Salameh on 6 June.
Mr. Salameh has denied all allegations.
49. On 15 April, Parliament enacted the Law on the Recovery of Assets Derived
from Corruption Crimes. Separately, the Government requested technical assistance
on asset recovery from the joint United Nations and World Bank Stolen Asset
Recovery Initiative. The National Anti-Corruption Institution is still not operational
as it is pending the appointment of its commissioners. The National Commission for
Missing and Forcibly Disappeared Persons in Lebanon, whose two remaining
commissioners were appointed on 13 April, and the National Human Rights
Commission, including the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, remain
inoperative absent budget allocations.
50. The investigation into the Beirut port explosion continues under Judge Tareq
Bitar. On 15 April, Judge Bitar approved the release of 6 of the 25 detainees held since
August 2020. On 5 May, a German company removed 59 containers of hazardous
material from the port.
51. On 22 March, three United Nations independent human rights experts called
upon the Government to ensure a credible and effective investigation into the killing
of Lokman Slim, noting that the lack of meaningful results thus far raised “concerns
as to the effectiveness of the current investigation”. During the reporting period, there
was still no progress to report.
52. On 22 February, the military prosecutor of Lebanon charged 35 people,
including two minors, with terrorism, forming criminal associations and stealing
public property during the protests over socioeconomic hardship in Tripoli in January
2021. On 29 March, the Lebanese public prosecutor referred to the military court an
investigation into allegations of cases of torture and other ill-treatment of Syrian
refugees in detention contained in a report by Amnesty International dated 23 March.
53. The Lebanese Presidency tweeted on 17 May that “the democratic practice in
Lebanon is safeguarded and will be translated into the upcoming parliamentary and
municipal elections that will take place on time in 2022”. On 3 June, the caretaker
Minister of the Interior indicated that the parliamentary elections would be held on
either 8 or 15 May 2022 on the basis of the current electoral law, unless a new law is
passed, while the municipal elections would be deferred for up to three months. The
United Nations has developed a framework to support women as candid ates and
voters and thus promote greater participation by women in the political process.
21-09721

9/18

S/2021/650

Meanwhile, by-elections to fill the 10 vacant parliamentary seats have yet to be
scheduled, notwithstanding that by-elections are required to be conducted within two
months of respective vacancies.
54. Furthering implementation of the national action plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), and amid an increase in requests from women for support, the
National Commission for Lebanese Women and UNFPA completed a baseline study
on women’s access to domestic violence shelters. Separately, the United Nations is
hosting a national-level dialogue process between women in political parties.
55. According to the World Food Programme, in 2021, 22 per cent of Lebanese
nationals, 50 per cent of Syrian refugees and 33 per cent of refugees of other
nationalities are considered food insecure. Competition over resources and access to
basic services, and perceptions that refugees are better assisted than Lebanese nationals,
is fuelling social tensions. Disputes over subsidized products in supermarkets, as well
as over fuel, have become commonplace, with one person shot dead on 16 May at a
gas station in Akkar. Separately, it has been reported that Syrians in Lebanon,
including refugees, were intimidated and threatened with violence and confiscation
of documentation in connection with out-of-country voting for the Syrian presidential
election on 20 May. Statements from some Lebanese political actors calling for those
who voted to return to the Syrian Arab Republic exacerbated tensions.
56. As at 31 May, 866,532 refugees and asylum seekers were registered with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon,
including 851,717 Syrian refugees and 14,815 refugees and asylum seekers of other
nationalities. The number of registered Syrian refugees continued to decrease owing
to returns to the Syrian Arab Republic, resettlement to third countries, deat hs and
irregular onward movements. With new registrations of Syrian refugees by UNHCR
suspended by the Government since 2015, the actual number of Syrians in need of
international protection in Lebanon is unknown. The Government of Lebanon
estimates that there are 1.5 million Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
57. UNHCR is aware of 12 movements (or attempted movements) by sea from
Lebanon, involving 601 individuals (almost all Syrian nationals) in 2021, marking an
increase over previous years. The primary country of destination was Cyprus. On at
least five occasions between March and June in North Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed
Forces and Internal Security Forces apprehended Syrian nationals attempting to reach
Cyprus by sea. On 18 May, a boat carrying 63 Syrians (24 men, 16 women and 23
children) was returned by Cypriot authorities to Lebanon. The United Nations
continued to engage the Cypriot and Lebanese authorities in ensuring the protection
and rescue of people in distress at sea and respect for the principle of
non-refoulement. Meanwhile, deportations of Syrians who entered or re -entered
Lebanon irregularly after 24 April 2019 continued, without the application of legal
procedural safeguards.
58. Inside some Palestine refugee camps, protests against the socioeco nomic
situation led to temporary closures of United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East facilities and service disruptions.
59. As at 18 June, Lebanon had recorded 543,371 cumulative cases of COVID -19
and 7,819 associated deaths. On 26 March, the Higher Defence Council extended the
state of general mobilization until 30 September 2021. The intensive care unit
occupancy rate dropped from 95 per cent in February to 9 per cent in June. As at
18 June, 1,160,378 individuals had been partially or fully vaccinated (16 per cent of
the eligible population had received the first dose and 8.3 per cent had received both
doses), while 1,714,833 people were registered and awaiting vaccination.

10/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

60. At the first meeting of the Consultative Group for the strategic framework for
reform, recovery and reconstruction on 31 March, the caretaker Government
committed to implementing policy actions and reforms within its legal capacity. On
29 April, the governing Partnership Council of the Lebanon Financing Facility (a
multi-donor trust fund) endorsed its annual work plan and budget. As at 31 March,
the recovery track of the Facility’s strategic framework was 5 per cent funded, with
$20.1 million available out of the $426.3 million required.
61. As at 31 March, overall international assistance to Lebanon reported by donors
stood at $999.8 million, including $564.2 million disbursed in 2021 and $435.5 million
carried over from 2020. Donors reported $106.7 million in outstanding commitments
for 2021 and $176.7 million in commitments for 2022 and beyond. The Lebanon
Crisis Response Plan for 2021 is 24 per cent funded at $645.5 million, with United
Nations entities and non-governmental organizations reporting $287.8 million in
funds received in 2021 and $357.7 million carried over from 2020.
62. On 25 February, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1757 (2007), I extended
the mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon from 1 March for two years, o r until
the completion of the cases before the Special Tribunal or the exhaustion of available
funds, if sooner. On 29 March, the Special Tribunal Appeals Chamber found the
appeal in the Ayyash et al. case, filed by Mr. Ayyash’s defence counsel on 13 January,
inadmissible owing to lack of standing. A decision in the prosecution’s appeal against
the acquittal of Mr. Merhi and Mr. Oneissi is pending. On 3 June, the Trial Chamber II
issued an order cancelling the commencement of trial and suspending all decisi ons
on filings in the connected cases of the attacks against Mr. Hamade, Mr. Hawi and
Mr. El-Murr, owing to insufficient funds. The whereabouts of the convicted,
Mr. Ayyash, remain unknown.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
63. The COVID-19 Countrywide Business Contingency Plan of Lebanon continued
to inform United Nations preparedness measures, in line with World Health
Organization guidelines.
64. In accordance with the Action for Peacekeeping commitments to improve the
safety and security of peacekeepers and deliver accountability for peacekeepers,
UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans and risk prevention and mitigation
measures in close coordination with the Lebanese authorities. Strict security measures
remained in place in the Arqub area (Sector East), including the use of armed escorts
for official movements by all United Nations personnel. UNIFIL facilitated 36
missions to the Arqub area by members of the United Nations country team. On
27 April, UNIFIL heard approximately 20 gunshots and discovered thereafter a hole
in the roof and a 7.62-mm bullet inside a UNIFIL position near Burj Qallawiyah
(Sector West).
65. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in Lebanese military courts against
individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
peacekeepers. In the case of the attack of April 1980 during which two UNIFIL
peacekeepers were shot dead and another one was injured, the Military Court of
Cassation dismissed the defendant’s appeal on 27 Ap ril (on 21 December 2020, the
Permanent Military Court had sentenced the defendant to 15 years of imprisonment
with hard labour; see S/2021/240, para. 64). In the cases of serious attacks against
UNIFIL on 26 July and 9 December 2011, causing injuries to UNIFIL peacekeepers,
on 24 March, the Permanent Military Court convicted and sentenced the defendant to
15 years of imprisonment. On 9 April, the defendant filed an appeal with the Military
21-09721

11/18

S/2021/650

Court of Cassation. In the case of the attempted serious attack against UNIFIL in
2008, in which one of the four convicted perpetrators filed an appeal, a hearing was
held on 18 May; the next hearing is scheduled for 16 December 2021. The United
Nations has not been informed of any criminal proceedings to bring to justice the
perpetrators of the incident of 4 August 2018 in the village of Majdal Zun (Sector
West), in which armed individuals attacked a UNIFIL patrol (see S/2018/1029).

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
66. As at 18 June, UNIFIL comprised 10,401 military personnel, including 686
women (7 per cent), from 46 troop-contributing countries; 241 international civilian
staff, including 92 women (38 per cent); and 562 national civilian staff, including 152
women (27 per cent). The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised five vessels, one
helicopter and 627 of the Force’s military personnel, including 35 women (6 per cent).
In addition, 52 military observers, including nine women (17 per cent), from the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization serve with Observer Group Lebanon,
under the operational control of UNIFIL. The most senior military woman serves at
the rank of Colonel; the most senior civilian woman serves at the D -2 level.
67. In accordance with the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
commitments and Security Council resolution 2436 (2018), UNIFIL finalized the
assessment of 12 subordinate military units and three ships for logistics, training and
operational preparedness on 31 March. Shortfalls identified within five military units,
related to logistics and documentation, have been addressed. On 1 April, the mission
initiated the assessment of 19 additional military units and one ship.
68. Further to my letter dated 29 October 2020 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2020/1059), UNIFIL has continued consultations on aspects of
the assessment with both parties, including briefings with the Lebanese Armed Forces
on 11 March and the Israel Defense Forces on 11 April. The mission has made the
necessary adjustments related to the Statement of Unit Requirements and for vehicles
and equipment. All recommendations of the UNIFIL civilian staffing review that was
completed in 2020 have been incorporated into the mission’s budget submission for
2021/22. To reinforce its liaison branch, UNIFIL has reassigned six officers. The
mission closed one of its positions, south of the village of Tiri (Sect or West), handing
it over to the Lebanese Armed Forces on 28 May.

V. Conduct and discipline
69. Neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon received any new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse during t he
reporting period. Both missions continued to implement activities related to
prevention, enforcement and remedial actions regarding misconduct, in particular sexual
exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and fraud. All personnel received training
and military commanders continued to receive briefings on their accountability in
respect of conduct and discipline matters.
70. The United Nations country team, with international and national
non-governmental organizations, supported the prevention of sexu al exploitation and
abuse network of Lebanon through the development of inter-agency standard
operating procedures, an information-sharing protocol on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, awareness-raising materials and technical guidance
documents to strengthen prevention and response efforts, in addition to awareness -

12/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

raising with front-line aid workers and promoting the integration of a prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse approach to the COVID-19 response.

VI. Observations
71. After almost one year without a fully empowered government, I continue to urge
the political leadership of Lebanon, in view of the gravity of the situation, to rise
above parochial interests and expeditiously form a government able to implement
measures that put the country on the path to recovery. The economic and financial
crises are being borne disproportionately by the most vulnerable. I call upon the
Government to finalize the social protection system accompanying the subsidy
rationalization programme. Ultimately, while the United Nations and the international
community continue to offer support, the responsibility for salvaging Lebanon lies
with the country’s leaders.
72. I call upon the Lebanese authorities to take all steps necessary to ensure the
timely conduct of elections in 2022. Clarity on the applicable electoral framework, as
well as measures to strengthen the participation of women, youth and persons with
disabilities in the political process is needed.
73. I condemn the firing of rockets from southern Lebanon on 13, 17 and 19 May
towards Israel and the retaliatory fire from Israel on 17 and 19 May. Such breaches
of the cessation of hostilities have the potential to lead to escalation with serious
consequences. The possession of unauthorized weapons on these occasions are clear
violations of resolution 1701 (2006). I also denounce the violations of the Blue Line
and damage to Israeli infrastructure that followed demonstrations, in particul ar near
Arab al-Wazzani and Metulla on 14 May. Importantly, the effective liaison and
coordination arrangements of UNIFIL with the parties, as well as the continued
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and active engagement with UNIFIL by the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces helped to contain these
incidents and restore the cessation of hostilities. It is essential that the parties avoid
provocative actions, exercise utmost restraint and refrain from hostile activity that
could put at risk the cessation of hostilities. In this regard, I call upon the Lebanese
Armed Forces to enforce law and order and prevent any incident on the Blue Line
originating from Lebanese territory. I call upon the Israel Defense Forces to refrain
from responding with live fire except where clearly required in immediate self defence. Both parties should continue to fully utilize the agreed liaison and
coordination arrangements with UNIFIL to mitigate the risk of further violence.
74. I commend the parties for continuing to attend the tripartite meetings, despite
COVID-19 restrictions. I urge the parties to engage with UNIFIL in the Blue Line
subcommittee and find agreed solutions to the outstanding contentious ar eas. The
United Nations will continue to support efforts to defuse tensions through dialogue,
to pursue opportunities for confidence-building and to create an environment
conducive to resolving underlying differences, including through the continued good
offices of my Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and
Force Commander.
75. The continued violations of Lebanese airspace by Israeli aircraft and drones
remain of deep concern. The overflights constitute violations of resolution 1701
(2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty and cause distress to the Lebanese population. I
reiterate my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and call again
for the Government of Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory. The
continued occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of northern Ghajar and an adjacent
area north of the Blue Line equally represents a continuing violation of resolution
1701 (2006).
21-09721

13/18

S/2021/650

76. I call upon the Lebanese authorities to grant UNIFIL full and timely access to
all locations north of the Blue Line, requested in connection with the mission’s
investigations, including with respect to the tunnels crossing the Blue Line, confirmed
by UNIFIL in December 2018 and early 2019, and to the Green without Borders site
in Aytarun in connection with the incident on 1 September 2019, as mandated under
resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in resolution 2539 (2020). The restriction of the
freedom of movement of a UNIFIL patrol that was following up on the reported firing
of rockets on 13 May is concerning. The Lebanese authorities have the primary
responsibility for ensuring that there are no unauthorized armed personnel, assets or
weapons in the area and, to that end, must facilitate the mission’s access to such
locations. I also urge the parties to support and facilitate the conduct by UNIFIL of
independent investigations into the alleged incidents.
77. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations, including
along the full length of the Blue Line, remains critical. The mission’s ability to
conduct patrols and activities independently must be maintained in accordance with
its mandate. I call upon the Lebanese authorities to investigate any restrictions of the
movement of UNIFIL. I reiterate my call to the Lebanese authorities to fulfil their
obligations to ensure the safety of UNIFIL personnel and full accountability for those
who attack peacekeepers, including with respect to the incidents in Bar‘ashit on
10 February and Blida on 25 May 2020, as well as in Majdal Zun in 2018. I note the
verdict of 24 March of the Permanent Military Court of Lebanon, sentencing the
perpetrator of an attack on UNIFIL peacekeepers in July 2011. I welcome this
development and urge the timely conduct and completion of judicial processes in all
outstanding cases of attacks against United Nations personnel.
78. The initiation of construction works for the model regiment and the continued
commitment of the Lebanese Armed Forces to make progress towards a partial
transfer of UNIFIL Maritime Task Force responsibilities t o the Lebanese Navy,
despite budgetary challenges, are encouraging. International partners are strongly
encouraged to further support these initiatives. Acknowledging the support provided
to date, I reiterate my call for donors and partners to reinforce su pport for the
Lebanese Armed Forces, as the only legitimate armed forces of Lebanon.
79. I appeal to the parties for their cooperation in the implementation by UNIFIL of all
recommendations in the UNIFIL assessment report. The Secretariat and UNIFIL are
committed to carrying out this process in consultation with and with support from the
parties, members of the Security Council and troop-contributing countries, as appropriate.
80. The continued self-acknowledged maintenance of unauthorized weapons
outside State control by Hizbullah and other non-State armed groups represents a
persistent, grave violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I call upon the Government of
Lebanon to take all actions necessary to ensure that there will be no weapons or
authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State, including through the
full implementation of the relevant provisions of the Taif A ccords and of resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), which require the disarmament of all armed groups in
Lebanon. Earlier decisions of the National Dialogue pertaining to the disarmament of
non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada should be
implemented.
81. I reiterate the need for an impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into
the explosion at the port of Beirut. The Government must also hold perpetrators of
serious violations and abuses of human rights accountable by following through on
previously announced investigations.
82. Despite my urgent appeals, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon continues to face a
severe financial crisis. A premature closure prior to completing the judicial work of the
14/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

Special Tribunal would represent a serious setback for international justice eff orts and
send a negative message to the people of Lebanon and to victims of terrorism worldwide.
83. I encourage Lebanon and Israel to continue talks regarding their maritime and
land boundaries. The United Nations, through its representatives, remains com mitted to
supporting that process as requested by the parties and within its capacity and mandate.
84. I call upon the Government of Lebanon to abide by its policy of disassociation,
consistent with the Baabda Declaration of 2012, and for all Lebanese part ies and
nationals to cease their involvement in the Syrian conflict and other conflicts in the
region. I condemn any movement of fighters and war materiel across the border of
Lebanon with the Syrian Arab Republic in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
85. Cross-border smuggling is detrimental to the international trade relations of
Lebanon, with repercussions for local livelihoods and State revenues. I urge the
Government to continue efforts to improve border control measures.
86. I commend Lebanon for its continued hospitality towards refugees and thank
donors for their enduring support. While the United Nations and its partners continue
to work towards creating the conditions for large-scale safe, dignified and voluntary
returns, respect for due process of law and enabling refugees to live in dignity remain
indispensable.
87. To address the rising needs of host communities, refugees and migrants, I call
upon the international community to strengthen the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus, including through support for the development of an inclusive social protection
system. In this vein, I appeal to donors to generously fund the framework for reform,
recovery and reconstruction and call upon the Government of Lebanon to implement
without further delay the priority policy actions of the framework to enable the
reconstruction phase of the framework to commence. I welcome the continued robust
and flexible donor support for the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan, as well as for the
ongoing health, education and food emergency responses. Furthermore, I reiterate my
calls for the international community to uphold its commitments so that the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Ne ar East can
continue to provide relief and services to the Palestine refugee community.
88. I reiterate my gratitude to all countries contributing military personnel and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon and encourage them to increase
the number of women among military personnel in UNIFIL. I welcome the arrival to
Lebanon of my new Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Joanna Wronecka, and thank
the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Stefano Del Col,
the Deputy Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Najat Rochdi, and the staff of the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, the civilian and military
personnel in UNIFIL and the members of the United Nations country team.

21-09721

15/18

S/2021/650

Annex I
Restrictions on the freedom of access and movement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon from 20 February 2021
to 18 June 2021
1.
In its resolution 2539 (2020), the Security Council called upon the Government
of Lebanon to facilitate the access of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in line with resolution 1701 (2006), while respecting Lebanese sovereignty.
2.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL conducted an average of 6,555 monthly
patrols during the day and night, of which 2,116 (33 per cent) were foot patrols. The
mission conducted an average of 2,365 patrols each month along the Blue Lin e, both
by vehicle and on foot (48 and 52 per cent, respectively). In addition, the mission
conducted an average of 81 helicopter patrols each month, as well as an average of
973 inspection activities, including the operation of temporary and permanent
checkpoints, and counter-rocket-launching operations. While the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL was respected in most cases, there were instances of restrictions
in the freedom of movement. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to object to some
patrol routes that were proposed by UNIFIL in order to expand its presence in areas
outside main routes and municipal centres, on the grounds that they were either
private roads or involved areas of strategic importance to the Lebanese Armed Forces.
UNIFIL has consistently followed up on reported incidents with the appropriate
authorities and continuously engages with the Lebanese Armed Forces to secure
freedom of movement and unrestricted access to all areas within its area of operations.
Access to all locations along the Blue Line
3.
UNIFIL is yet to gain full access to several sites of interest, including a number
of Green without Borders sites, despite repeated formal requests to the Lebanese
Armed Forces. Access to those locations is required both in connection with
investigations and as part of the mission’s daily monitoring of the Blue Line, as
mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in resolution 2539 (2020).
Freedom of movement incidents
4.
On 5 March, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol was stopped by an individual
in civilian clothes, near the entrance to the village of Dib‘al (Sector West). The
Observer Group Lebanon personnel stated that they were conducting a routine patrol,
but the individual insisted that the patrol could not proceed any further. Shortly
thereafter, two other individuals approached the patrol and accused the Observer
Group Lebanon personnel of spying on behalf of Israel, adding that the “United
Nations had no business” in that area and should focus “on the Blue Line”. The patrol
then left the area. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces about the incident
and followed up with the mayor of Dib‘al.
5.
On 8 March, a UNIFIL vehicle patrol accompanied by the Lebanese Armed
Forces was blocked by a group of approximately 20 individuals in civilian clothes
who had placed their vehicles across the road in the vicinity of Ayta al -Sha‘b (Sector
West). While the Lebanese Armed Forces talked to the group, the members of the
group did not show any hostility during the interaction but were unwilling to remove
their vehicles from the road. As a result, the UNIFIL patrol and the Lebanese Armed
Forces had to reverse and return to the base.
6.
Also on 8 March, a UNIFIL vehicle patrol was stopped by a group of 15 to 20
individuals in civilian clothes who had placed four vehicles across the road in the
centre of Bint Jubayl (Sector West). The UNIFIL patrol commander exited his vehicle
16/18

21-09721

S/2021/650

and spoke to the apparent leader of the group, which led to an altercation during which
some of the individuals in the group repeatedly slapped the UNIFIL patrol commander
and another patrol member. During the altercation, members of the group snatched a
rifle magazine and a map that were attached to the utility belt of one of the UNIFIL
soldiers. As the patrol members returned to their vehicles and locked the doors, the
crowd surrounded the patrol vehicles, preventing them from leaving the area. About
26 minutes later, Lebanese Armed Forces personnel arrived at the location and spoke
to the individuals, who returned the magazine and removed their vehicles, allowing
UNIFIL to leave the area. On 23 March, the Lebanese Armed Forces returned the map
that had been taken during the incident. UNIFIL personnel sustained bruises during
the incident but no major injuries. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL in
a follow-up meeting that the individuals involved had been arrested.
7.
On 7 April, a vehicle, from a UNIFIL patrol of three armoured vehicles, got
stuck in the mud in the vicinity of Yanuh (Sector West). Approximately 20 individuals
in civilian clothes approached and surrounded the patrol. Some of the individuals
became agitated and began insulting the peacekeepers. They searched the UNIFIL
vehicles and took three GPS devices, a map and a personal laptop, despite the
objections of the UNIFIL personnel. Soon thereafter, a UNIFIL quick response team
followed by Lebanese Armed Forces personnel arrived at the site of the incident, upon
which the individuals left the area. The vehicle was eventually dislodged with the
help of a civilian backhoe and returned to the United Nations position. The three GPS
devices have been retrieved.
8.
On 13 May, one of the six UNIFIL patrols following up on the rocket-launching
incident was stopped by six individuals in civilian clothes, some of whom were
armed, north-west of Qulaylah (Sector West). The individuals had placed their
vehicles across the road. The individuals pointed their weapons at the patrol from a
distance of approximately 15 m. The patrol reversed its vehicles and proceeded
towards the coastal road. While the same patrol was moving towards the coastal road,
two additional vehicles appeared and blocked the road, n early hitting one of the
UNIFIL vehicles. The patrol managed to manoeuvre around the vehicles, but was
followed until it reached a Lebanese Armed Forces position close to Qulaylah.
UNIFIL has launched an investigation into the incident.
9.
Also on 13 May, seven individuals in civilian clothes blocked the path of a
UNIFIL patrol close to Hanin (Sector West) by placing two vehicles across the road.
The individuals then exited the vehicles and started to hit the UNIFIL patrol vehicles,
damaging a mirror on one of the vehicles. The patrol was able to manoeuvre out of
the location and returned to its position. UNIFIL has launched an investigation into
the incident.
10. On 7 June, a UNIFIL patrol en route to Naqurah inadvertently deviated from the
main road in the village of Hanin (Sector West). Two individuals in civilian clothes
riding a scooter in front of the UNIFIL patrol vehicle shouted and signalled the
peacekeepers to follow them. Subsequently, another civilian placed two barrels on the
road in front of the UNIFIL vehicle. The UNIFIL patrol managed to bypass the barrels
and continued driving. However, it was followed by the scooter for approximately
five minutes. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces about the incident.

21-09721

17/18

S/2021/650

Annex II
Implementation of the arms embargo
1.
In paragraph 20 of its resolution 2539 (2020), the Security Council recalled
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), according to which all States should take the
necessary measures to prevent, by their nationals or from their territories or using flag
vessels or aircraft, the sale or supply of arms and related materiel to any entity or
individual in Lebanon other than those authorized by the Government of Lebanon or
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The United Nations
continued to engage with Member States on allegations of weapons transfers and
efforts to address such violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
2.
No response was received during the reporting period to my letter dated
22 October 2019 addressed to the President of Lebanon, in which I reiterated my
request that the Government of Lebanon share with the Secretariat any pertinent
information or developments related to the arms embargo.
3.
Pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), all States shall take the
necessary measures to prevent, inter alia, the sale or supply to any entity or individual
in Lebanon of arms and related materiel of all types. During the reporting period, no
new information was shared with the Secretariat in this regard.
4.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting overall compliance by the
parties with resolution 1701 (2006) in all its provisions and to advancing its
implementation. This applies to the implementation of the arms embargo under
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) and any decision that would be adopted by
the Security Council in this regard. I look forward to continued dialogue with the
Council and its members on furthering our joint goal of the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

18/18

21-09721
