A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/147
27 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 19
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/23, chap. III, para. 9
and A/51/L.46)]
51/147.

Dissemination of information on
decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples1 relating to the
dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the
dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly
resolution 50/40 of 6 December 1995,
Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches
towards reviewing the options of self-determination for the peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to achieving complete
decolonization by the year 2000,
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an
instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration and mindful of the role
of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories to achieve self-determination,

1

A/51/23 (Part II), chap. III; see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 23.
97-76255

/...

A/RES/51/147
Page 2

Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting
information to the Secretary-General in accordance with the terms of Article
73 (e) of the Charter of the United Nations,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination
of information on decolonization,
1.
Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples1 relating to the
dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2.
Considers it important to continue its efforts to ensure the
widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with
particular emphasis on the options of self-determination available for the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3.
Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat to take into account the suggestions of
the Special Committee to continue their efforts to take measures through all
the media available, including publications, radio and television, as well as
the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field
of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a)
To continue to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to
the Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(b)
To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the
discharge of the tasks referred to above;
(c)
To maintain a working relationship with the appropriate regional
and intergovernmental organizations, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean
regions, by holding periodic consultations and exchanging information;
(d)
To encourage involvement of non-governmental organizations in the
dissemination of information on decolonization;
(e)
To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the
implementation of the present resolution;
4.
Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to
continue to extend their cooperation in the dissemination of information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5.
Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the
present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-second session.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996
