S/PV.8450

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8450th meeting

Wednesday, 23 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vargas Maldonado . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mrs. Marsudi
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/1159)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01814 (E)
*1901814*

S/PV.8450

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/1159)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Colombia and
Cuba to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): I am very
pleased to have this opportunity to address the Security
Council, for the first time, upon its consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/1159).
I welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, and of the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio José Archila. I also take
this opportunity to express my gratitude for the warm
welcome I received in their country.

23/01/2019

Academy on 17 January, which 1eft 21 dead and dozens
injured. On 21 January, the National Liberation Army
(ELN) acknowledged responsibility for this attack.
In the swift rejection of the attack from across the
political spectrum in Colombia and in the marches
held around the country this past Sunday, Colombians
demonstrated their ever-broader consensus around the
rejection of violence, which is highlighted in the report
of the Secretary-General as one of the fruits of peace.
This consensus must continue to be nurtured.
Since taking up my duties on 7 January, I have met
with key interlocutors for the Mission, including from
the Colombian Government, the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), civil society
and the international community. I held productive
initial meetings with President Duque, Foreign
Minister Trujillo, High Counsellor Archila and High
Commissioner for Peace Miguel Ceballos. I also met
with FARC leaders in Bogotá and visited two of the
territorial areas for training and reintegration in the
departments of Antioquia and Caquetá. These visits
confirmed both the strong desire of former combatants
to work and find their place in society, as well as the
uncertainty many still feel regarding their security,
including their legal security and economic future. I held
discussions with civil society representatives, including
women’s organizations, and with the Presidents of both
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Commission
on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition, all of whom
stressed their commitment to the peace process and
their appreciation for the work of the Mission.

(spoke in English)

In my meetings with the Resident Coordinator
and members of the United Nations country team, we
discussed the importance of their partnership with
the Mission on reintegration and legal and security
guarantees, as well as their complementary support for
the implementation of agreements on rural development,
political participation, transitional justice and the
voluntary substitution of illicit crops. Discussions
also touched on ongoing cooperation on cross-cutting
dimensions of gender, ethnic affairs, child protection
and youth.

The tragic events of late last week in Bogotá remind
us once again of the urgent need to end violence and
persevere in efforts to ensure a more peaceful future
for all Colombians. Both the Council and the SecretaryGeneral delivered a strong and clear condemnation
of the car bombing at the General Santander Police

I am pleased to report that the Government’s highlevel forum on gender, which was responsible for the
implementation of the gender provisions of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, met for the first time on
16 January.

2/23

19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

The inauguration of the Truth Commission, which
now embarks on a three-year mandate to foster truth and
reconciliation, represents an important milestone. On
16 January, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, entrusted
with one of the most sensitive dimensions of any peace
process — that of transitional justice — completed its
first year of operation. As a measure of what is at stake,
the five cases initiated in the first year of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace will examine responsibility for
violent actions impacting no fewer than 32,000 victims.
Progress on the cases before the Special Jurisdiction
continues. The Jurisdiction has taken testimony from
46 members of the armed forces in the context of
extrajudicial killings. Two days ago, it announced that
31 members of the FARC leadership will also be required
to appear in person to provide their testimony on
individual and collective responsibility for kidnappings.
As the Security Council has itself insisted, it remains
vitally important that the independence and autonomy
of the Special Jurisdiction be respected and that it
receive the support required to operate effectively.
Turning to the economic reintegration of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), I welcome
the approval of additional productive projects by
the National Reintegration Council and advances in
the disbursements for these projects. The challenge
ahead, as noted in the report and confirmed in my first
discussions and field visits, is to further accelerate
such efforts and to ensure their sustainability in order
to advance on the acquisition of land and to work on
the development of markets for goods and services
produced, including with the participation of local
Governments and the private sector.
I welcome the Government’s decision in December
to extend food distribution to former combatants in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration for
an additional eight months. This assistance, as well as
current health and education services and the provision
of basic monthly payments to all former FARC-EP
members, are set to expire in August.
A near-term challenge is to define the status of
the 24 territorial areas, whose current authorization,
due to expire on 15 August, is a matter of concern
and uncertainty for the thousands of former FARCEP members inhabiting those spaces. I welcome
Mr. Archila’s recent public remarks reassuring those
in the reintegration process that a solution will be

S/PV. 8450

found, building on a current census of those living
and working in these areas. It will require, however,
a concerted effort to work through the legal, financial
and other implications and to arrive at an agreed set of
proposals. Therefore, time is of the essence to arrive at
an agreed way forward.
Regarding political reintegration, on 27 October
the FARC party will participate, for the first time, in
regional and local elections, marking another advance
in its political participation. To ensure the security
of the FARC in undertaking political activities at the
local level during the coming elections, the Technical
Committee on Security and Protection has begun work
on a protection plan. Colombia’s presidential elections in
2018 were the most peaceful in decades. To ensure that
similar conditions prevail in this year’s elections and
given specific concerns with regard to the FARC party,
comprehensive prevention and protection measures
will be needed to ensure the safety of candidates of all
parties, as well as communities and their leaders.
A wave of killings of social leaders in the very
first days of the new year reinforced the deep concerns
about these killings expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report and which the Council has also
expressed repeatedly. Seven leaders, six men and one
woman, were killed in the first seven days of January
and a total of 31 attacks in 10 departments have been
reported since the publication of the report. According
to investigations by the Office of the Attorney General,
three-quarters of these killings are being committed
by criminal and illegal armed groups. Leaders being
targeted include members of local election boards,
leaders involved in land-reclamation processes, leaders
active in the voluntary crop substitution programme
and leaders of indigenous communities.
President Duque has expressed his personal
commitment to addressing this issue. The Government
has indicated that it has activated its Action Plan for
the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists in specific
departments. The Ministers of Defence and the Interior
and the High Commissioner for Peace have been
charged with identifying additional actions required.
The Inspector General has called for implementation
of a series of commitments in the national pact for
life and for the protection of social leaders and human
rights defenders endorsed by the Government and civil
society representatives in August.

19-018143/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

I urge the swift implementation of these measures
and that they be coupled with broader efforts to ensure
an effective State presence in these areas. I welcome
President Duque’s decision to convene the National
Commission on Security Guarantees on 30 January,
as it is entrusted with defining a strategy to dismantle
criminal and illegal armed groups with the participation
of civil society.
In addition to the 14 FARC-EP members killed
during the period covered by the report of the SecretaryGeneral report, 2 more have been killed this year. A total
of 87 have been killed since the Peace Agreement was
signed. This underscores the importance of provisions
of effective security for new settlements outside the
territorial areas for training and reintegration, which
are where the vast majority of these killings have
taken place.
The security of communities, leaders and FARC-EP
members is ultimately tied to the ability of the State to
establish an integrated security and civilian presence in
conflict-affected areas. The Government’s “Peace with
legality” plan provides a road map for achieving this
important objective. It builds on the 16 development
programmes with a territorial focus agreed under
the peace agreement and links them more clearly to
assisting nearly 100,000 families under the voluntary
crop-substitution programme and to the reintegration of
former FARC-EP members. As stated by the SecretaryGeneral, what is now urgently required is a translation
of this and other plans into effective actions that change
the realities on the ground.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
the important contributions made over the past three
and a half years by my predecessor, Jean Arnault. I
add my words of appreciation to those I have heard
from so many Colombians for the important role he
has played in the peace process. I would like to stress
that one of the messages I have heard consistently from
Colombians during my first weeks on the ground is how
strongly they both welcome and expect the support and
assistance of the international community as they seek
to overcome the many challenges to consolidating peace.
The continued engagement and support of the Security
Council will remain a vital pillar of Colombia’s peace
process. I assure Council members of the commitment
of the Mission to carrying forward the task the Security
Council has entrusted to it.
4/23

23/01/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and the information that he
provided this morning.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I would like to welcome you again to the Security
Council; we thank you for being with us today. I would
also like to welcome the Colombian Foreign Minister,
who has visited us before, and whom we thank for being
with us again.
We also offer a big welcome to the Special
Representative in his first appearance before the
Council. I think he and his team have made a very
good start in just two weeks, and his briefing was very
helpful. We thank him very much for it.
May I begin by reiterating our condolences to all
those affected by the bomb attack in Bogotá last week.
There is no justification for such violence, and we
condemn terrorist acts in all their forms. It is good that
the Council was able to issue a statement (SC/13671).
I think the attack underlines the significance of the
end of the armed conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). It reminds us of the importance of pressing
ahead with work to implement the Peace Agreement in
order to consolidate peace and build stability. I think
the focus we heard today on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement has been very important.
I wanted to start where the Special Representative
finished by saying that I think the Council has been
pleased to support Colombia in this important process,
and the Council has been united in doing so. As the
Special Representative said, Council support is a vital
pillar in helping Colombia achieve success in the peace
process. As the penholder, I can promise Colombia’s
representatives here today that we will do our utmost to
ensure that this effort continues.
I wanted also to welcome the steps that the new
Colombian Government has taken over the last three
months, particularly towards the effective reintegration
of former FARC-EP members and comprehensive
rural development, and this is particularly through the
development programmes with a territorial approach. I
was very interested in what the Special Representative
had to say about the economics, particularly with
respect to education and food and what is happening
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

in the 24 territories. It is very good to have that level
of detail.
I think we share the hopes set out in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1159) that Colombia’s
“Peace with legality” plan can bring both security
and economic development to former conflict areas,
and we see the upcoming year as an opportunity for
the Government to cement and build on achievements
over the past two years since the Peace Agreement was
signed. But as the Secretary-General also said, there
are considerable challenges, and in particular, I would
like to use today’s meeting to highlight two issues
that we believe deserve the Colombian Government’s
urgent attention.
The first is that we share the Secretary-General’s
alarm with regard to the increasing killings of human
rights defenders and social leaders by organized
criminal groups competing for rural territory. The
Special Representative gave us some additional detail
on that issue. The lack of State presence and the
persistence of violence in these areas risk undermining
the peace process if people lose faith in the State’s
ability to provide safety and economic opportunity.
Secondly, we concur with the Secretary-General’s
call for increased coordination across State institutions.
A coherent and holistic approach to tackling security
and development issues in former conflict areas is
vital. The “Peace with legality” plan recognizes the
need to coordinate implementation with other policies
on security, drugs and protection of leaders. Bringing
these plans together — and most importantly delivering
on them — will be crucial to preventing renewed cycles
of violence.
I would like to conclude by also thanking Jean
Arnault, the previous Special Representative, for
his significant contribution to Colombia’s peace
process and once again to reiterate our full support
for the new Special Representative and for Colombian
Foreign Minister Trujillo García. We are fully
committed to working with him — as is the rest of the
Council — as his country works towards securing a
lasting and sustained peace.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
welcome the President in the Security Council today;
it is excellent to have him back with us. We thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
We look forward to his leadership as we begin the next
chapter in the United Nations Verification Mission in

S/PV. 8450

Colombia. We also thank former Special Representative
Jean Arnault for his outstanding contributions to the
peace process in Colombia. We warmly welcome our
close partners in the Colombian Government, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict Archila and Foreign
Minister Trujillo García. We thank them for joining
us today.
On 24 November, Colombians commemorated
the second anniversary of the Final Peace Agreement.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
Colombia has been an inspiration for peace, not just in
the region, but around the world. The gains of this peace
are irrefutable. Over the past two years, Colombians have
put aside over a half-century of fighting, held peaceful
and inclusive elections, set up transitional-justice
institutions and extended development and governance
to remote areas of the country.
We believe the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia has been vital to this success, and we
welcome the Colombian Government’s support for the
United Nations. Despite this progress, now is not the
time to become complacent, as evidenced by the deadly
car bombing in Bogotá last week. We strongly condemn
this attack and offer our condolences to the victims
and their families. Ensuring meaningful justice and
accountability for those responsible for serious crimes
committed during so many years of armed conflict is
vital to reconciliation, as is the need to tackle violence
and poverty in the conflict-affected areas.
We remain concerned about the persistent instability
and the violence related to illicit activities, security
vacuums and a lack of meaningful State presence in
so many rural areas. We trust that the Government will
continue its efforts to protect vulnerable populations
and human rights defenders, and to expand its presence
in conflict-affected areas so as to keep illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations from replacing the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común and
creating a new source of violence. Effective military and
civilian agencies that provide security and Government
services in remote areas are critical to sustained peace.
We encourage the Government to continue its efforts
to protect, support and empower displaced Colombians.
President Duque well knows the challenges that
face Colombia. We are encouraged by his strong resolve
and his Government’s partnership with the United
States on matters ranging from counter-narcotics and

19-018145/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

security to the humanitarian response to the Venezuela
regional crisis.
The success of the peace accord and counternarcotics efforts are intrinsically linked. We are
committed to partnering with our Colombian friends
to dismantle criminal organizations and to curtail
narcotrafficking. In the United States, President Trump
has made substance abuse prevention a priority for his
Administration, issued a global call to action on the
world drug problem and chaired a high-level event on
counter-narcotics during the high-level week here at the
United Nations in September last year.
The United States continues to work with the
Colombian Government to cut coca cultivation and
cocaine production in Colombia by half by the end
of 2023. Together we can achieve sustainable results
for the people of both countries through increased
resources, the effective use of all available tools and an
integrated whole-of-Government approach.
Colombia has shown its strength as a regional
leader. The United States is grateful for Colombia’s
generosity in hosting more than 1.1 million Venezuelans
fleeing the man-made crisis in their country. We are
proud to support Colombia’s response to the crisis
by committing $92 million to assist the Venezuelan
people and the communities hosting them in Colombia,
including $55 million in humanitarian aid and more than
$37 million in bilateral development funding. We have
also provided more than $39 million in humanitarian
assistance for the protection of and assistance to
Colombians forcibly displaced throughout the region,
including internally displaced persons inside Colombia.
The United States stands firmly with President
Duque and the people of Colombia as they continue
to preserve the hard-won peace and build a strong and
prosperous future for generations to come.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to once again see you, Mr. Minister, presiding
over our deliberations. We appreciate the convening of
this meeting and the briefing by Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
whom we congratulate on his appointment. We assure
him of our cooperation. We welcome the participation
of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila,
High Counsellor for Post-Conflict. I would also like
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the efforts
undertaken by Mr. Jean Arnault and his important
contribution to the peace process in Colombia.
6/23

23/01/2019

Allow me to begin by reiterating our strongest
condemnation of the heinous terrorist attack by the
National Liberation Army in Bogotá last week, as well
as our most heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims. Peru reiterates its full support to Colombia and
commends the resilience of the Colombian people and
their unquestionable commitment to peace.
Last November marked two years since the signing
of the historic peace agreement, which put an end to
more than 50 years of conflict. In a short period of time,
enormous progress has been made in consolidating the
agreement. It is important to continue to move towards
its full implementation.
We would like to highlight the measures adopted
by the Government of Colombia in order to improve the
coordination of the actors involved and strengthen the
presence of the State throughout the territory. We will
focus in particular on the efforts required in the areas
of security, the reintegration of former combatants and
national reconciliation.
Despite the progress with regard to security, we
regret the ongoing killings of social leaders, human
rights defenders and former combatants. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1159),
coordinated action by all actors on the ground is
required, in particular in the most vulnerable rural areas.
In that regard, we wish to welcome the adoption of
the “Peace with legality” plan, which seeks to protect,
stabilize and develop the former conflict areas and
should be complemented by the Action Plan for the
Protection of Social and Community Leaders, Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists.
We also highlight the importance of the early
warning mechanism of the Ombudsman’s Office,
which, among other elements, highlights the threat
posed by the criminal groups competing for the control
of the former conflict areas used to transport illicit
goods, such as drug trafficking.
With respect to the reintegration of former
combatants, we would like to acknowledge the
commitment and efforts of the Government in tackling
the complex challenges of that aspect of the agreement.
In that context, we believe that it is important to
strengthen inter-institutional coordination and the
participation of the local authorities and to take into
account the allocation of the necessary resources.
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

In that regard, we believe that the new “Peace with
legality” plan should also be linked to development
programmes with a territorial approach, the crop
substitution programme and rural reform. All the
above must take into account the gender perspective
towards the economic empowerment of women and the
role of young people. In that process, we acknowledge
the contribution of the territorial areas for training and
reintegration and the monthly allowances. We believe
that it is important to have an inclusive reflection
process concerning their future after August that takes
into account the access of former combatants to land
and alternative sources of income.
In that vein, we highlight that more than 90,000
Colombian families have signed voluntary agreements
for the substitution of illicit crops. Our own experience
with regard to alternative development programmes
bear witness to their effectiveness, and we believe
that it is important that the new national strategy to
fight drugs “The future path” continue to promote
such measures.
Finally, we would like to highlight the importance
of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition to ensure the rights of
victims and to promote access to justice and national
reconciliation in Colombia, in particular the role of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru’s commitment
to sustaining peace and development in this sister
country, based on the unity of the Council, with a view
to consolidating Latin America and the Caribbean as a
region of peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
informative briefing on the outstanding work of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Allow me to take this opportunity to again pay tribute
to his predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his exemplary
commitment. I also welcome the presence among us
of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila,
High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.
The attack on 17 January was a shock. At a time
when all Colombians long for lasting peace, that
terrorist act claimed the lives of 20 innocent people
and injured more than 60 people. On behalf of France,
I would like to reiterate our strongest condemnation

S/PV. 8450

of the attack, as expressed by President Macron. The
Colombian people can count on the unfailing friendship
and solidarity of the French people in this trial and in
the face of terrorism. To overcome it, unity must prevail
more than ever, including within the Security Council.
At this time of sadness and suffering, we must
remember the tremendous hope generated by the peace
process between the Colombian Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and that, together,
we have the responsibility to uphold it. Disarmed,
the former FARC-EP guerrillas are now full-fledged
political actors, while the former combatants have
expressed their desire to regain their rightful place in
Colombian society.
More than two years after the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, three points deserve special
attention, in our view. The security situation in former
conflict zones in Colombia is emerging as the absolute
top priority at the start of this year. In the past two
weeks, the murders of at least seven human rights
defenders have been confirmed. Make no mistake, that
phenomenon, which we have pointed out at previous
open Council meetings, is not an accident. It is taking
on such proportions that it is clearly a strategy of terror
and should be combated as such. We are compelled
to conclude that the high level of violence in former
conflict-affected areas, which has not spared former
FARC-EP combatants, is eroding confidence in the
peace process.
We welcome the Colombian Government’s
initiatives, in particular the action plan for protecting
civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and
journalists. With departmental and municipal elections
coming up in October, we must redouble our efforts.
The success of that democratic exercise will depend on
the degree of security provided for the women and men
willing to make a political commitment to contributing
to the vitality of Colombian democracy. The two are
inextricably linked.
The economic reintegration of former combatants
is another priority for 2019. France has regularly
encouraged the Colombian authorities to invest in this
process so as to give former combatants a genuine
chance to reintegrate into Colombian society, and that
will unquestionably be the deciding factor in the peace
Agreement’s success. In that regard, we hope that long-

19-018147/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

term solutions will be found for former combatants
currently residing in regrouping and reintegration
zones. The crucial issue of access to land must not be
ignored in the process of economic reintegration. The
productive projects currently under way demonstrate
the close link between this issue and a sustainable
development policy. We encourage the Colombian
Government to continue its ongoing steps to ensure
the full implementation of the decree adopted in June
last year.
Lastly, particular attention must be paid to the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The Colombian peace
process has established a unique system of transitional
justice based on cooperation with the Jurisdiction by all
the parties to the conflict. Only when they cooperate
and continue to do so will Colombia be able to shed
light on the crimes committed during that period,
including those against women, who are often the first
victims of violence. In addition to the commitment to
cooperation of all parties to the conflict, respect for
decisions having the authority of res judicata will also
be vital to preserving the legitimacy of that pillar of
the peace process. France therefore calls on all political
actors, regardless of their affiliation, to reaffirm the
independence of the Jurisdiction at every opportunity,
as it guarantees legal security for the women and men
who have had the courage to lay down their weapons.
The Colombian peace process deserves our full
admiration and is also a profound source of inspiration
for the United Nations and the Council. The United
Nations stands resolutely with Colombia in urging it
to write a historic new chapter on the establishment of
lasting peace for the entire Colombian people. Colombia
will always have the fraternal support of France in this
decisive period of its history.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you presiding over
the Security Council, Sir, and it is an honour to have
you conducting today’s meeting. We also welcome
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio José Archila, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, to today’s meeting.
I would first like to express my condolences to the
families of those killed and injured during the attack
on the police academy in Bogotá on 17 January. That
heinous crime, which killed and maimed dozens of
people, should be thoroughly investigated and its
perpetrators duly punished.
8/23

23/01/2019

We would like to express our gratitude to Mr. Jean
Arnault, former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Colombia, for his genuine commitment to the
peace process in Colombia. We congratulate Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, on his debut in the Security
Council, and thank him for his comprehensive briefing
on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1159), which
is a reasonably objective reflection of the situation
regarding the Colombian parties’ fulfilment of their
obligations under the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We
note the report’s conclusions about the steps taken by
Bogotá to stabilize the situation in the country and
consolidate public opinion on the Agreement, which
has established a reliable legal basis for a settlement
and made broad international support possible. It is
now important to ensure that its signatories strengthen
and develop the progress that has been made in the 16
months of the Verification Mission’s existence.
The security of citizens must be a top priority.
One task that cannot be put off is preventing and
investigating the murders and attacks on civilians,
including former combatants. As long as the problem
remains unresolved, it will compel people to seek
security independently. That trend must be stopped and
efforts must be focused on the problem.
Needless to say, there is a great deal to be done
to create conditions that can enable the people to
earn a stable and legal income. Political problems
persist. It will also be essential to ensure that the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común is
duly represented in Colombia’s Parliament and the
independence of the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is guaranteed. In that context, the commitment of
President Iván Duque Márquez to the socioeconomic,
political and legal reintegration of former combatants,
noted in the Secretary-General’s report, is crucial, in
our view. We firmly believe that under the leadership
of its new Head, the Verification Mission will continue
to be of reliable assistance to the Colombians in
monitoring the implementation of the peace Agreement
by its signatories.
The Security Council has often pointed out
that Colombia is the poster-child example of how
international support can and should be provided,
through close cooperation with a host Government in
the leading role, and a responsible attitude on the part of
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

the whole of society. It was its citizens’ avowed national
ownership and desire to seek a politically sustainable
solution that made peace possible in Colombia.
In conclusion, I want to again touch on the tragic
attack on the police academy. Our position is well known.
We are firmly against all terrorist acts, regardless of
their aims. It is clear to us that the organizers of the
17 January attack intended to undermine the peace
process, and if that leads to incitement, they will
achieve their goal. We believe that in their wisdom, the
Colombians who struggled for decades to achieve peace
will not permit those evil plans to come to fruition and
that the peace process will continue. For our part, we
will continue to support the people and the Government
of Colombia in the work of building a lasting peace and
post-conflict development.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We are
pleased that you are presiding over today’s meeting,
Sir. We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for
his briefing. I also join previous speakers in welcoming
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio José Archila, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, to today’s meeting.
In my statement, I will focus on three main issues.
My first concerns the latest developments in the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The
measures taken by the Colombian Government to promote
the implementation of the peace agreement and the plan
announced by the High Counsellor for Post-Conflict,
entitled “Peace with legality”, are important and vital.
The tireless efforts of the Government to support the
socioeconomic reintegration process for the former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and to link
that process with the regional development programmes
and initiatives launched within the framework of the
peace agreement — including rural development,
through cooperation with national authorities
and United Nations agencies — contribute to the
sustainability of the peace process and the promotion
of security and stability in Colombia. We underscore
the importance of continuing the full reintegration of
former members of FARC-EP at the political, legal,
social and economic levels, despite the slow progress of
this important process to date.

S/PV. 8450

With regard to the comprehensive system of truth,
justice, reparation and non-repetition, which is a
mainstay of transitional justice, we commend the role of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other bodies and
committees that have recently started to work to achieve
full justice. We also urge the Colombian Government to
step up its efforts within the framework of the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops and provide legal and security guarantees
for former members of FARC-EP in order to overcome
the challenges hindering the implementation of the
peace agreement, given the significant challenges
facing the Colombian Government in implementing the
peace agreement in all its aspects.
Secondly, with respect to the security situation, the
continued killings, violence and threats against social
leaders, human rights defenders and indigenous leaders
constitute an obstacle to the implementation of the
peace agreement. We strongly condemn the terrorist
attack in the Colombian capital on 17 January, which
targeted the police academy and resulted in a number
of fatalities and injuries. The security repercussions
of this incident will undoubtedly affect security and
stability in Colombia, and we offer our condolences to
the Government and the people of Colombia and the
families of the victims.
We also commend the national pact for life and
for the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders, signed between the Colombian Government,
regional authorities and civil society organizations
in August 2018, as well as the Action Plan for the
Protection of Social and Community Leaders, Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists, which was signed
by President Duque Márquez in November 2018. The
Action Plan is considered to be an important step in
building the confidence required to provide security
and political conditions conducive to the complete
implementation of the peace agreement in all its aspects.
Thirdly, we commend the efforts made by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
through coordination with Government officials,
national and regional authorities, the private sector and
the international community, as well as by promoting
dialogue with organizations and youth leaders at
all levels.
In conclusion, I thank Mr. Jean Arnault for
his efforts during his recently completed tenure as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

19-018149/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

Colombia and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. We reiterate our support for
the Colombian peace agreement, which has ended a
50-year conflict and has become a success story to be
emulated in resolving other conflicts in the world. We
underscore the full support of the Security Council
and the international community for the Colombian
peace agreement. The State of Kuwait supports the new
Special Representative, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and
all members of his team.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start by conveying
to the representative of Colombia the condolences of
the German Government and people for the injured and
the families of those killed. There is no justification for
this heinous attack on innocent people.
Of course, we all understand that the Colombian
Government has said that enough is enough, but at the
same time it must not fall into the trap of any kind of
escalation. We believe that there is no alternative to a
political process, and in that context I would issue a plea
to the National Liberation Army (ELN) to take the first
step by releasing all kidnapped persons and detainees.
I would also like to do to thank Mr. Jean Arnault
for his work, as well as the United Nations team on the
ground, and to welcome the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Columbia, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, who despite only two weeks on the
job has produced a very good and very well received
briefing, which is to be expected from a former member
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.
Allow me also to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
and the High Counsellor for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio
José Archila, whose visit to New York demonstrates
their commitment to the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and to
the unity of the Security Council —
­ an important unity
that has been preserved as reflected in the statements
made in the Council today.
I also congratulate them on the second anniversary
of the peace agreement. Germany welcomes the
clear commitment of President Duque Márquez to
the peace agreement, the peace process and national
reconciliation. The task that faces Colombia now is the
consolidation of the peace process, in relation to which
10/23

23/01/2019

I would like to make three points to reiterate what has
already been said.
First, regarding the security situation, the Special
Representative has reported the number of human rights
defenders, social leaders, women leaders, women’s
rights defenders and indigenous leaders who have
been victims of attacks because of their support for the
peace agreement or its implementation, in particular
land restitution. The protection of people against such
attacks, although a difficult task, must be a top priority.
Secondly, regarding transitional justice, a very
important subject, for which the Special Representative
reported the number of cases that have been dealt
with, the legal uncertainty of combatants and former
combatants is an issue which, if allowed to persist, will
be detrimental to the consolidation of the peace process.
I would therefore encourage Colombia to increase the
capacity of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
Thirdly, regarding the reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, progress has been made
but more needs to be done. I would like to underline and
confirm Germany’s support for traditional justice as a
key element of building an inclusive society, which is
why we highly appreciate the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund in
this area, and we would like to encourage Colombia to
persevere in social and economic integration.
In that context, I would like to join the position
of France stated earlier with regard to the victims
of crimes, a large number of whom are women. I
urge Colombia to focus on support women’s issues,
in particular the reintegration of female former
combatants and the provision of day care for children,
as well as the inclusion of youth, which is a critical
element for the future without violence that the country
is determined to achieve. We know that Colombia faces
many challenges, including the implementation of the
peace agreement, the hosting of more than 1 million
refugees from Venezuela and the illegal trafficking of
drugs. We wish to assure Colombia that it can count
on the support of the international community and the
Security Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for calling today’s meeting
and welcome you to New York. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Trujillo García to the Security Council.
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

Finally, I thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing.

S/PV. 8450

China strongly condemns the recent terrorist attack
in Bogotá. We convey our deepest condolences and
sympathy to the bereaved families and those injured in
the attack.

China joins other members of the Security Council
in supporting the work of Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to fulfil their mandates — advancing
the Colombian peace process and contributing to the
early realization of comprehensive peace and stability
in Colombia.

The Colombia peace process continues to advance.
The Colombian Government has carried out a
comprehensive assessment of the situation in the country
and seeks consensus among all parties in Colombia
with regard to the revision of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Thanks to the joint efforts of the Government
and relevant parties, the national security situation in
general has been stable, with State institutions being
restored, economic recovery under way and the peace
process bearing fruit.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I, too, would like to congratulate Special
Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu on his new role and
thank him for his briefing. I also thank his predecessor,
Jean Arnault, for his considerable contribution to
the peace process. Finally, I welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and
express the sympathy and condolences of the Belgian
Government following last week’s attack against a
police academy in Bogotá. We condemn that attack in
the strongest terms.

China welcomes those developments. While
the overall situation in Colombia is stabilizing and
improving, the security situation in some parts of
the country remains fragile. In addition, Colombia
has the daunting tasks of fully implementing the
peace
agreement,
reintegrating
ex-combatants,
fighting organized crime and realizing social and
economic development.

The year 2019 is crucial for peacebuilding in
Colombia. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points — first, the Colombian Government’s
commitment to the peace process; secondly, the
unacceptable violence towards human rights defenders
and local leaders; and, thirdly, the socioeconomic
and legal reintegration of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP).

Some time ago, Colombia commemorated the
second anniversary of the peace agreement. We hope
that all parties in Colombia will cherish the hardwon peace process, further solidify consensus, meet
each other halfway and resolve their differences by
continuing the inclusive dialogue and negotiations. The
Security Council should respect the leadership of the
Government and the people of Colombia, and provide
constructive assistance to advance the Colombian
peace process.
China welcomes the appointment by SecretaryGeneral Guterres of Mr. Ruiz Massieu as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia.
China commends former Special Representative Arnault
for his work. We hope that Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia will continue to help the Colombian
Government address the issues of reintegrating former
combatants and achieving security in conflict areas
in a bid to promote mutual trust among all Colombian
parties and actively implement the peace process.

At the outset, Belgium welcomes the new
Government’s commitment to the peace process as
demonstrated by the “Peace with legality” plan, which
recognizes that rural poverty and inequalities are the
root causes of the conflict. Today more than ever, after
last week’s cowardly attack, the implementation on the
part of all parties of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
is essential in the framework of an urgent, inclusive
and concerted effort to advance the peace process
throughout the country. In that regard, Belgium calls
for the implementation of the affirmative action policies
contained in the agreements on the role of women.
My second point has to do with human rights.
Belgium is very concerned about violence against
human rights defenders and social leaders, too often
committed with total impunity. In 2018, a human rights
defender or leader was murdered, on average, every
48 hours. January is not yet over and already seven
people have been killed, as indicated by the Special
Representative. In that connection, the implementation

19-0181411/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

of the action plan for their protection, in consultation
with civil society, is key. We welcome the recent
convening of the National Commission for Security
Guarantees. Violence against former FARC-EP
combatants is also a source of concern.
We strongly encourage the Colombian authorities
to consolidate the State’s presence throughout its
territory, not only in order to ensure security but also
to promote social programmes that focus on health
care and education so as to meet the expectations of
rural communities and historically marginalized ethnic
minorities, in accordance with the recommendations of
Special Rapporteur Michel Forst.
Finally, with regard to the socioeconomic and
legal reintegration of the FARC-EP, Belgium believes
reintegration to be a key element in the successful
implementation of the peace agreement and underscores
the need to make progress at the national, regional and
local levels. Even as we ensure transitional justice, we
must show ex-combatants, who have laid down their
weapons, that it is in their interest to be on the right side
of history. Access to legal revenue sources and to land
is at the heart of effective reintegration. In that context,
Belgium is pleased to note that illegal-crop-substitution
policies continue and have been successful.
Belgium underlines the central role of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, which must have the necessary
means to be able to carry out its mandate independently.
Further progress must be made in ensuring legal
protection for former FARC-EP members.
(spoke in Spanish)
Before I conclude, I would like to make some
remarks to the representative of Colombia. His country
serves as an inspiration throughout the world. Regions
affected by conflict see his country as a model to
overcome the past and to choose to build a peaceful
future. The coming year will require a concerted effort
on the part of the Government, the political parties and
civil society to reap the benefits of the peace agreement
with the FARC-EP. Last week’s atrocious terrorist
attack reminds us of the urgent need for action.
Belgium recognizes that the situation in Venezuela
has an extremely negative impact on neighbouring
countries. As such, we commend Colombia for its show
of solidarity towards Venezuelans who seek refuge.
12/23

23/01/2019

We cannot let this historic opportunity pass us by.
Belgium, along with the other members of the Council,
is fully committed and ready to collaborate.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are honoured to
have you, Mr. President, presiding over this important
meeting, giving our friend Mr. José Singer Weisinger a
bit of a break. I think he deserves a break. We are also
honoured by the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Carlos Trujillo García,
and his delegation, as well as the Foreign Minister of
Indonesia, Mrs. Retno Marsudi.
We welcome the extensive and informative briefing
by Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We furthermore
acknowledge the role played by Cuba and Norway,
as the guarantors and facilitators of the Colombian
peace process.
At the outset, South Africa extends its deepest
condolences to the Government of Colombia and its
people following the attack that claimed more than 20
lives in Bogotá last week and injured many more. We
condemn, in the strongest terms possible, this senseless
violence, which must not be allowed to threaten and
derail the hard-won and significant achievements of the
peace process in Colombia.
Notwithstanding that regrettable and tragic incident,
South Africa welcomes the report (S/2018/1159) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which conveys a generally
positive view of progress in achieving lasting peace in
the country. However, the report also notes the killing
of social leaders and human rights defenders, which is a
major concern and presents an ongoing challenge.
In addressing those challenges, South Africa
would like to emphasize, based on our experience, the
importance of working to expand the State’s presence
throughout its territory, which is particularly necessary
in areas that have been affected by conflict and vacated
by former combatants. It will also help to resolve
the sensitive land question and restore much-needed
basic services to all, including combatants who have
surrendered and their families.
As Colombia commemorates the third anniversary
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, it is important
that we recognize and commend the Government
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

of Colombia, led by President Duque Márquez, for
its significant efforts in encouraging dialogue and
the implementation of the peace agreement. We take
note, inter alia, of the Government’s launching in
2019 of its “Peace with legality” plan, which aims to
provide concrete solutions to potential obstacles to the
peace process.
South Africa also expresses its full support for
Colombia’s Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-repetition, known as the Truth Commission. Our
very own Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
South Africa, as painful and imperfect as it may have
been, was invaluable in allowing our people to confront
our painful history and deal with the deep wounds that
had divided us for a long time. Therefore, in order to
foster healing, it is important that Colombia’s justice
process, embodied in its Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
receive the full support and cooperation of all the parties
involved. Its independence and autonomy, as well as the
judgments it arrives at, also need to be fully respected.
Furthermore, as pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report, it is critical that the
reintegration process in Colombia involve efforts to
empower local communities, in close collaboration with
the private sector, universities and other stakeholders,
such as civil society organizations, women, victims
of violence and ethnic or indigenous peoples. On
this point it is important to recognize the important
pioneering efforts and achievements of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in working
specifically to address youth in the peace process. As
the country’s future leaders, its youth and their futures
are critical to the success of the peace process in
Colombia. That pioneering work by the United Nations
Verification Mission should serve as an important
example for other peace missions.
South Africa also commends the efforts of regional
bodies, such as the Organization of American States
(OAS), particularly through its Mission to Support of
the Peace Process in Colombia, led by Mr. Roberto
Menéndez. We encourage greater coordination between
the United Nations efforts and those of the OAS.
As has been mentioned, the transition that
Colombia is undergoing bears many similarities with
the experiences of South Africa. Following the end
of apartheid, South Africa’s fledgling democracy had
to deal with similarly complex challenges, including
reforming the security sector, demobilizing and

S/PV. 8450

reintegrating former combatants, processes related to
truth and reconciliation, as well as justice.
Peace is expensive. Peace is complex. Making
peace is a difficult, yet necessary, undertaking.
Patience is needed. Respect and equal treatment for all
is required. Certainty about the common future must be
spelled out. Justice must be applied fairly to everyone.
Inter-Colombian dialogue is the way to go. Neighbours
should give the Colombian people a chance to deal
with the painful past to heal, to deal with mistrust, to
bond together and to move together. Democracy needs
compromises. Democracy needs accommodation.
Work together with former combatants. Do not
demonize them.
As always, South Africa remains ready and willing
to share the small experiences and lessons that it
learned through those difficult processes, in the hope
that Colombia and its people might find lasting peace
and prosperity.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): It is a pleasure for our delegation to
have you, Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado,
presiding over this briefing of the Security Council
on Colombia. Our delegation expresses its heartfelt
congratulations to Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
recent appointment as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification in
Colombia. We also thank him for the very informative
briefing he just provided, despite the very short time
that he has been leading the Verification Mission. We
would like to express to him our hope that his high
level of training and accumulated experience will serve
as his guide in carrying out this new, challenging and
very sensitive responsibility to the best of his abilities.
We wish him every success. We also would like to
pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Arnault, for his
excellent work.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and thank him for joining
us today. We wish him a pleasant stay in New York.
We also reiterate our appreciation for the presence
of Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, who has been with us
since yesterday, in the debate on the Middle East (see
S/PV.8449) and today’s discussion on Colombia.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the treacherous terrorist act perpetrated

19-0181413/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

by the National Liberation Army (ELN) against the
police academy in Bogotá on 17 January, with deadly
results and leaving many wounded. We express our
total condemnation of such terrorist acts. We join with
the Government of Colombia and the families of the
victims with the profound hope that the perpetrators
will be identified and brought to justice.
Our delegation expresses its satisfaction and
admiration for the spirit of willingness, devotion and
dedication of His Excellency Mr. Iván Duque Márquez,
President of the Republic of Colombia, who in the
short period of his presidency has already begun to
promote important initiatives to advance the peace
process in Colombia. His visit on 12 October to one
of the most important territorial areas for training
and reintegration, in Pondores, whose purpose was to
affirm his Government’s intention to support the peace
agreement and those committed to returning to civilian
life, shows, with this act of supreme political will, his
direct involvement in this Governmental task.
We welcome the Government’s “Peace with
legality” plan, presented in mid-December, which
aims to cover and stabilize further areas affected by
the conflict and is focused on eradicating the violence
that has been endured for decades. We believe it to be
a very credible project, considering the damage that
criminality — in the form of murders, drug trafficking
and human rights violations — has caused in Colombia.
It is important that the plan be duly supported, given
its comprehensive nature, which includes multiple
initiatives within and outside the scope of the peace
agreement, and that this will for peace be translated
into tangible achievements on the ground.
We welcome the inauguration, at the end of
2018, of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-repetition, designed to promote understanding of
the events that took place during the armed conflict,
recognition of responsibilities and reconciliation. We
believe that, with the support of the Government and
other institutions, the Commission should be able to
operate in accordance with the powers conferred on it
by law.
We regret the 4 October incident in which
investigators from the office of the Attorney General
forcibly entered the premises of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We understand that all entities created to
facilitate the peace process enjoy powers conferred by
law and that the recruitment of operational personnel
14/23

23/01/2019

also follows a legal procedure, which is why their
offices must enjoy full autonomy if the exercise of their
functions is to be guaranteed.
We cannot end our statement without expressing
our concern about the growing distance between the
new Government and the National Liberation Army.
The truth be told, the ELN must refrain from attacking
the civilian population and consider the possibility of
handing over hostages, which would make a significant
contribution to future negotiations, and it would also
have a significant impact on the population.
In conclusion, our delegation would, on the one
hand, like to express its recognition and appreciation
for the continued significant support that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the
United Nations agencies in the country have dedicated
to encouraging the Colombian peace process. On the
other hand, we urge the Government, as well as other
political institutions of the State, the political parties,
civil society and the population in general, to take the
greatest advantage possible of the work of the United
Nations for the reconstruction of Colombia. Finally, we
express the hope that the local elections scheduled for
next October will be held in a climate of calm and peace
and free from all types of violence.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the review of
the peace process in Colombia. WE would also like to
welcome the presence at this meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia. His
presence is a good illustration of the Colombian
Government’s commitment to working towards the
success of the ongoing peace process. My delegation
also congratulates Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
on his informative briefing and wishes him every
success in his new position.
My delegation notes, in the light of the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1159), that significant
progress has been made in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). The report sets forth observations on the
tangible results of the peace process, the challenges
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

ahead and the critical role of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.
With regard to the tangible results of the peace
process, my delegation welcomes the combination of
the political will shown by the Colombian authorities
with the commitment of the other stakeholders in the
process, which has enabled the progress unanimously
recognized by the international community. This
combination of actions by all actors in the peace
process has made it possible to move from a rationale
of conflict to one of peace. Accordingly, after several
decades of conflict, Colombia held its first peaceful and
inclusive elections, which saw the participation of the
FARC-EP, now transformed into a political party, the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC).
In the same vein, the legal framework to promote
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
transitional-justice institutions have been put in place.
My delegation welcomes the determination of the
new authorities to pursue the peace process through
concrete actions, including the implementation of
the “Peace with legality” plan, aimed at eradicating
violence in conflict-affected areas, promoting rural
development and launching a new anti-drug policy. We
also welcome the preparation and presentation of draft
laws on peace, the regular holding of hearings of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the commencement of
the work of the Truth Commission and the resumption
of the work of the National Reintegration Council to
promote income-generating activities.
We furthermore welcome the progress made in
political reintegration. Indeed, the FARC effectively
occupies the five seats granted to it in the Colombian
Congress, and arrangements are under way to enable
it to take part in the 2019 regional and local elections.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes all those encouraging
developments and urges the Colombian authorities to
continue their efforts to address all the challenges related
to peacebuilding. In that regard, we call for a synergy
of actions among the Government, State institutions,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
with the support of the international community.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the opinion that the general
aspiration for peace deserves to be strengthened and
protected from any action that could affect the valuable
achievements of the peace process. We therefore strongly
condemn the heinous attack on the police academy in
Bogotá on 17 January, which caused approximately

S/PV. 8450

20 deaths and many injuries. We offer our condolences
to the grieving families and our wishes for a speedy
recovery to the injured. My country calls on the
National Liberation Army to renounce all armed action
and resolutely join the peace and reconciliation process.
With regard to the challenges ahead, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that the implementation of the peace agreement
requires a systematic approach and sustained efforts by
all stakeholders and the international community to
promote security, economic reintegration and justice.
With respect to security issues, my delegation
condemns the ongoing attacks on social leaders
and human rights defenders. Similarly, it remains
concerned about the increasing activities of illegal
groups and criminal organizations, the growing illegal
economy and the taking up of arms again by some
FARC members, frustrated by the slow pace of the
peace process.
In that context, the challenge of economic
reintegration, which is at the heart of the peace
process, deserves particular attention. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the increase in the number of
approved income-generating projects to a total of 20 to
date. However, it believes that the difficulties in former
combatants accessing such opportunities for economic
reintegration remain an obstacle to the peace process.
My delegation therefore urges the Government,
with the support of the international community, to
increase measures to strengthen the technical capacity
of cooperatives, access to land and markets and the fight
against corruption and to take into account the gender
dimension to promote the empowerment of women. My
delegation also encourages the Colombian authorities
to redouble their efforts to ensure the continuity of
basic services, in particular health, education, water
and electricity services in the most remote rural areas.
In the area of justice, my delegation encourages
the Government to continue its efforts to facilitate
the smooth functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and to provide adequate responses to outstanding
issues regarding legal guarantees.
To address all those challenges, Côte d’Ivoire urges
the political authorities, the Colombian institutions
and all other stakeholders to persevere in their efforts
to build trust and to promote reconciliation among
all Colombians in order to ensure the success of the
peace process.

19-0181415/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

With regard to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, my country would like to
acknowledge the key role played by the Mission in
Colombia, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team and the various partners. My delegation
particularly welcomes its commitment to peacebuilding
and issues related to gender, child protection and ethnic
and cultural integration.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire assures the Colombian
authorities of its full support in their determination to
work for the success of the peace and reconciliation
process. In addition, we recall the need for the Council
to continue to support the Government’s peace and
reconciliation efforts.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): It is an honour to see
you, Mr. President, in the Chamber today. Allow me
also to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Colombia. We are also pleased to
see among us Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, who was
present with us yesterday, as well. Let me thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his first briefing to the
Council in his new capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia. We assure
him of our full support. Let me also thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, whose dedication was crucial to the success
of the peace process from the very first moment before
we could even think about a United Nations mission
in Colombia.
The peace process remains an undeniable success of
Columbian society and serves as a source of inspiration
worldwide, sending a much-needed positive message.
We hope that the process of its implementation will
continue despite some difficulties.
That said, we are obliged to underline the urgent
need to address the killings of social leaders and human
rights defenders and to ensure meaningful engagement
with civil society, particularly through the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, so that plans are
directed where most needed. That will also be critical to
ensuring peaceful local elections, which are scheduled
to take place in October.
We encourage all parties to support the extremely
important work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
in its role in promoting access to justice and national
reconciliation in Colombia. We also stress the need to
preserve the independence and autonomy of the Special
16/23

23/01/2019

Jurisdiction for Peace and the other transitional justice
mechanisms. According to reports, the challenges
ahead remain formidable in that area.
There is a need for clarity on the sustainability of
the reincorporation process of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) as soon as possible. The full political, legal
and socioeconomic reintegration of the former FARCEP members is needed. We strongly believe that the
issue of land ownership must be properly addressed, as
it is at the heart of effective reintegration.
The issue of illicit coca crops remains one of the
most threatening to the peace process in some regions
of the country. According to reports of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, almost 100,000
families have signed up for the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops. Since
the voluntary eradication rate remains high, it will
be critical to ensure that the commitments to those
families are upheld.
External factors are also influencing the
process. We must remain vigilant and aware that the
spillover effects from the massive influx of people
from neighbouring Venezuela could have adverse
consequences for Colombia’s efforts.
Unfortunately, only a few days ago, we were all
shaken by the information about the heinous terrorist
attack on the National Police Academy in Bogotá,
which left several fatalities and dozens injured. Poland
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences to the
victims and their families, as well as to the people and
the Government of Colombia.
Poland strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms, underlining that any acts of terrorism are
criminal. It is of the utmost importance to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Given the evidence presented
by the Colombian Government, which identifies the
National Liberation Army (ELN) as the instigator of
that terrorist attack, Poland urges the ELN to renounce
terrorism and immediately and unconditionally release
all hostages. We support all measures announced by
President Duque in his recent message to the nation and
his willingness to continue to support the Colombian
people in their peace efforts.
In conclusion, Poland fully supports the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which
continues to play a vital role in facilitating the
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

S/PV. 8450

implementation of the peace agreement. We also
commend the role of the United Nations country team
and every United Nations agency present on the ground.

We therefore welcome the strong efforts of President
Duque Márquez to accelerate the socioeconomic
reintegration of former members of FARC-EP.

Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I would like once again
to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, on the Dominican
Republic’s presidency of the Security Council. I am
very glad to see you again. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment. Let me also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.

Indonesia stands ready to contribute, in particular
to provide support for demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, including the conversion of coca
fields into more productive commodities, such as palm
oil, rubber or cacao. Last December, Indonesia and
Colombia initiated a programme entitled “Oil palms for
peace”. We look forward to continuing to work closely
with Colombia this year and expanding the programme
into a second phase entitled “Crops for peace”.

Allow me to convey Indonesia’s deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Colombia following the terrorist attack in Bogotá
last week. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.
The recent bombing shows the complexity of
challenges faced by Colombia. Indonesia is confident
that that will not deter Colombia’s strong commitment
to making further strides towards peace and stability.
Indonesia is privileged to have been part of Colombia’s
endeavour. In 2015, at the request of Colombia’s
Government, I led a high-level delegation to Bogotá
to share Indonesia’s experiences in ending its 29-year
conflict with the Free Aceh Movement.
Indonesia was therefore very happy when, in
2016, the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) signed the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which provides important guidelines and
sets out the path towards peace and reconciliation.
Its full implementation by all parties will provide
lasting peace, stability and prosperity. From our own
experiences, we know that healing wounds and staying
true to an agreement have never been easy and require
the commitment, patience and understanding of all
parties and the support of the international community.
Allow me to highlight some key issues with regard
to the briefing.
First, effective reintegration is key: it is a highly
complex and sensitive challenge and requires sustained
nurturing. Moreover, while political reintegration
is critical, socioeconomic reintegration is equally
important. Ensuring the livelihood of the population is
vital: everyone must be able to enjoy the peace dividend.

Secondly, security challenges must be addressed.
We note from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1159) that illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations still persist, which has allowed violence
to occur in areas that were previously under FARC-EP
control. We are also concerned about the assassination
of former FARC-EP members, social leaders and human
rights defenders by those illegal armed groups. We have
learned from our own experience that law enforcement
must be accompanied by respect for human rights.
Otherwise, order and security, as well as mutual trust
and confidence, will be hard to attain. We therefore
welcome the adoption by the Colombian Government
of the Action Plan for the Protection of Social and
Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders and
Journalists, which we trust will be implemented in
an effective and consistent manner. In that context,
Indonesia stands ready to extend our support to the
Government and the good people of Colombia.
Thirdly, commitments made must be honoured by
all sides. The ultimate success of the peace process
will depend upon all parties involved respecting
their commitments.
Colombia has embarked upon a historic journey
towards peace. It must stay on course. All parties must
continue to play their parts. At stake is the welfare of
the people of Colombia, who long for peace. The unity
of the Security Council is of vital importance so that it
may work closely with the Colombian Government and
a stable and lasting peace will not be beyond reach.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
First, I would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his excellent briefing. I am also pleased to welcome

19-0181417/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose presence
demonstrates the high degree of commitment of the
Colombian authorities to every detail of this process. I
would also like to welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and
to acknowledge the work of Mr. Jean Arnault, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Columbia/Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
We take this opportunity to reiterate the interest
of the Dominican Republic in, and support for, the
peace process in Colombia, and would like to express
our condemnation of the very serious terrorist attack
perpetrated last week against the police academy in
Bogotá, as well as our solidarity with the families of
the victims and the Colombian people.
Since the establishment of the Verification Mission,
we have contributed Dominican human resources to
form part of the team of experts involved its work, and
today we continue to be committed to the success of the
initiatives launched under the historic peace agreement
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP).
On the occasion of its second anniversary, there is
no question that the peace process has shown tangible
progress. We commend the efforts of the Government
of President Iván Duque Márquez to reach a national
consensus on the path to be followed, which is clearly
seen as a new phase. The second anniversary of the
signing of the peace agreement on 24 November
provided a space for reflection on its achievements,
which have already transformed Colombian society, as
well as the road that must still be travelled to achieve a
sustainable and irreversible peace.
Much has been achieved in those two years: a
definitive ceasefire between the Government and the
FARC-EP, the laying down of weapons, a significant
reduction in the levels of violence and the beginning
of a new national political dynamic. However, a
conflict that lasted so long and is so deeply rooted also
requires comprehensive and sustained measures to
bring about genuine reconciliation among all parties.
That is why we welcome the implementation of the
work of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-Repetition. We urge the Government of President
18/23

23/01/2019

Duque Márquez to continue its determined efforts to
unite Colombian society.
The holding of regional and local elections this
year, with the participation for the first time of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común party,
will be a very important step on the road to the
consolidation of the political process that underpins
this broad national agreement. A peaceful and inclusive
process, in which the rights of the entire population are
fully respected, will demonstrate the importance of
the political dimension of the peace agreement and its
transformative effect.
We are aware that the consolidation of peace will
depend on the transformative economic development
of the whole country. We note as positive the steps
taken to effectively link development programmes
with a territorial focus, together with voluntary
crop-substitution programmes, and more broadly to
link those programmes with initiatives to promote
rural development, which are all important for
reintegration and especially critical for the well-being
of citizens in areas previously affected by instability
and violence. We cannot avoid noting that this is an
exemplary process that shines a light for us to follow
at a time when other conflicts in the world seem to
be becoming more entrenched and long-lasting. The
experiences and lessons learned we are discussing
here today can in many ways serve as models for the
efforts of the Security Council to promote and support
transitions from armed conflict to political processes.
Two years after the signing of the peace agreement,
we commend the presentation by the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio José Archila Peñalosa,
of the policy entitled “Peace with legality” as a clear
indication of the will to consolidate the achievement
of peace with a consistent vision of the future. That
milestone marks the transition to a new phase of the
process in Colombia. We welcome the plan’s objective,
which consists of stabilizing the areas most affected by
the conflict and eradicating violence from the places
that have endured it for decades. It is a long-term crosscutting policy anchored in the principles of justice
and national security, which involves the coordination
of development initiatives, reintegration, voluntary
substitution and a commitment to the victims.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Agency
for Reintegration and Normalization of Colombia to
reduce inequalities observed within the 24 territorial
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

areas for training and reintegration and indicated by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. It is
crucial that ex-combatants enjoy equal opportunities
in this process. In that connection, we note President
Duque’s visit, on 12 October, to one of those areas,
which shows that the authorities are committed to
the process.
As President Duque pointed out during his visit,
the international community must maintain its
support for reintegration projects in order to increase
their viability. The territorial areas for training and
reintegration and the monthly stipend granted to excombatants are scheduled to continue until 15 August
2019. We trust that any decision regarding the
continuance of those measures beyond that date will
be based on an assessment of their positive effects thus
far, the challenges that remain and respect for the views
of all parties.
It is essential that projects aimed at the reintegration
of ex-combatants and other initiatives launched within
the framework of the peace agreement be sustainable.
The success of the process is intimately linked to the
ability of any Colombian citizens committed to peace
to improve their living conditions and economic
prospects. We also welcome the measures taken by
the Government to strengthen the institutional and
legal basis for those processes. We also encourage an
open line of communication among the main actors
responsible for initiatives within the Government, with
a view to achieving more effective results, starting with
the splitting up of competencies and responsibilities.
It is critical to consider the gender provisions of
the peace agreement, particularly the issue of women’s
reintegration and security guarantees. We share the
concerns expressed by the international verification
component for gender established in the peace
agreement, and we welcome the commitment of the
Vice-President of Colombia, who undertook to examine
that report.
We welcome the adoption by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia of a strategy for
the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018), with a focus on the role of young people
in reintegration and security guarantees. It is formal
recognition of the role of youth in promoting peace.
We welcome President Duque’s signing by decree in
November of the Action Plan for the Protection of Social
and Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders

S/PV. 8450

and Journalists. The development and promulgation of
the plan reflects the attention given by the authorities
to the concerns of the Verification Mission about the
high number of leaders murdered since the signing
of the peace agreement in November 2016 and the
continuation of the violence to date.
One of the benefits of the peace process should be
the restoration of the rule of law and security for all
citizens throughout Colombia. The achievement of that
objective and the definitive reduction of insecurity will
depend on the effective implementation of the plan.
Security guarantees should be extended, under the
terms of the agreement, to former FARC-EP members.
We recognize the work carried out by the Colombian
Government in that regard and see the preparation of
a security plan for ex-combatants in the face of the
upcoming state and local elections as a step forward.
With regard to the dialogue between the Government
and the National Liberation Army, we recognize the
current obstacles. However, we urge both parties to
consider the possible reinitiation of peace negotiations
with the necessary flexibility to achieve the desired
objective. The achievements of the process that led
to the signing of the peace agreement between the
FARC-EP and the Colombian Government confirm the
possibility of conflict resolution through negotiations
on the basis of trust between the actors.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize four points.
First, we reiterate our support for and recognition
of the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.
Secondly, we stress the importance of maintaining
the commitment of all parties involved to the successful
implementation of a complex and delicate process that
is still beset by controversy in some of its phases.
Thirdly, the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission will remain essential for some
time, given that it is the greatest guarantee that
the international community will fully support an
agreement that required the investment of so much
effort and sacrifice.
Finally, Colombia can count on the solidarity of the
Dominican Republic throughout the process to achieve
lasting peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

19-0181419/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I must begin my remarks by thanking everyone for the
unanimous expression of condolences and solidarity
following the recent heinous terrorist attack in Bogotá,
which resulted in more than 20 deaths and left close to
70 injured.
I thank Foreign Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado
for presiding over this informative meeting. I
congratulate the Dominican Republic, Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia, whose Minister for Foreign
Affairs is with here with us, and South Africa on their
election to serve as non-permanent members of the
Security Council.
I also convey my Government’s appreciation of
Mr. Jean Arnault for his work at the helm of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and I once
again welcome Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
whom I had an opportunity to meet in Bogotá, along
with President Iván Duque and Mr. Emilio Archila
Peñalosa, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict, who is
with me today.
We welcome the fact that the report (S/2018/1159)
recognizes that the first 100 days of President Duque’s
Administration witnessed his explicit commitment to
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
within the framework of his Government’s agenda.
With regard to the initiatives that have been
submitted to the Congress of Colombia, we must
specify that, as set out in the “Peace with legality”
policy, which was put in place last December, all
adjustments to the regulatory framework adopted
under the agreement — namely, that henceforth neither
drug trafficking nor kidnapping will be recognized as
crimes related to political crimes and that the treatment
of sexual crimes committed against minors will be
reviewed — have been openly proposed as legislative
acts so that they will have an effect on the future.
On the path to implementation, the Government
of President Duque has reiterated its commitment to
overcoming obstacles and correcting the problems it
has encountered. We are doing so with a long-term
perspective to eliminate the conditions that have
protected many forms of violence throughout our
20/23

23/01/2019

history, based on the coordination of different State
agencies and prioritizing victims’ rights and the
legitimate expectations of those who remain within
the legal framework, while honouring in good faith the
commitments undertaken. Allow me to highlight some
concrete examples of this commitment.
With the active participation of senators and
representatives belonging to the political party that
emerged from the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the former illegal armed group, the
Congress of Colombia is discussing various initiatives
related to the agenda of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
including the reforms that I already mentioned. We
proposed those initiatives so that they will be in force in the
future with a view to broadening the national consensus
necessary to ensure that the implementation of the
Final Agreement is politically and socially sustainable.
At the same time, the Government obtained credit to
finance the first stage of the Multipurpose Cadaster
Project. The first phase will be focused on approximately
70 of the country’s municipalities, of which 50 per
cent belong to those marked as priorities within the
development programmes with a territorial focus. Within
the framework of the “Peace with legality” policy, we
will take advantage of all available tools, such as the
development programmes with a territorial focus, the
implementation of which involves 11,000 villages of 170
municipalities and will benefit nearly 7 million people.
In that, too, we can see tangible progress in the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP).
Since September 2018, the Government of
President Duque Márquez has been working closely
with representatives of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) to focus the
efforts of the body responsible for the follow-up to
the reintegration process on its role as a high-level
executive and strategic body with the aim of adopting a
road map in line with its responsibilities. As indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report, 20 collective projects
and 29 individual income-generating projects, valued
at $3.7 million, have been approved, which will benefit
1,340 ex-combatants, including 366 women.
In line with this new momentum, the departments
have established departmental reintegration boards,
with very positive effects. The Government believes
that one of its functions is to create the right conditions
19-01814

23/01/2019

Colombia

and provide leadership, so that the international
community and the private sector are actively involved
in reintegration. When that is achieved, one cannot,
obviously, believe that the projects developed with that
support are a failure on the part of the State, but rather
an achievement of the Government. Although we agree
that land may not have been released as quickly as
possible by the previous Administration, it is relevant
and worth mentioning that a number of productive
projects have been sustainably realized with access
to land in the form of leases, thanks to the technical,
commercial and financial support of many entities that
we have asked to strengthen the development of those
projects, such as iNNpulsa, which is the Government
entity that provides expertise in economic projects
and that falls under the umbrella of the Ministry of
Commerce, Industry and Tourism.
Along the same lines — and undoubtedly because
of the dates on which the information was collected,
it was not possible to indicate this in the report — the
Government, through a great effort, headed by the
Ministry of Health and Social Protection, carried out
a judicious study of needs and ensured health coverage
in the transitional areas for training and reintegration
under better conditions than those that had been
carried out up until August of 2018. In addition, and in
developing a project that had been going on for some
time and that the Verification Mission was aware of,
the Government managed to extend food distribution
until August 2019.
Lastly, the full activation of the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition,
with the beginning of Truth Commission’s work last
November, is of great importance. On 16 January, in
commemoration of its first year of operation, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace reported a positive balance: 11,675
people had signed agreements subjecting themselves
to the authority of the Jurisdiction, of which 9,687
were former members of the FARC-EP and 1,938 were
members of the public security forces. The Government
shares the expectations of all Colombians with regard
to transitional justice — it hopes that its credibility will
be strengthened and, in doing so, its functioning will be
enhanced, in accordance with the mandate of each of its
components and with Colombia’s commitments under
international law.
The Government of President Duque Márquez
attaches the utmost importance to ensuring the safety
of ex-combatants, their leaders and the leaders of

S/PV. 8450

voluntary crop substitution programmes. In that regard,
we agree with the value that the report places on the
effort that the Government has made, the plausible
results and the expectation that we are already working
on a protection plan for the local elections to be held
in October.
The Government of Colombia condemns without
hesitation unacceptable acts that affect social leaders
and defenders, which are linked to factors such as the
intensification of competition for the domination and
control of different criminal economies, the stabilization
of the areas in which the FARC-EP guerrillas formerly
exerted its influence, the unprecedented increase in
illicit crops and the ongoing activity of various kinds
of illegal armed groups. The Office of the Attorney
General has been working to strengthen investigative
processes and has shed light on 53.36 per cent of cases
to date. By adopting, in November 2018, the Action
Plan for the Protection of Social and Community
Leaders, Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, we
further strengthened the State’s capacity to implement
effective measures for the prevention, protection and
punishment of these crimes.
With regard to legal guarantees for former FARCEP combatants, I would also mention that, during this
period, the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace
has been resolving incidents related to the transition
to legality.
The report also highlights the very difficult
situation that we inherited with regard to the increase
in illicit crops in Colombia. In that context, we share
the report’s assessment that reducing violence and
insecurity is inextricably linked to success in combating
illegal economic activity, especially drug trafficking,
which is of particular importance.
We will spare no effort to continue to tackle the
world drug problem firmly, in a comprehensive and
balanced manner, in all its dimensions and in all the
links in the chain. Accordingly, we are intensifying our
efforts and adopting a new policy to effectively address
all the relevant issues. Beyond that, we claim the
importance of the principle of shared responsibility as
the basis for the international collective action needed
to confront the world drug problem. This has been
demonstrated by the eradication of 30,262 hectares of
illicit crops between 7 August and 26 December 2018.
In this context, we hope that, with the adjustments
made to the “Peace with legality” stabilization policy

19-0181421/23

S/PV.8450

Colombia

and the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops, with the various initiatives
that will be implemented, will have a sustainable effect
over time.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
main challenge today is to achieve the effective
implementation of plans and programmes designed
to provide the most vulnerable communities, victims
and former FARC-EP members with greater security,
better access to public goods and services, and viable
alternatives to criminal economies. In accordance
with the relevance that the Government gives to the
issue, the Vice-President of the Republic and the High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict received a first report from
the international verification component for gender
in November, in which the Government’s high-level
forum on gender had already been cited. The session
of the forum was held on 16 January 2019, at which
the guidelines that its president, the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, presented, were approved, with the
decisive participation of the Presidential Counsellor
for Equity for Women. At the same time, the gender
technical group of the National Reintegration
Council has continued to be relevant in promoting
comprehensive reintegration.
The monitoring, support and facilitation role of the
United Nations is of great importance in verifying the
effective implementation of the Final Agreement and
the fulfilment of the commitments made. We believe
that these activities should take place within the
mandate received and with the understanding that it is
the National Government of Colombia that must lead
all fronts of implementation and that the most valuable
way to contribute is to coordinate the work with the
“Peace with legality” plan and the developments that
will come from it, many of which will have to engage
at local levels.
We highly value the contribution of the Verification
Mission to the realization of this shared purpose,
and we hope to maintain a constructive and trusting
relationship with it, within the terms of its mandate and
of our Constitution and our laws.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to see you presiding over this meeting
of the Security Council, Mr. President.
22/23

23/01/2019

We welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and the delegation that is accompanying
him. We also welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Marzudi.
We thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his briefing, and we reiterate Cuba’s ongoing
support for his work, while also paying tribute to his
predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, for the important work
he accomplished.
Cuba is committed to the peace process in
Colombia. We have contributed for decades to the
various efforts made to that end in the country. The
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace was a historic event that
allowed the reinsertion into society of thousands of
guerrilla fighters who for more than 50 years opposed
the Colombian State. The implementation of the final
agreement signed between the Colombian State and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in its entirety is vital.
Although important progress has been made, there
have been considerable delays in the implementation of
other important components of the Agreement, including
those related to political participation, the agrarian
question, legal and legislative actions and such aspects
as the lack of security in the most vulnerable areas
and the slow process of socioeconomic reintegration
of former combatants. It is particularly worrying that
attempts are being made to modify essential aspects of
what was agreed in good faith in terms of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. It would be regrettable if years
of complex negotiations were not recognized. Failure
to comply with the agreement could jeopardize the
peaceful future that Colombia craves and deserves, and
would have a negative impact on Latin America and
the Caribbean and on the international community as
a whole, which has unreservedly supported the Final
Agreement and is following the process with hope.
We wish to express our condolences to the
Government and the people of Colombia, in particular
to the families of the victims of the 17 January attack
in Bogotá. Cuba rejects and condemns all terrorist
acts, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations. Cuba has never allowed nor will it allow
19-01814

23/01/2019

S/PV. 8450

Colombia

its territory to be used for the organization of terrorist
acts against any State. Cuba has strictly fulfilled its
role as guarantor in the peace process between FARCEP and the Colombian authorities as well as guarantor
and alternative headquarters of the Colombian dialogue
between the Government and the National Liberation
Army. Cuba is against terrorism and against the war in

defence of peace. On the moral grounds of having been
a victim of State terrorism for decades and of having
an unblemished history on the subject, we condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations whatever
its motivations.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

19-0181423/23
