152

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - · ___"____
Deeply concerned at the loss of life and the destruction of
Fund for Population Activities - to maintain and mcrease
their current and future programmes of assistance to
essential infrastructures such as roads, railways, bridges,
petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and hospiMozambique, to co-operate closely with the Secretarytals, as identified in the reports of the Secretary-General, 111
General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
Noting with deep concern that Mozambique has conthe steps they have taken and the resources they have
tinued to suffer from a prolonged drought causing heavy
made available to help that country;
losses in food production and livestock and resulting in
dislocation of its people,
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
Also noting with deep concern the extensive damage
resources for an effective programme of financial. technical
caused by the cyclone "Demoina" at the end of January
and material assistance to Mozambique:
1984,
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under co~
Noting that Mozambique faces an emergency food situastant review, to maintain close contact with Member
tion of an exceptional scale and needs imports of 700,000
States, the specialized agencies, regional, other intergovtonnes of cereals in 1984/ l 985 to meet its food requireernmental organizations, international financial instituments,
tions and other bodies concerned, and to apprise the EcoRecognizing that substantial international assistance is
nomic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
required for the implementation of a number of reconI 985, of the current status of the special programme of
struction and development projects,
economic assistance for Mozambique;
I. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
(c) To prepare. on the basis of sustained consultations
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistwith the Government of Mozambique, a report on the
ance to Mozambique;
development of the economic situation and the implemen2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
tation of the special programme of economic assistance for
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
3. Also expresses its appreciation for the assistance pro103rd plenary meeting
vided to Mozambique by various States and regional and
17 December /984
international organizations and humanitarian institutions;
4. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
39/200. Assistance to Djibouti
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
The General Assembly,
adequate food aid to Mozambique to prevent further starRecalling its resolution 38/213 of 20 December 1983
vation and malnutrition;
and its previous resolutions on assistance to Djibouti, in
6. Draws the attention of the international community
which it drew the attention of the international commuto the two areas for immediate action - the supply of
nity to the critical economic situation confronting Djibouti
crude oil and petroleum products and the supply of basic
and to the country's urgent need for assistance,
inputs and consumer goods for the agricultural sector Deeply concerned at the adverse effects of the prolonged
that are critical for the functioning of the economy;
drought on the economic and social development of Dji7. Also draws the attention of the international combouti,
munity to the additional financial, economic and material
Recalling also its resolution 37/176 of 17 December
assistance identified in the annex to the report of the SecreI 982, in which it called upon the international community
tary-General as urgently required by Mozambique;
to continue to support the efforts made by the Govern8. Calls upon Member States, regional and interment of Djibouti to cope with the needs of the refugee
regional organizations and other governmental, intergovpopulation,
ernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide
Bearing in mind its resolution 37/133 of 17 December
financial, material and technical assistance to
1982, in which it decided to include Djibouti in the list of
Mozambique, wherever possible in the form of grants, and
the least developed countries,
urges them to give special consideration to the early incluHaving examined the summary report of the Sccretarvsion of Mozambique in their programmes of development
114
Cieneral,
assistance, if it is not already included;
Noting the critical economic situation of Djibouti and
9. Urges Member States and organizations that are
the list of urgent and priority projects formulated by the
already implementing or negotiating assistance proGovernment that require international assistance,
grammes for Mozambique to strengthen them, wherever
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
possible;
for the steps he has taken to organize an international pro10. Also appeals to the international community to
gramme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
contribute to the special account for Mozambique estab2. Notes with appreciation the assistance already prolished by the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitavided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States. organizating the channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
tions of the Urnted Nations system and other organi,a11. Requests the appropriate organizations and protions;
grammes of the United Nations system - in particular the
3. Draws the attention of the international community
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Interand to the severe structural constraints to its development;
national Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
11 3 A/38/201-E/1983/69 and Corr I and 2. annex I, sect. E; A/38. 216
sect. XIII; and A/39/382.

11 4 A l9'N2. sert \

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to
cope with its difficult economic situation and to implement its development strategies, including the programme
of assistance that was presented at the round-table of
development partners convened by the Government of
Djibouti in November 1983;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
financial, material and technical assistance, as a matter of
urgency, to alleviate the sufferings of the population affected by drought and for the implementation of the droughtrelated projects and programmes;
6. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing the
special programme of economic assistance for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/201. Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
5 of 17 May 1984 on emergency assistance to the drought
victims in Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the appeals made by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
for emergency assistance to Ethiopia,
Having heard the statement made by the Commissioner
for Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia on 2 November
1984 115 concerning the critical food situation and the sad
state of affairs that prevails in the disaster-stricken areas of
Ethiopia,
Alarmed by the catastrophic effects of the serious and
persistent drought that poses imminent danger to the survival of millions of drought victims,
115 See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thlr/1•-ninth Sesswn,
Second Commillee, 32nd meeting, paras. 39-42
•
116 A/39/572.
117
See Official Records of 1he General A 1semhl1. l'hlr/v-mnth Sfssum. Plenary Meetings. 21 st meeting, paras 48-104
•

153

Deeply disturbed by the grave food situation and the
widespread and deadly famine that prevails in the disasterstricken areas,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative in
order to avoid the recurrence of a tragic human drama
such as the one which is currently unfolding in the disaster-stricken areas,
I. Commends the generous response of the international community to the tragic situation in Ethiopia;
2. Expresses its deep gratitude to all States, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have provided emergency humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia;
3. Urges all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to assist the Government
of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide for the emergency
needs of the drought victims and to deal with the problem
of medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts:
(a) To mobilize resources for relief and rehabilitation,
including assistance for the victims of drought who wish to
resettle in areas less prone to drought;
(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
first regular session of 1985, of the situation of the drought
victims and the response- of the international community
to their plight.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/202. Economic and financial assistance to Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Guinea, 116
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
59 of 26 July 1984, in which the Council confirmed the
urgent need for international action to assist the Government of Guinea in its efforts to bring about national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea on 4 October I 984, 117 in which he described his country's serious socio-economic and financial
problems,
Noting with concern the grave balance-of-payments
problems facing Guinea,
Deeply concerned by the weakness and underdevelopment of Guinea's economic and social infrastructure,
which constitutes a major obstacle to the country's economic development and to raising the living standard of its
population,
Taking note, in this context, of the results of the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in
particular the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 118
Recalling that Guinea is one of the least developed
countries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
118 Report of the Unued Natwns Conference on the Least D1•1·eloped
Counrrw,. Pans, 1-14 S1•ptemher 19/i/ (llnited Nations publication. Sales
No. E 82 I 8). pan one. secl. A
