asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6946

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6946th meeting
Monday, 15 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Mushikiwabo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ohin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Peace and Security in Africa
Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing the root causes
Letter dated 2 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/204)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-28995 (E)

*1328995*

S/PV.6946

Union and its subregional organizations in order to
achieve better results in conflict prevention.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

The agenda was adopted.

The Secretary-General: I am pleased to address
the Security Council on the important subject of
preventing armed conflicts and addressing their root
causes. Although we are focused today on Africa, there
are universal lessons in conflict prevention that apply
everywhere around the world.

Peace and security in Africa
Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing
the root causes
Letter dated 2 April 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/204)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and the representatives present in
the Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Tekeda Alemu,
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations, representing the Chairperson of the African
Union, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/204, which contains a letter
dated 2 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
As the President of the Security Council, I hope that
this important meeting on the item entitled “Prevention
of conflicts in Africa: addressing the root causes” will
be an occasion for the Council to revisit the concept and
practice of conflict prevention as currently understood
within the United Nations system. Recalling the
theme, today’s briefing aims at examining how we can
move from a day-to-day management of conflicts and
develop a culture of conflict prevention through skills,
mechanisms and institutions that address the root
causes of conflicts in Africa.
The African Union has identified various factors
and root causes of conflict on the continent, and it has
established institutions and mechanisms to address
them. We believe that it is the right time for the Security
Council to strengthen its cooperation with the African

2

Conflicts breed where there is poor governance,
abuse of human rights and grievances over the unequal
distribution of resources, wealth and power. Tensions
simmer where people are excluded, marginalized
and denied meaningful participation in the political
and social life of their country. Unrest flourishes
where people are poor, jobless and without hope. To
prevent conflicts, we must strengthen democracy,
build stronger, more resilient and accountable State
institutions, ensure adequate checks and balances,
promote the rule of law and work to establish effective
democratic control over the armed forces.
Too often, national pride and the self-interest of
political actors and spoilers conspire to undermine
prevention efforts. Issues related to poor governance
and the unfulfilled promise of democracy often lead
to conflict. Good governance will be the focus of my
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
More than 20 African countries are holding elections
this year. The relatively peaceful elections in Kenya
were an example of how electoral disagreements can
be handled through the legal process without recourse
to violence. In other cases, elections can be a source of
instability. The parties may use elections to continue
the competition to divide the spoils of war. That is why
it is so important for mediation efforts to ensure that
peace agreements are not just pacts between political
elites to address an immediate political problem; they
must also deal with the underlying causes of conflict
and allow all stakeholders to participate.
It is also not enough to reach agreements — they
must be fully implemented, monitored and enforced.
That is clear in the case of the Central African
Republic. The violation of the Libreville agreements by
parties contributed to the resumption of conflict and,
eventually, the unconstitutional change of Government.

13-28995

S/PV.6946

Such challenges are particularly acute when
States are fragile and armed movements operate
with impunity across porous borders, often with the
support of neighbouring States. Whether in the Horn
of Africa or the Great Lakes region, the continent is
still afflicted by interconnected instability spreading
from one territory to its neighbours. That contagion has
many vectors: economic despair, arms flows, massive
population displacements, proxy conflicts triggered by
relationships of mistrust, and regional rivalries. In our
increasingly interconnected world, regional action to
prevent or address conflicts is all the more important.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, national
authorities, regional leaders and the international
community are coming together not only to deal with
the manifestations of violence, but also to address its
underlying root causes. I am grateful to the Security
Council for endorsing the approach of leaders of
the region. Their Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region emphasizes the need to address the
structural causes fuelling instability in that country
and commits regional actors to shared responsibilities.
The Council’s new mandate for the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is intended to contribute to efforts for the
implementation of the Framework, including through
the deployment of an intervention brigade to deal with
the problem of armed groups.
In South Sudan, decades of political and economic
marginalization resulted in organized military and
political resistance. The United Nations has committed
to helping that young country, even though we have
paid a heavy price. I was outraged by the attack last
week that killed a dozen people, including five brave
peacekeepers. I thank the Council for joining me in
strongly condemning that appalling ambush and calling
for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
Since the independence of South Sudan, Juba and
Khartoum have made slow but steady progress towards
the resolution of post-secession issues, including
agreements on border security arrangements, economic
relations and oil. But potential sources of conflict
remain, including in particular the unresolved status of
the Abyei Area,
The conflict in Somalia has multiple, complex
causes, including competition for resources and power,
a repressive State and a colonial legacy. The crisis is

13-28995

exacerbated by politicized clan identity, easy access to
weapons, the presence of a large number of unemployed
youth and a culture of impunity that sanctions the use
of violence.
The Federal Government of Somalia has entered a
new era of peacebuilding and statebuilding. But it faces
daunting challenges to restore confidence in the State
and the conditions necessary for peace and stability.
I am also concerned about the situation in the
Sahel, where countries have faced decades of complex
challenges of poverty, the effects of climate change,
frequent food crises, rapid population growth, poor
governance, corruption, the risk of violent extremism,
illicit trafficking and terrorist-related security threats.
The situation is exacerbated by the fact that States of
the region have limited capacities to deliver basic social
services and protect human rights.
When State authority and security institutions
erode, it becomes more difficult to manage borders. In
Mali, that has paved the way for transnational criminal
organizations and terrorist networks to disrupt regional
stability and compromise territorial integrity. Severe
drought and food insecurity in many countries in the
Sahel region, including in Mali, the Niger and Burkina
Faso, have also created conditions for instability and
undermined stabilization efforts.
The United Nations is at a critical juncture in its
engagement in Guinea-Bissau. Following the military
coup last year, the United Nations has continued to
promote inclusive dialogue among national actors
towards the restoration of constitutional order.
In all of our efforts across Africa, the United Nations
benefits from reinvigorated regional organizations.
They are playing a stronger and role as key strategic
partners. The prompt reaction of the Economic
Community of Central African States to the crisis in
the Central African Republic showed an increased
willingness to formulate joint responses to common
problems. The United Nations is working to strengthen
the conflict prevention and early-warning architecture
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). We are pursuing our 10-year capacitybuilding partnership with the African Union. We are
strengthening our close relationship with Economic
Community of West African States on peacebuilding
and crisis prevention in West Africa. We are engaging
with the African Union, SADC and the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in the search

3

S/PV.6946

for peace in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. And we are partnering with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development on the
urgent challenge to bring stability to Somalia.

with the most appropriate solutions in order to halt
their potential tragic consequences for the legitimate
aspirations of a continent for lasting socioeconomic
development.

Above all, it is critical to ensure that affected
communities own and lead conflict prevention
initiatives. Our support for national Governments
should focus on building the active engagement of
community organizations, the private sector, civil
society, women and youth in decision-making. Their
activities can help stabilize communities.

It goes without saying that following the redrawing
of the map of Africa, which saw the emergence of
new States created within the borders imposed by the
colonizer, several factors, both internal and external,
have contributed to the destabilization of State
institutions and still today are at the root of conflicts
on the continent. One could cite the contest for political
power and the poverty of populations, which are often
identified as primary causes of internal conflicts, as
well as border problems, which have been at the heart of
several inter-State armed conflicts since independence.

Prevention also demands that we address the
culture of impunity surrounding sexual violence. As
my Special Representative on the issue has rightly said,
sexual violence affects more than isolated individuals;
it is an assault on the peace and security of entire
communities. That is why I place such high priority on
addressing that destabilizing and dehumanizing crime.
I count on the Council to continue giving priority to
preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict.
I thank the Security Council for its engagement
in the committed efforts of the United Nations to
address the root causes of conflict in Africa. Through
our comprehensive approach, strong partnerships and
principled action, we can usher in a new era of lasting
stability for the continent and its people.
Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend you, Madam President, on convening
this debate on the prevention of conflict in Africa, a
continent always beset by recurring conflicts. I would
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing on the question under
consideration.
The persistence of conflicts in Africa is a major
obstacle to its socioeconomic development. While very
often it is relatively easy to identify the immediate
factors that trigger those conflicts, the deep causes
underlying them are more complex. Their complexity is
due to the fact that they originate from a combination of
multiple factors — political, social and economic — and
to the fact that those deep causes must be sought not
only in the legacy of colonialism, but also in ancient
struggles for vital areas carried out by emperors or
kings.
It is therefore useful to identify all those factors,
whose combined effects have had a negative impact on
the peace and stability of States, and to provide States

4

Since gaining independence, African States have
been confronted with the problem of the difficult
choice of representative leaders. Traditional institutions
that were familiar to local populations were largely
dismantled by the colonizer, and only the Western
model of Government, not readily adaptable to the
social realities of Africa, became widespread across the
continent. The internal conflicts that break out in Africa
are often rooted in that laborious apprenticeship in a
model of Government and external political concepts
for which Africans are not only unprepared, but which
also they do not adapt to sufficiently.
It must be noted, unfortunately, that that inadequacy,
that structural and functional maladaptation of the
State and of institutions bequeathed by colonialism
and mechanically slapped on in Africa, continues to
generate illegal struggles for power that in many cases
are transformed into ethnic or religious rivalries that
strengthen the feeling of belonging to a group, to the
detriment of the national identity.
Alongside political factors and those related to
non-respect for human rights, to the absence of social
justice or to the marginalization of some social groups,
there are also economic factors. Those factors are no less
important and to a very great extent have contributed
to weakening the African State and to favouring the
emergence of numerous conflicts.
This is a matter, inter alia, of bad management of
economic resources, the growing impoverishment of
populations, increasingly difficult access to basic social
services and a lack of prospects for young people, whose
numbers are rapidly growing. Those situations, which
create a climate of social tensions and subsequently

13-28995

S/PV.6946

lead to the weakening of State structures, in many cases
pave the way for the incursion of armed groups, often
ethnic-based, into political life. They seize power even
though they are not prepared for it.
Another conflict factor has to do with the borders
of most African countries, often drawn by the colonial
Powers in an arbitrary manner to suit their exclusive
interests. That artificial delimitation brought together
fundamentally different peoples and divided others
having the same cultural identity. To that one must
add the porous nature of borders, which facilitates the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons that fuel rebels and
other armed groups.
Furthermore, ethnic problems are also accompanied
by resource issues. A simple difference between
two communities on both sides of a border can lead
to tensions between States. When those areas have
important resources, their management can cause even
more serious misunderstandings.
Given those conflicts, which have seriously
hampered and, in the current state of affairs, continue
to compromise development in Africa, it is necessary,
in the framework of conflict prevention, to tackle them
at the roots of the evil through a comprehensive global
and regional approach. That strategy must include a
focus on promoting a democratic culture, on reducing
poverty through an equitable distribution of the
resources of the country and on swiftly implementing
border demarcation programmes.
With regard to the promotion of a democratic
culture — the contest for political power being in
Africa one of the major causes of many armed conflicts
since independence — the promotion and strengthening
of a democratic culture, guarantor of human rights,
could help to reduce the risk of conflict by providing
everybody with equal opportunities to participate in
the management of public affairs. The creation of the
United Nations Democracy Fund to assist countries
that are seeking to establish democracy or to strengthen
it is therefore a decisive advance along those lines.
In addition, African initiatives for democracy and
good governance, such as the African Peer Review
Mechanism and the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, which are genuine tools
for promoting democracy on the continent, represent
major advances in the field. The full implementation
of the provisions of those instruments and awarenessraising among the various national political actors

13-28995

could contribute greatly to the entrenchment of general
democratic principles on our continent.
The overhaul of States’ capacities for political
governance, and hence their ability to address political
and social vulnerabilities, will not promote lasting
peace if we do not, at the same time, seek to reduce
Africa’s endemic poverty.
Situations of scarcity and poverty provide fertile
breeding grounds for conflicts. It is therefore urgent
to rethink the economic governance of African States
through a change in mindset, as it is well known that
the economic problems of Africa lie not so much in its
poverty but, rather, in the mismanagement of its many
riches.
In addition, the benefits of those resources should
be equitably shared, and that should not be limited to
resources that can be mined. Land and water should
be used in more efficient ways in order to provide
opportunities, such as fishing, farming, grazing and
agriculture, to all populations.
Borders are also a major issue in Africa. While
States subscribe to the principle of the inviolability
of the borders inherited from colonization, which is a
principle adopted by the African Union, the demarcation
of those boundaries has, for several decades now, led
to structural conflicts on the continent. It is therefore
important to remedy that situation by promoting peace,
peaceful coexistence between divided communities
and security in border regions and their economic
development. In that regard, we urge the international
community to further support the African Union’s
border programme, which is aimed at completing the
demarcation of borders across the continent in order to
reduce the risk of inter-State conflict over resources.
Moreover, my country believes that it is essential
to encourage and promote projects on the shared
management of transborder natural resources, on the
involvement of local populations on both sides of the
border in border projects and, ultimately, on regional
integration, which will help reduce tensions along
borders.
Togo believes that civil society organizations, while
not substitutes for the State, have a key role to play in
the culture of peace. Efforts should therefore be made
to strengthen the capacity of civil society organizations
through an approach that includes participatory
development, where institutional and policy changes

5

S/PV.6946

respond to the deep and legitimate desires of the
populations concerned.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the need for
Africa to find locally generated structural solutions to
address the deep causes of conflict. We believe that,
if many proposed approaches have been doomed to
failure or have at best had mixed results, it is because
they were, for the most part, imposed from the outside
on the affected populations, actors or victims of those
conflicts. It is also important that the Council use
conflict prevention mechanisms as much as possible, in
particular as provided by the Charter in Articles 40 and
41. Employing such mechanisms will have the advantage
of promoting early-warning systems and strengthening
the role of the Security Council in conflict prevention,
which is by far less expensive than peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia, who will speak on behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU), I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, and your Government on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. I also commend you for organizing
today’s debate on the theme “Prevention of conflicts in
Africa: addressing the root causes”.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
being always mindful of the special situation of Africa
and for acting accordingly. I would also like to express
appreciation to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Togo for being here at this important meeting.
Your excellent concept paper (S/2013/204, annex),
Madam President, has proposed that we focus on the
structural dimension of the prevention of conflicts in
Africa, which is obviously most germane to looking at
the root causes of conflicts on our continent.
On the topic of the root causes of conflicts in
Africa, there is perhaps no better starting point than the
comprehensive report (S/1998/318) submitted in 1998
by the former Secretary-General to both the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. That was a seminal
contribution, which rightly brought up Africa’s colonial
history, the post-Second-World-War ideological rivalry,
various external factors and internal governance
issues and other matters that are specific to particular
6

situations as having had a major impact as sources of
conflict on the continent. Development is therefore,
according to the report, central to the prospects for
reducing conflict in Africa. Accordingly, the report
underlines the vital role that international cooperation
for the development of Africa plays in addressing the
challenges of conflict. While mentioning the deficits
in that area, the report nonetheless makes it clear that
Africa has the primary responsibility for preserving
its own peace and stability. Today more than ever, the
report states, Africa must look to itself.
That is precisely what Africa has done over the
past decade or so. Today’s Africa is emphatically not
the Africa of the 1980s or the 1990s. Many things have
changed, including with respect to Africa’s readiness
to take the lead in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the various subregions of the continent.
Two examples will suffice in that regard. The progress
made in Somalia, despite the occasional hiccups, would
have been inconceivable without the lead role played
by African troops, together with the Somali security
forces, to keep extremists, including foreign ones, at
bay. The wisdom and prudence that was brought to bear
on the complex situation between the Sudan and South
Sudan also has a decisive African component.
All those factors do not diminish the role of the
international community, most of all the United
Nations, both with respect to Somalia and the
Sudan, as well as other parts of the continent, as the
latest developments in Mali have made so obvious.
However, it is necessary that Africa’s contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security
be given due recognition. The point is that much has
changed in Africa over the past decade or so.
The change that we have witnessed in Africa over
the past decade is also evident in institution-building,
including in the area of peace and security. The
African Union Peace and Security Architecture, with
its Continental Early Warning System, the Panel of the
Wise and the African Standby Force, with the Peace
and Security Council at the helm, has transformed
Africa’s capacity to contribute to peace and stability
on the continent. Africa has come a long way in that
respect, the process having begun in 1993 in Cairo with
the establishment of the AU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution.
On the other hand, no event demonstrates the
feebleness of Africa of that period better than the
genocide in Rwanda only nine months later. It is
13-28995

S/PV.6946

doubtful that the Africa of the current period would
allow that to happen. At the minimum, it would raise
its voice in time and not sit idly by.
Also in that connection, the Constitutive Act of
the African Union shows that Africa has come a long
way when, in paragraph (h) of article 4, member States
agreed that
“The right of the Union to intervene in a member
State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly
in respect of grave circumstances, namely, war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity”.
Paragraph (j) of the same article confers the right
on member States “to request intervention from the
Union in order to restore peace and security”. How
much progress that represents in Africa’s resolve to
address the challenges of peace and security can be
fully appreciated only when one considers how strongly
the 1963 Organization of African Unity (OAU) Charter
was opposed to any initiative even remotely suggestive
of what is allowed under article 4 of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, to which I have just referred.
No doubt, everything I have mentioned is a
manifestation of the trust that Africans have managed to
build in one another and of their readiness to strengthen
their unity, including with the view to addressing the
challenge of peace and security in Africa. I wanted to
bring up the question of trust because of the undeniable
fact that it has not been present in abundance, as
witnessed in paragraph 5 of article III of the Charter of
the OAU under “Principles”, when member States felt it
necessary to agree: that
“Unreserved condemnation, in all its forms,
of political assassination, as well as of subversive
activities, on the part of neighbouring States or any
other States”.
While much remains to be done, although much of
Africa’s good work continues to be called into question
by some, we have also made great strides in developing
the conditions for good governance. The African Union
has, for instance, gone on record as not being ready to
countenance unconstitutional changes of Government.
All that is to say that, more than at any time
in the past, Africa is ready to play its part for peace
and stability on the continent. It has the wherewithal
to be a good partner to the United Nations and the
Security Council for the realization of that objective.
We are pleased to note that the partnership between the

13-28995

Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union is already gradually growing. No
one can deny that, despite the progress made, Africa
still requires the strong support of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, as well as that of other
partners. It is our hope, in that regard, that the United
Nations Office to the AU will play its proper role with
a view to strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. Let me add that
the subregional organizations of the continent also play
a vital role in peace and stability. It does not help to
understate the added value that they bring and how
critical they are in that regard.
However, consultations and cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU need to develop further.
Their nature and content in terms of quality should
be commensurate with the vital role that the African
Union plays in the peace and security in the region.
There is much room for improvement in that regard.
The principles of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations should be adhered to. Africa is second
to none in that regard. However, such adherence should
not be conceived as disallowing a genuine partnership
based on taking advantage of each other’s strength.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing one
crucial point. That relates to how much the lack of
institution-building, including the consolidation of
State institutions, is understated as one of the major
root causes of conflict on our continent. It appears that
it is sometimes taken for granted that the weaker the
State, the greater the space and the opportunity for
democracy to blossom. That is perhaps not always true.
In any event, the way to proceed might be to maintain the
proper balance. Lessons need to be drawn from recent
experiences, including that of Mali. In that connection,
tearing down those that have embarked upon building
successful institutions may be good neither for conflict
prevention nor for putting in place a robust foundation
for good governance.
That, in a nutshell, is the message that I was asked
by the current Chairperson of the AU to deliver to the
Security Council at this meeting.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We particularly welcome
the initiative of Rwanda and your presence here today,
Madam President, as we mark the terrible experience
of the Rwandan genocide. Rwanda painfully knows the
cost of the failure of us all to prevent conflict.

7

S/PV.6946

In its opening lines, the Charter of the United
Nations defines the purpose of the Organization as
being to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. The prevention of conflict was the primordial
reason that we created the United Nations. Yet,
typically, we spend our time responding to situations in
which populations are already caught up in the misery
of conflict.
There has never been any question that prevention
is better than cure. Prevention can save countless lives
and untold trauma and grief. The World Development
Report 2011 tells us that, on average, a civil war can
cost the equivalent of 30 years of lost gross domestic
product growth. No society in conflict has achieved
a single Millennium Development Goal. Regional
spillovers are inevitable. There are 42 million people
displaced today as a result of conflict, violence and
human rights abuses.
Today, we are focusing on the root causes of conflict
in Africa. I will mention three issues.
First, let me turn to institution-building. The links
between strong and trusted institutions, development
and conflict-prevention are well known and well
understood. In Timor-Leste in 2006, four years after
independence, violence erupted between the military
and the police, causing further deaths and massive
internal displacement. Yet, just two years after that,
the country was able to withstand the shock of dual
assassination attempts on the lives of the President and
the Prime Minister, without further deterioration in
the security situation. Over the two intervening years,
Timor-Leste was able to develop stronger institutions
and to offer alternative tools to violence and handle
the shock. The Parliament, the security services under
civilian oversight, and justice institutions all played
their roles.
Secondly, with regard to economic opportunities,
the nexus between security and development is obvious.
We simply must work to create — and narrow the gap in
access to — economic opportunities, in particular for
young people, women and other marginalized groups.
Thirdly,
with
regard
to
natural-resource
management, natural resources can be a source of
conflict, as we know, but can also present decisive
opportunities for growth. Australia is sharing its own
experience and expertise to support African countries
in their efforts to maximize economic benefits from
their extractive sectors in a regulated and sustainable

8

manner that returns revenue to the State. Joint
development across borders can often be effective.
In addition to addressing root causes, we must also
work to minimize the impact of global challenges that
exacerbate conflict. I will mention just two.
First, let me turn to small arms and light
weapons — the weapons of mass destruction in Africa.
The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty (resolution
67/234 B) two weeks ago was a historic step towards
controlling the proliferation of such weapons and their
ammunition, but we must work to ensure its robust
implementation by our own Governments and by other
States with our assistance.
Secondly, climate change is affecting Africa
disproportionately, increasing competition for scarce
resources such as food and water. We need to utilize
all the tools at our disposal to minimize threats. That
means bolstering our disaster risk-reduction efforts,
improving early-warning and response capacities,
and strengthening resource management and building
resilience.
I must highlight the responsibility to protect,
19 years on from the Rwandan genocide. Protection
from atrocities is not only a reason to strive to avoid
conflict, but is itself part of conflict prevention.
Likewise, combating impunity for the most serious
crimes — including through instruments such as
the International Criminal Court, a lynchpin of the
international criminal justice system — is essential.
I shall turn now to the role of the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations. As
we know, such bodies can have unique comparative
advantages in addressing root causes, not least because
such causes often transcend State boundaries.
As Ambassador Tekeda Alemu said on behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) this morning,
the AU is building a transformative peace and security
architecture. The Peace and Security Council and the
Peace and Security Department are complemented
effectively by the strategic use of representatives and
AU missions, the appointment of high-level mediators
and the dispatch of fact-finding missions — for instance,
the joint pre-election observer mission to Kenya.
We commend the African Peer Review Mechanism
as an African-driven initiative that allows frank
messages on governance.

13-28995

S/PV.6946

AU conflict-prevention mechanisms are evolving,
and there is a need to support their development. We
would, for example, welcome the full operationalization
of the Continental Early Warning System and its
integration with subregional and national systems,
as well as the strengthening of its relationships with
the Panel of the Wise and the African Peer Review
Mechanism.
AU-United Nations cooperation on prevention
has been growing. Its impact has been demonstrated
in efforts to avoid an outbreak of renewed hostilities
between the Sudan and South Sudan last year. However,
that cooperation has often been crisis-driven. Efforts
to move beyond a reactive approach have been helped
by more institutionalized meetings and dialogues at
the working level, through the Joint Task Force and
Security Council-African Union Peace and Security
Council meetings. We would suggest that we consider
conflict prevention at the next such meeting between
those two bodies.
In conclusion, we must acknowledge that the
Security Council is itself often crisis-driven. We
should make better use of preventive tools, including
horizon-scanning and increased responsiveness to
early warning signs. We welcome Rwanda’s intention
to focus on root causes in the Council’s Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
While many of the root causes go beyond the
Council’s direct purview, the Council still needs to
be focused on those causes and their consequences.
Clearly, the cost in human suffering, wasted resources
and lost opportunity speaks to why this has to be done.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Madam, for having called
this meeting on peace and security in Africa on the
theme “Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing
the root causes”. On behalf of the United States,
I would also like to congratulate Rwanda on its
presidency during the present month. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
recommendations to address the root causes of conflict,
as well as Ambassador Tekeda Alemu for his statement
on behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union.
Violent conflict has been a destructive scourge
in Africa, to which the Council has rightly devoted
significant attention. The good news is that, after a
peak in the 1990s, armed conflict has significantly
declined in sub-Saharan Africa, both in the number

13-28995

of conflicts and in their intensity. The Council and
the United Nations system, together with the African
Union, subregional organizations and other partners,
have significantly helped drive that positive trend. The
less good news is that many risk factors and drivers of
conflict remain.
While every violent conflict is unique and has
its own history, several factors fuel or intensify
risk, including poverty, real or perceived inequality,
the lack of good governance and the rule of law,
proximity to instability and cycles of previous
conflict. The disenfranchisement of youth, minorities
and other groups, or their deliberate manipulation by
non-democratic leaders, are explosive potential drivers
of conflict. On the other hand, capable and legitimate
governance institutions create security, predictability
and mutual confidence, which allow individuals and
communities to resolve disputes and practice politics
peacefully. Free media and a vibrant civil society also
play crucial roles in building citizens’ confidence by
increasing transparency and providing communities
with tools to speak up and articulate their concerns
and interests. A key common factor in preventing or
overcoming conflict is the active presence of credible,
capable and widely legitimate governing institutions
able to deal with their citizens’ most pressing needs,
economic growth and jobs, basic services and access
to justice.
To the United States, that means we need to energize
efforts on a few key fronts. First, we need to get much
more serious about poverty eradication. Poverty alone
does not cause conflict, but in combination with other
factors, it dramatically increases the risk. That is why the
United States is mobilizing a wide variety of tools, from
the Millennium Challenge Corporation to the African
Growth and Opportunity Act to the Administration’s
global health and food security initiatives, all of which
seek to help grow Africa’s economies and invest in
Africa’s people. All of those bilateral initiatives should
complement multilateral efforts to address poverty and
inequality, not just in Africa but globally. The wider
United Nations system has a critical role to play in that
regard, as does the private sector.
Secondly, we need to strengthen our focus on
governance and institutional challenges, including the
security environment needed for good governance to
take hold. United Nations peacekeeping operations,
when appropriate, can bring about critical security and
political stability that give national actors the space

9

S/PV.6946

to build their own institutions and carry out peaceful
power transitions, as well as provide a foundation for
economic growth. Such operations can also create
space for the work of the United Nations and other
intentional partners in key areas such as justice and
security sector reform, rule of law and anti-corruption.
We also need to look at innovative ways to nurture the
next generations of leadership. In that regard, President
Obama’s Young African Leaders Initiative is working
to put younger generations at the centre of economic
and political development.
Thirdly, we need to continue to strengthen
peacebuilding. Ninety per cent of the civil wars that
started after 2000 occurred in a country that had had
a civil war in the previous 30 years. We must do better
than that. We need to listen to countries that have gone
through war-to-peace transitions, as in the Group of
Seven Plus, and focus international efforts around what
they tell us they need. United Nations peacebuilding
instruments also have the potential to provide a platform
for the mobilization of national and international
partners around common priorities for transition, as we
have seen in places including, inter alia, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Burundi.
Fourthly, we must continue to hone our national and
international structures and capacities to anticipate,
prevent and respond to conflicts. The Atrocities
Prevention Board, for example, helps the United States
mobilize action by the United States Government and
further develop tools and institutional changes to enable
more nimble and effective responses in future.
Fifthly, we need to be able to speak candidly and
act credibly to address another kind of root cause:
when leaders are willing to take their populations to
war or wage war against their own people for their own
purposes.
Finally, we need to build stronger and more
dynamic partnerships among all actors engaged in
conflict prevention and response, based on comparative
advantage and the unique capability each can bring.
The United Nations, the African Union and Africa’s
subregional organizations, along with the African
Development Bank, the World Bank and major
development partners, all must continue to deepen
collaboration and strengthen their capacities to address
conflict drivers in Africa.
We have much greater knowledge today about
what causes conflict. We have a much wider range of

10

potential tools at our disposal. Let us use them with
focus, dedication and results.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to the Government of Rwanda for
having organized this briefi ng and for the concept note
(S/2013/204, annex) that it prepared on a topic of such
relevance for the Security Council. Madam Minister,
we welcome your presence among us. We also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for the statement he
made this morning, and we welcome Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu, who on this occasion is representing the
African Union.
To speak about Africa in the abstract always entails
risks. Africa is a vast, diverse and heterogeneous
continent. Perceived from the vantage point of the
Security Council’s agenda, the continent appears
highly problematic. However, perceived from the
broader vantage point of the United Nations as a
whole — including the initiatives emanating from the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development — a much
more promising image emerges, as noted by Ambassador
Alemu. Africa has indeed achieved notable progress
in all areas: democratic governance, economic and
social development, the consolidation of peace and
interregional cooperation.
In other words, it is simply that our limited agenda
focuses on situations of instability, conflict, crime,
human rights violations and failed States, when,
in fact, we are dealing with a region that, in spite of
the difficulties and obstacles it faces, has achieved
considerable progress over the past 10 to 15 years. That
is another way of saying that even the most worrisome
situations on our agenda are not necessarily condemned
to sink into chaos and desperation.
Somalia, with the progress that has been achieved,
is a specific example in that respect, but the African
continent as a whole is a source of inspiration for those
countries lagging behind, showing them that they have
better alternatives.
This issue is a broad one and can be addressed from
many different perspectives and national situations. I
will limit my remarks to five specific points.
First, I would like to offer some thoughts on one
of the most abused phrases in our lexicon: the root
causes of conflict. It is clear that it is not enough to
send peacekeeping troops to restore stability and peace
to a conflict situation if the root causes of a conflict
are not addressed. That is, of course, true, but the root
13-28995

S/PV.6946

causes of conflicts vary from case to case, and some
of those causes — such as in the context of conflicts
based on tribal, inter-communal, ethnic or religious
divisions — are linked to deeply ingrained cultural
traits that are very resistant to change in the short term.
The social sciences are far from understanding how to
persuade populations with long-standing divisions to
find paths towards reconciliation. However, one aspect
that we have noted in situations of conflict in Africa, as
well as in the Balkans and the Middle East, is that those
conflicts tend to intensify in two specific instances.
The first is related to competition for the use of
natural resources, especially water, land and pasturage.
The second is related to the demarcation of political
boundaries that ignore the geographic distribution
of certain ethnic populations and tribes. While this
observation may not be particularly original, it does
offer hints on how we can mitigate those root causes by
including in the peacekeeping toolkit issues such as the
facilitation of cross-border migrations, especially those
of a transitory nature, and by paying more attention to
land-tenure issues.
That brings me to my second point: that other root
causes of conflict, including social marginalization
and exclusion, extreme poverty and vulnerability
to systematic violations of the human rights of a
population, can be mitigated or corrected by policies
tailored to that end. That is why we support the broader
concept of peacekeeping that has evolved over the
past two decades with a view to addressing complex,
multifaceted conflicts. That concept acknowledges that
while the resolution of a conflict requires a military
presence in order to re-establish stability, it is also
important that, in order to bring about lasting peace,
concerted efforts be made in multiple areas. Among
those areas, we would stress the need for governance
systems that the population perceives as representative,
as well as transitional justice systems, building a system
grounded in the rule of law, promoting the reform of
the security sector and strengthening State institutions
so that they fulfil their role effectively and efficiently.
Undertaking peacebuilding activities together with
other peacekeeping activities also makes a lot of
sense. Among many other aspects, it requires a closer
partnership among the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the multilateral financial institutions.
Thirdly, in that context, we would stress the
importance of the role of justice in achieving peace and

13-28995

security in Africa, especially as part of the preventive
actions that are incumbent upon the Council. Our
delegation organized an open debate on that issue
during our presidency of the Council last October (see
S/PV.6849), and I do not wish to repeat the contents
of the concept note that we prepared on the occasion
(S/2012/731, annex). But we do firmly believe that the
simple fact that actions that threaten peace, including
incitement to violence, can have consequences within
the framework of international jurisprudence is proof
of progress in the fight against impunity. We believe
that the International Criminal Court is an adequate
mechanism in that regard. On that particular point,
we regret the fact that a reference to the International
Criminal Court as an element in conflict prevention
could not be included in the draft presidential statement
before the Council, as we and other delegations would
have preferred. Even more important is to strengthen
universal access to justice in each country as a general
approach, in particular for victims of conflicts who have
suffered all sorts of humiliation, especially members
of the most vulnerable groups, women and children.
The application of justice involves sanctions for the
perpetrators and reparations for the victims.
Fourthly, perhaps more than any other, the African
continent has multiple regional and subregional
institutions at its disposal, starting, of course, with the
African Union. The manner with which the Council
interacts with those institutions within the framework of
Chapter VIII would produce more than enough material
for a separate debate. But it should be noted that, in all
the agenda items that the Council has before it, there is
a noticeable proactive participation on the part not only
of the African Union but of other subregional actors.
The Council’s partnership with one or more regional
institutions is different in each case, ranging from the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is basically an
African Union operation, to the African Union/United
Nations hybrid operation in Darfur, and to various
intermediate solutions with subregional partners.
The point is that the multiplicity of partnerships
is complex and sometimes poses difficulties with
respect to jurisdictional and operational questions,
which requires better coordination among the parties
and greater conceptual clarity with regard to “who
does what”. However, on balance, the strong presence
of African institutions complementing the Security
Council has been highly positive for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in Africa.

11

S/PV.6946

That brings me to my fifth and final point, which
is most timely at present. I am referring to our recent
debate on extending our peacekeeping activities
to incorporate elements of peace enforcement (see
S/PV.6928). The creation of an intervention brigade
within the framework of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic People’s
Republic of the Congo in support of the central mandate
of the Mission to protect civilians in that country, and
the current proposal of the Secretary-General to create
a force in Mali that
“would operate under robust rules of engagement
with a mandate to use all necessary means to
address threats to the implementation of its
mandate” (S/2013/189, para. 75).
They may be justifiable on their own merits, but, as
we have stated on previous occasions, we are concerned
at what we perceive as a continuous erosion of the basic
principles of impartiality and non-use of force in a
peacekeeping operation. Although that concern is not
Africa-specific, since it is part of what we could call a
doctrine of peacekeeping, the only specific cases that
have surfaced are located in that region.
In conclusion, it is in Africa where we have derived
most of the lessons learned on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and that is where the most significant
progress has been achieved, without forgetting that
those achievements also come together with great
challenges still awaiting resolution.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to note your presence here today, Madam
President, and to warmly welcome you among us. I
would also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Elliot
Ohin, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Togo. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Tekeda Alemu for
their briefings.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the work
of your delegation in holding the presidency of the
Council for the month of April, in particular that of our
dear and respected friend Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana.
We would also like to say how much we appreciate
everything the Rwandan delegation is doing on a daily
basis as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council.
By way of introduction, I would like highlight three
points.
12

First, we are glad to see the imminent adoption of
the draft presidential statement with the conviction that
it is an important result of the work of the Council.
Secondly, we would like to point out that African
conflicts and subjects, as is well known, account for the
majority of the meeting time of the Council. I would
also point out that it is also true that a great deal of
progress has been made by most African countries,
the African Union and other subregional organizations
in the prevention of conflicts, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in questions of development and in the
protection and promotion of human rights, democracy,
the rule of law and constitutional order.
The third point I would make is that, given the
fundamental principle of sovereignty, the primary
responsibility for peace and security in Africa is the
responsibility of African countries themselves. It is their
peoples and their Governments that must peacefully
resolve conflicts and deal with the deep-seated causes
of those conflicts.
At the same time, Argentina is a firm believer in
the importance of the support that the African countries
should receive from the international community and
the United Nations. Such support should be based on
a policy not of intervention but of multilateralism, and
should lead to cooperation and complementarity, not to
new forms of colonialism.
Since we have been asked to focus on the structural
aspects of preventing conflicts, there are, in our view,
five aspects that are key to tackling the possible causes of
conflict. First are justice and the fight against impunity
as factors in preventing conflict. We know there can
be no lasting peace without justice. Argentina, from its
own experience, is convinced that combating impunity
helps to prevent conflicts, unite society and strengthen
democracy, since such justice sends a clear message that
serious crimes will not be tolerated. In that context, the
role of the international ad hoc tribunals established by
the Council has paved the way for a new phase, an era
of accountability, one that is another step on the road
to a universal fight against impunity. In that regard,
the International Criminal Court is unquestionably
one of the most notable achievements of multilateral
diplomacy. Since it was established, a little more than
10 years ago, it has become the centre of the criminal
justice system for the international community. We feel
that the emerging international criminal justice system
is the present and future true and legal path of “never

13-28995

S/PV.6946

again” for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The reference in today’s draft presidential
statement to the international criminal justice system is
simply a reference to the International Criminal Court,
which is why Argentina regrets that it was not possible
to actually name the Court in that statement.
The second aspect is the regulation of the arms
trade. The peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations represent a cost of $7 billion a year, while the
estimated cost of armed conflict worldwide amounts to
$400 billion yearly. In the case of Africa, it is estimated
that armed violence costs $18 billion annually. As the
Secretary-General pointed out, 60 years of United
Nations peacekeeping operations have cost the
international community less than six weeks’ worth of
current military expenditures. That demonstrates that,
without adequate regulation of international transfers
of conventional weapons, the human and financial costs
will continue to be immense. That is why the General
Assembly’s adoption, on 2 April, of the Arms Trade
Treaty (resolution 67/234B) represents a historic step.
Thirdly, there are the economic, social and
environmental aspects. We need a comprehensive
approach to the effective prevention of conflicts.
One such aspect can be found in the related issues of
climate and security. Years of unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption have inflicted significant
damage on the natural equilibrium of our climatic
system. While it is true that dealing substantively with
the issue of climate change falls within the purview of
another area of the Organization, I would also like to
recall here the principle of shared but differentiated
responsibility. The industrialized nations bear the
major part of the responsibility for avoiding the
outcome represented by the most pessimistic forecasts
of the impact of climate change on our countries. The
international community should continue to work
for the development of African countries so that that
region, which will be seriously affected by climate
change, will possess the means necessary for mitigation
and adaptation.
Concerning food security, about 1 billion people
around the world are currently suffering from hunger.
In the past four years, Africa was the only region where
the number of hungry people increased, from 175 million
to 239 million, which, with almost 20 million more
added, amounts to almost one quarter of its population.
Is that the fault of Africans? Argentina believes that
world hunger is not the fault of the world’s peoples; it

13-28995

is not the result of volatile food prices, as some would
like us to believe, but the result of poverty and the
unfair distribution of wealth. Prices that are being
kept artificially low by protectionist international
agricultural trade and subsidies from developed
countries are one of the principal reasons, affecting
vast areas of the world. That is why we believe that
the solution should be centred around increased food
production with access for more people.
Another fundamental issue that Argentina believes
should be addressed is financial speculation, through
the application of adequate, balanced regulations and
instruments — something that is greatly needed by
African countries and those in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Briefly, concerning the current global
economic and financial crisis, I would also like to say
that African, Latin American and Caribbean countries
are united in demanding changes to the international
monetary and financial system. Only substantial
change to the rules, structure and operations of the
International Monetary Fund and other institutions can
ensure that the monetary system is compatible with the
goals of a sustainable world economy. The financial
system cannot continue to operate as though nothing
had happened. We are being given the same recipes that
led to disaster before in poor and developing countries,
and today they threaten social cohesion and the quality
of democracy in developed countries.
Briefly, concerning human rights, I would like to
highlight the importance of the Council’s inclusion of
the gender perspective and the equality of women in
peacekeeping operations in terms of the prevention
of violence against women and children and their full
participation in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution. We also feel that it is essential
to maintain and strengthen development assistance and
the capacities of democratic States. In that context, we
believe that the protection of the rights of children and
providing young people with equal opportunities and
conditions are crucial.
Fifthly, concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Argentina firmly believes that any method
that settles disputes peacefully is also worth using for
settling conflicts. In that regard, we stress the special
role that the Charter of the United Nations entrusts to
the Secretary-General in the area of good offices and
mediation, as well as the obligation incumbent upon
all Member States to consent to the peaceful resolution
of disputes.

13

S/PV.6946

We have great respect for the fraternal nations of
Africa with regard to issues that my country believes
affect them, situations where peace in Africa is
constantly threatened. We stress the importance of the
African Union’s growing participation through various
mechanisms in helping to settle conflicts affecting
Africa. The United Nations should not impose formulas
that claim to be a rigid road map for our peoples while
representing the interests of only a few.
Given that most of the situations being considered
by the Security Council have their origin in Africa,
Argentina considers that, in any Security Council
reform, the issue of the representation of the African
continent in this body is particularly important. It is
also essential that we rigorously implement the arms
embargoes and request States to seek to ensure that
their citizens or companies avoid violating those
sanctions. Similarly, the fundamental debate on the
scope, mandates and nature of peacekeeping operations
must be considered in the light of the experience gained
in Africa. There are many challenges, but undoubtedly
we are on our way to finding and establishing the rules
of the game for a more fair, egalitarian and balanced
world.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are glad to welcome you, Madam
Minister, to the presidency of the Security Council. We
are grateful to the delegation of Rwanda for convening
this meeting on this very important topic, namely, the
prevention of conflicts in Africa by addressing the
root causes. Undoubtedly, that issue is crucial to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In recent years the United Nations as a whole, the
Security Council, the leadership of the Secretariat and
many regional and subregional organizations have
carried out significant work in identifying the causes
of conflicts and preventing them, including those
on the African continent. In that regard, it is clear
that the focus should be placed primarily on broadly
overcoming the many political, social, economic and
humanitarian problems that are compounded by a host
of new transnational challenges and threats. They
include international terrorism, religious extremism,
organized crime, drug trafficking, the illegal arms
trade and the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Of course, that list is far from complete.
Quick and simple solutions to the main challenges
in the area of conflict prevention do not exist.

14

A balanced strategy that takes into account the
relationship between security, social and economic
development and human rights must be developed. At
same time, we believe that the primary responsibility
for the prevention of conflicts in Africa lies with the
inhabitants of the continent themselves. Any assistance
from international partners in that area should not be
imposed. The same holds true for the duplication of
efforts and, especially, competition by non-regional
forces, which are counterproductive.
The successful prevention of conflicts, in particular
in Africa, depends on the skilful use of a number of
specific tools, including early warning and response,
preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures.
Significant return is reaped by investing in conflict
prevention and by strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations, both in logistical and intellectual terms.
Russia considers it very important to continue to
use of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations while encouraging regional and
subregional organizations to take initiatives in the areas
of preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. That chapter encourages Member States
to prioritize measures aimed at preventing conflicts,
ranging from the use of local instruments through the
use of the Security Council.
The United Nations and regional organizations are
called upon to complement each other by using their
objective comparative advantages. For the United
Nations, its strength is, first of all, the universal nature
of its work and membership, as well as its universally
recognized legitimacy. Regional and subregional
organizations, in turn, can often have the best knowledge
of the situation within their areas of responsibility
and, in many cases, have more customized preventive
diplomacy mechanisms that take into account the local
specifics. There has also certainly been no change to the
Charter of the United Nations, which gives the Security
Council the leading role in maintaining international
peace and security.
In order to prevent conflicts in Africa, the inhabitants
of the continent need to play a key role themselves. It
is important to adopt comprehensive and consistent
measures to prevent the development of illegal armed
groups and strengthen good neighbourly relations; to
expand cooperation in order to ensure border security;
to prevent the spread of conflicts, arms or mercenaries

13-28995

S/PV.6946

across borders; to ensure effective State Governments;
to combat poverty and mass unemployment, especially
among youth; and to combat corruption. That list could
be continued.
We welcome the increasing activity of the African
Union and subregional organizations in Africa to
prevent conflict on the continent. A central role in those
efforts is played by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, the Continental Early Warning
System and the Panel of the Wise. We attach great
importance to the African Standby Force. The African
Peer Review Mechanism and the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance should be
effective instruments to eradicate the root causes of
conflict.
Subregional
organizations,
including
the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
also make significant contributions to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We support strengthening
the partnership between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
to resolve crises. We further support the continuing
development of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in other formats as well.
Another important factor is the cooperation between the
Organization and African subregional organizations.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia is making a significant contribution to the
development of strategies for the international
community and practical measures to strengthen
peace and security in Africa, including the prevention
of conflicts. We are providing consistent political
support to the appropriate forces of the African
community. We are prepared to continue to contribute
to the strengthening of the African continent’s ability
to combat crises, including through the training of
African peacekeepers and law enforcement officials in
Russian institutions.
We are convinced that any obstacles to preventing
conflict can best be overcome through partnership.
There should be no preaching or ideological stereotypes
imposed from the outside.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks the delegation of Rwanda for

13-28995

its initiative in convening this open Security Council
meeting on the theme “Prevention of conflicts in Africa:
addressing the root causes”. I welcome Her Excellency
Minister Mushikiwabo in presiding over today’s
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
for his briefing and thank His Excellency Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
for his statement on behalf of the Chairperson of the
African Union.
In recent years, the overall situation of peace and
security in Africa has remained stable. The aspirations
of the African peoples for peace and stability have
been growing. The capabilities of African countries
and regional organizations in responding to their
own peace and security issues have been reinforced.
Nonetheless, Africa remains the continent with the
highest concentration of conflicts and the most fragile
security situation. Taking effective measures to prevent
African conflicts, in particular by addressing the root
causes of African conflicts, is of great importance for
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.
The root causes of conflict in Africa are
complicated. There are territorial, religious and ethnic
problems left over by history’s legacy. There are also
practical problems faced by African countries, such
as poverty, underdevelopment and weak capacities.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts in Africa calls
for integrated measures that address both the symptoms
and the root causes. I wish to underscore the following
points.
First, effectively helping Africa to achieve
economic growth and social progress is the fundamental
means to address the root causes of African conflicts.
In the light of the priority areas identified by African
countries themselves, China calls upon the international
community to further increase investment in Africa and
comprehensively honour its commitments of assistance
and debt relief. Walking the talk is essential. Africa is
by no means the private domain of any single country.
Developed countries should be positive and openminded in viewing the mutually beneficial cooperation
among emerging countries and Africa and should work
together with them for the rejuvenation and development
of Africa.
Secondly, the will of African countries should be
fully respected. African countries’ exploration of their
development paths in line with national conditions is
conducive to eliminating the root causes of conflicts

15

S/PV.6946

and to realizing long-term stability. The international
community should fully respect African choices and
refrain from arbitrary interventions or the imposition
of ideas on others. The vast African continent is a big
family with a shared destiny. African countries and
regional organizations have the deepest understanding
of their own regional issues.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Organization of African Unity, a
milestone in the African peoples’ aspirations in pursuit
of alliance and self-renewal.
The international community should uphold the
principles of objectivity and impartiality. It should
comprehensively and actively support African people
in addressing African problems with African means
and the efforts and the constructive role of the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations
in addressing African conflicts. The international
judicial system should also play a constructive role
in promoting the realization of peace and security
in Africa. The International Criminal Court should
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, while respecting the judicial traditions
and realistic needs of African countries and avoiding
double standards.
Thirdly, to effectively help Africa mobilize
resources, capacity-building in Africa should be stepped
up. Resource and capacity constraints represent the
biggest bottleneck for African countries and regional
organizations in seeking to address the root causes of
conflicts. In the light of the needs of Africa, we call
on the international community to actively provide
assistance in such areas as politics, capital, technology
and capacity-building. We hope that the United Nations
will further enhance coordination and cooperation with
Africa and actively respond to Africa’s requests for the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the provision of financial and technical support.
Fourthly, to enhance international coordination
and collaboration, various United Nations agencies,
the relevant peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and the relevant countries and regional
organizations should further enhance communication
and pool resources so as to maximize synergy and
help Africa to eradicate the root causes of conflicts. It
is essential to leverage the role of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission in helping post-conflict
countries consolidate peace.

16

China attaches great importance to preventing
conflict and addressing the root causes of conflicts
in Africa. For a long time we have been providing
substantial assistance to Africa through various
channels and platforms, including the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation. Not long ago, Chinese President Xi
Jinping, during his visit to Africa, reiterated the solemn
position of China to unswervingly enhance solidarity
with and mutual assistance for African countries and
to continue increasing assistance to Africa within its
capabilities.
China has always constructively participated in
peace and security issues in Africa. It has continued to
support the efforts of African countries and the African
Union and other regional organizations to safeguard
their national sovereignty and address their own
problems. During the fifth ministerial meeting of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, in 2012, China
launched the China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
initiative, which will continue to provide financial and
technical assistance to Africa for maintenance of peace
and security.
China will continue to work with the international
community to make its due contributions to the
realization of sustainable peace in Africa.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start
by expressing our gratitude to the Rwandan presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
meeting to discuss the ways of addressing the root
causes of conflicts in Africa. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu for their statements.
In 1998, the Secretary-General submitted the first
comprehensive report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (S/1998/318). That detailed report provided a
clear and candid analysis of the sources of conflicts in
Africa and put forward important recommendations to
reduce conflict and build a strong and durable peace. At
the heart of the report was a call to African countries and
to the international community to demonstrate political
will in order to transform the rhetoric into reality and
to take concrete actions in a number of areas. After 15
years, that call still maintains its relevance.
In the past decade, Africa as a whole has made
significant progress. Many African States have taken
serious steps towards political stability, democratization
and sustainable economic and social development.

13-28995

S/PV.6946

However, despite all the efforts and achievements, the
goal of peace and prosperity on the African continent has
yet to be realized. Ongoing old conflicts and emerging
new ones and instability, coupled with political,
security, economic and humanitarian challenges, have
not ceased.
Notwithstanding the diversity among the African
countries in many respects, as well as the differences
in their external and domestic political aspirations,
their economic development dynamics and their social
fabrics, the root causes of conflicts are, on the whole,
similar and interlinked. They are also complex and
multifaceted. It is not possible to define one single
underlying cause or to design a universal solution to all
conflicts in the continent. A comprehensive, integrated
and radical response and consistent engagement of
international, regional and national actors are critical
in that regard.
As a country suffering from the occupation of
a significant part of its territory and the forcible
displacement of hundreds of thousands of its citizens,
Azerbaijan fully understands the threats and challenges
affecting countries with unresolved conflicts, including
those in Africa. We proceed from the firm position that
all efforts aimed at preventing and resolving conflicts
in Africa and elsewhere must be based on the principles
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of States.
Further resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. In particular, ending
impunity is important not only for prosecuting and
bringing to justice those responsible for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide, ethnic cleansing
or other grave violations of international humanitarian
law, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation. In any event, the conflict prevention
and resolution initiatives considered by the Security
Council and regional arrangements must ensure that
peace and justice work together effectively.
The illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources in Africa remain one of the factors conducive
to the emergence and recurrence of conflicts. There is
a need to address that issue through employing a range
of instruments to limit the trade in conflict resources.
International assistance should be enhanced to ensure
the effectiveness of national and regional initiatives
designed to address the negative implications of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in all its aspects.
13-28995

In recent years, remarkable efforts have been
displayed by the African Union, as a leading regional
player, and subregional organizations in Africa to
collectively promote peace, security and stability on
the continent. We have also seen significant progress
in developing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
At the same time, it should be stressed that
responsibility for peace and security in Africa,
including addressing the root causes of conflicts,
lies primarily with African countries, whereas the
international community, including the United Nations,
should support and complement the relevant national
and regional processes.
Enhanced cooperation with the African Union
and its member States is one of the foreign policy
priorities of Azerbaijan. We fully support the approach
that international efforts to prevent conflicts and
consolidate peace in Africa should be channelled
towards sustainable development and human and
institutional capacity-building in African countries in
line with their priorities and the relevant capacities of
African organizations.
My country has implemented various assistance
programmes and provided financial aid to alleviate
humanitarian challenges in some African countries.
We are determined to continue our dialogue with
the African Union and its member States and to
jointly explore further opportunities to deepen our
engagement in many areas critical to establishing peace
and prosperity on the African continent.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg would like to thank Rwanda for
organizing this briefing during its presidency of the
Security Council on a topic of great importance, that
is, “Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing the
root causes”. We are honoured to have you, Madam
President, presiding personally over this meeting.
The conflicts that unfortunately destabilize certain
parts of the African continent engender devastating
violence, which has resulted in systematic violations
of human rights, including those of women and
children, large-scale sexual violence, massive internal
displacement, worsening humanitarian crises and the
destruction of infrastructure. Those conflicts bring
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
efforts to a brutal halt. It is a fact that violent conflict
constitutes one of the principal obstacles to the

17

S/PV.6946

achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. It
prevents millions of individuals from living in dignity.

a view to building the foundations of a just, prosperous
and peaceful society.

In that context, it is up to the Security Council,
which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
to the whole United Nations system to strengthen their
efforts, in harmony with the African Union, regional
organizations and African States, to prevent conflict in
Africa by tackling its root causes, thereby contributing
to ensuring lasting peace.

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is an important element of conflict prevention.
There can be no lasting peace without justice. The
pursuit of justice and the quest for peace are not
mutually exclusive, but complementary. National
criminal justice systems, which also represent a key
link in transitional justice, constitute the first line of
defence against impunity. In a complementary fashion,
the International Criminal Court plays a crucial role in
bringing to an end the most serious crimes — the crimes
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and,
in the future, the crime of aggression. The deterrent
effect of the Court’s mere existence enables the
bolstering of conflict prevention. We regret, therefore,
that it was not possible to include an explicit reference
to the International Criminal Court in the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt in the context
of this meeting.

For our part, we would like to emphasize certain
root causes that in general constitute triggers and
drivers of conflict. We also wish to underline elements
of a response before addressing two specific cases: the
Sahel region and the Great Lakes region.
It is the primary responsibility of States to prevent
conflict. We therefore believe that there is a need to pay
renewed attention to models of governance, including
economic governance, and to the paths of democracy,
as well as to the strengthening of State institutions that
have legitimacy and competence, which improve the
security and socioeconomic well-being of all citizens.
Certainly there is no single model of governance,
but to prevent conflicts, to promote peace and to lay
the groundwork for sustainable development in Africa,
it is important to put in place an inclusive political
and economic governance that allows for an equitable
redistribution of wealth, guarantees all citizens better
social protection and gives priority to the creation
of decent work, especially jobs for young people.
In certain cases, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and the absence of land rights constitute a
trigger for conflict. We believe that particular attention
should be given to the transparent management of
natural resources and of the revenue those resources
generate for State budgets.
Luxembourg’s experience in the context of the
Peacebuilding Commission strengthens our conviction
that such a holistic approach — which links sustainable
socioeconomic development, peacebuilding and
security and the promotion of human rights and the
rule of law — is indispensable to prevent a relapse
into conflict and violence. In that context, security and
defence sector reform, in a spirit of national ownership,
is of particular importance. Peacebuilding and
State-building aim at renewing the social contract and
at building trust between a State and its citizens, with

18

Since the 2005 World Summit, Luxembourg has
supported the elaboration and the implementation
of the principle of the responsibility to protect, so as
to avoid the recurrence of crimes against humanity,
notably genocide, like those committed during the last
century in Europe, as well as in Rwanda. We owe it
to the memory of the millions of victims of crimes of
the past to refine that principle together, as the United
Nations. We welcome the fact that the principle is
clearly reflected in the draft presidential statement.
We would like to underline the importance of
partnerships and cooperation among the Security
Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations in the area of conflict prevention.
Luxembourg supports efforts undertaken to develop the
partnership between the European Union and Africa in
that context. The European Union has provided more
than €50 million to support the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture. Those
resources allow for a strengthening of the capacities of
the African Union Commission and of the subregional
organizations, notably the mechanism of the Continental
Early Warning System, the Panel of the Wise and the
African Standby Force.
The regional dimension of conflict prevention has
rightly received increased attention in recent years. In the
case of the Sahel region, the multifaceted crisis, which
led Mali to the edge of the precipice at the beginning of
this year, should come as a lesson. It is now more urgent
13-28995

S/PV.6946

than ever to define an integrated strategy for the Sahel
region that would make it possible to prevent conflict
for all States in the region in a lasting way. Ultimately,
it could also be useful for the United Nations to define
an integrated strategy for the Horn of Africa.
In the case of the Great Lakes region, we welcome
the signing, on 24 February, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The signing of this
framework agreement represents a unique opportunity
to break the cycle of violence and to tackle the root
causes of the conflict by stressing regional cooperation,
including terms of trade. For the framework agreement
not to end up like the regional agreements of 2004 and
2006, which have remained dead letters, all signatories
will have to fulfil their part of the bargain, and the
international community must fully support them.
In conclusion, I should like to underline that
Luxembourg’s commitment in Africa bears witness
to our conviction that we need to adopt a holistic
and multidimensional approach that encompasses
conflict prevention, the consolidation of peace and the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
an approach would recognize the intrinsic link between
security and development, two objectives that can be
achieved only through respect for and the protection of
human rights and the rule of law.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome to the
Security Council Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, and we commend you
on presiding over today’s debate. We also thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo, Mr. Elliot Ohin,
and Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia for their
statements. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and support his efforts and initiatives to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa.
Let me start on a positive note. Four things
distinguish Africa today, namely, an impressive
economic turnaround, Africa’s growing ownership
of its destiny, the effective leadership demonstrated
by the African Union and subregional African
organizations, and the successes in Somalia, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire in conflict resolution
and management. We also welcome the recent signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Despite that good news, the fact is that roughly
62 per cent of the items on the Council’s agenda

13-28995

are African issues. Some issues are perennial and
protracted, others have shown recurrent relapse. Still
others point to the fragility of the peace and stability
that were so painstakingly achieved.
What are the divers of conflict in Africa? Without
sounding facile, we can say that they are perceived to
be the legacy of artificial borders, the exploitation of
Africa’s natural resources, poverty, ethnic and tribal
divisions, the illicit trafficking in small arms and, now,
the rise of extremism and terrorism, with their national,
transnational and global dimensions. However, Africa
has decided to address those challenges head-on, and
it is determined to succeed. Africa is forging ahead.
For Africa, those are existential — and not mere
historical — issues.
Pakistan has a long-standing and abiding
commitment to stability and progress in Africa.
We were steadfast partners in Africa’s struggle to
exercise its right to self-determination against colonial
rule. Over the past 53 years, Pakistani peacekeepers
have played an instrumental role in peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding in Africa. With the
help of other partners, we have also worked to prevent
the relapse of conflicts in a number of post-conflict
situations in Africa. Thus far, more than 132 of our
brave peacekeepers have laid down their lives, 119
of them in Africa. To date, we have contributed more
than 140,000 United Nations peacekeepers worldwide.
Today, 8,221 Pakistani peacekeepers are deployed in
six peacekeeping missions, 8,075 of which are deployed
in Africa.
We believe that greater reliance on the tools for
preventive diplomacy provided under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as those for
coordination under Chapter VIII, will help prevent
conflicts and stall their recrudescence.
Structural prevention in Africa can be achieved by
strengthening the nexus between security, development
and human rights, without embarking on the more
treacherous path of nation building. Nations will be
built by their own people, not by the Security Council
or the African Union, which can legitimately help them
prevent conflicts.
Integrated peacekeeping missions ensure that
efforts to address the root causes of conflict continue
even after the departure of peacekeeping missions.
Those missions assist in security sector reform (SSR),
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),

19

S/PV.6946

the rule of law, the enforcement and monitoring of
human rights and national reconciliation. We laud
the role of the United Nations regional offices in
providing services to prevent conflicts and in helping
post-conflict countries with good offices, mediation,
dialogue, electoral assistance and assistance for SSR
and DDR. Similarly, the Peacebuilding Commission’s
role is also critical in preventing the fresh eruption of
conflicts.
The economic development of Africa is the best way
to address the root causes of conflicts. Over the past
several years, Africa has experienced strong economic
growth and an improvement in social development
indicators. This year, Africa’s gross domestic product
is projected to grow by 6 per cent, and the continent
is poised to become middle income by 2030. Since
2005, foreign direct investment flows have increased
by 50 per cent, and there is a boom in investment
conferences on Africa. Emphasis on optimal population
growth, urbanization, technology and good governance
are redefining the African landscape.
That does not mean that aid flows should dry
up. On the contrary, many countries, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa, need massive assistance for their
economies and social sectors.
Africa has resorted to the wide array of tools
available under Chapter VI, with a view to preventing
disputes and conflicts. African countries have put in
place a solid peace and security architecture through
regional and subregional organizations, with built-in
mechanisms for conflict prevention and mediation.
Bodies such as the Peace and Security Council and the
Panel of the Wise give strength to that architecture.
The African Union has provided strategic
coherence, leadership and on-the-ground management
in nearly all of the conflicts on the continent. Through
close partnership, it has added value to the work of
the United Nations, particularly that of the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
In recent times, there have been new flare-ups in
Mali, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are now witnessing the rise of terrorism, drug
and weapons trafficking and piracy. The entire Sahel
region is under threat of destabilization due to the rise
of organized crime. The conflict in Mali is linked to
terrorism and organized crime.

20

The integrated United Nations strategy for the
Sahel region, backed by the necessary financial
resources, must be made to work. The United Nations
should continue to provide support to strengthen
the African Union’s capacity for conflict prevention
under the umbrella of the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union. The deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali underscores the commitment of the continent to
address its conflicts. However, that is being hampered
by a shortage of resources.
Let me now turn to two pressing issues that have
been identified as potential sources of conflict by
the Secretary-General, that is, youth education and
employment and conflict and natural resources.
Some 60 per cent of Africa’s population of
1 billion is under the age of 25. That youth bulge, if
not harnessed properly, could have grave costs. It
is therefore important to have a comprehensive and
integrated approach to youth development.
The continent is rich in natural resources, but poor
in wealth. Fights over natural resources, the absence of
land rights and land tenure systems and the large-scale
acquisition of land by foreigners for industrial
agriculture or logging keep fuelling and re-igniting
conflicts. The Security Council and the countries
concerned should make greater efforts to identify and
bring to justice those who are benefiting from that
illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa, both
within and outside the countries concerned. African
countries should be given assistance to exploit their
resources and get a fair share of their trade.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
conflict prevention works, and works best when there is
synergy among all the relevant institutions and actors.
The United Nations and the international community
must therefore invest more in conflict-prevention
mechanisms. It is far better to invest in conflict
prevention than to expend resources in dealing with the
aftermath of conflicts. Pakistan stands ready to engage
in that effort.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting this morning. I should like to take the
opportunity to congratulate Rwanda on its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and Ambassador

13-28995

S/PV.6946

Alemu for his statement on behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union.

capacities and the efforts of African countries to share
expertise and experiences are also important.

Conflicts in Africa continue to take a devastating toll
on the continent. Lives are needlessly lost. Populations
face brutal consequences, such as sexual violence, the
use of child soldiers and mass displacement. Conflict
has also stopped Africa delivering on its enormous
potential. Africa has vast natural resources, some of
the fastest growing economies in the world and, in the
African Union, an increasingly strong and influential
continental organization. However, only by addressing
the root causes of conflict can Africa secure sustainable
peace and unlock that potential.

The United Kingdom particularly welcomes last
week’s commitment by the Group of Eight Foreign
Ministers to take steps that address and deter sexual
violence, which too often accompanies and fuels
conflict. We will follow up that initiative during our
Security Council presidency in June.

As is known only too well, 800,000 people
tragically died in the Rwandan genocide. That mass
atrocity threatened the very existence of Rwanda and
its people. The international community recognizes
with shame that we should have done more. We said
never again. The doctrine of the responsibility to
protect was endorsed by all Members at the World
Summit in 2005 as a means of delivering on that
promise. The responsibility to protect is the foremost
responsibility that sovereign Governments owe to their
populations, but the international community also has
the responsibility to support and assist States in that
task.
Today, we take stock of our performance in tackling
conflict in Africa. We should admit that we are not
doing well. In the past few months alone, crises in Mali,
the Central African Republic and the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have emerged or
worsened. We must learn the lessons of our failure. We
must better spot the warning signs and act accordingly.
We must use the right tools at the right time.
The United Kingdom believes that representative,
legitimate and inclusive political systems, unwavering
respect for human rights and the rule of law and social and
economic development are the most important factors
that help to prevent conflict in Africa, as elsewhere. The
crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo reminds us that, when such factors are
absent, it is very difficult to break the cycle of conflict.
Delivering effective national institutions is a key part
of upstream prevention. We need to help national
Governments in building capacity through mechanisms
such as the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
All Member States should invest early in such fragile
States. The work of the United Nations on civilian

13-28995

When a crisis is on the horizon, we need to spot
it early. That means, as the Secretary-General told us,
that improving our early-warning systems is vital. The
United Nations Office for West Africa and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa are starting
to play a role, but it is not yet enough. We hope that the
recently established United Nations Crisis Operations
Centre will also make a difference but, equally, early
warning is useful only when it is acted upon. The
United Nations is slowly getting better at mediation and
preventative diplomacy but there is much more to be
done. Too many members of the Council shy away from
their responsibilities with regard to conflict prevention.
Where conflict breaks out, we must hold those
responsible accountable and demonstrate that impunity
will not be tolerated. The International Criminal Court
and the other regional tribunals are vital to ending
impunity. We need to facilitate the transitional justice
that enables countries to emerge and to recover from
violent conflict.
Preventing conflict and addressing its root causes
are a long-term and complex process. If we are to
succeed in helping African States in that endeavour, we
must work together to support local processes and to
build local capacities. That means, as others have said,
that we should support the African Union Peace and
Security Council in its conflict-prevention work, while
respecting the Security Council’s global responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. We
must promote preventative diplomacy and transform
the United Nations culture of post-conflict response
into prevention before a conflict. We must never stop
learning lessons about what works and what does not.
We must deliver on our promise of never again.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Your
personal presence, Madam President, at today’s debate
on the prevention of conflicts in Africa shows the
importance that your country, Rwanda, attaches to the
security, stability and development of our continent. We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs

21

S/PV.6946

and Cooperation of Togo and commend the strength
of the message that he transmitted to the Council
today on the topic of peace in Africa. My Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who had originally planned to join
the Council for today’s debate, asked me to convey his
sincere regrets that he was not able to do so for urgent
reasons that required his presence in Rabat. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his contribution
to the debate, as well as our colleague, Mr. Tekeda
Alemu, Permanent Representative of Ethiopia, for the
perspective that he has brought to our debate on behalf
of our continent, Africa.
Today’s debate takes place at a time when Africa
is preparing to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of the African Union as a result of
the merger of the Casablanca and Monrovia groups
and the far-sighted and bold vision of the founding
fathers of African unity. It also occurs at a time
when major challenges to the security and stability of
several African States are emerging. Such challenges
have given rise to an unprecedented mobilization of
Africa, in particular at the subregional level, through
the mediation of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
Africa has significantly won the day in terms of
economic and social development, good governance
and respect for the fundamental rights of its citizens.
However, almost half a century after its decolonization,
our continent still faces various crises that continue to
destabilize it. While a significant set of multilateral,
regional, subregional and national mechanisms, as well
as arrangements established in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, have be set
up to prevent and manage conflicts, to build peace and
to protect civilians and human rights, the fact remains
that the lives of millions of men, women and children
in Africa continue today to be threatened by cycles of
conflict and by the re-emergence of separatism at a high
human cost, jeopardizing all efforts for the sustainable
development and growth of the continent.
That can be explained less by the failure of
established mechanisms that have undoubtedly spared
millions of lives in Africa and elsewhere than by the
lack of action with regard to the root causes that give rise
to or fuel conflicts. Such underlying causes, referred
to in great detail this morning by Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, have their roots internally in the difficulties

22

encountered by some States to strengthen their State
institutions, to manage democratic transitions and
to promote sustainable socioeconomic development.
Externally, the regional dimension of conflicts on
the continent is becoming ever more important, as is
the destabilizing effect of international criminal and
terrorist networks.
All conflict-prevention and -resolution policies
must incorporate the establishment of a national and
regional environment conducive to peace and stability,
addressing in an integrated and comprehensive manner
the underlying multidimensional causes of conflict.
At the national level, recent developments in
Africa have underscored the importance of putting
in place governance models and national institutions
that are efficient and credible through participatory
and inclusive processes that continuously seek to meet
the aspirations of populations, especially of women
and young people, who are the primary targets of
conflict, and aiming at the promotion of democracy,
good governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
progress.
Considerable progress has been made on the
continent in terms of political participation and
socioeconomic development. That progress needs to
be sustained and taken further, with full respect for
the sovereignty of African countries, to establish an
environment conducive to social harmony.
Furthermore, it goes without saying that there can
be no peace without sustainable development. Poverty
eradication is an important and essential measure for
establishing lasting peace and stability on the continent.
Against the backdrop of the growing funds and
ever more accessible sophisticated technology at the
disposal of armed groups, separatist movements and
terrorist and criminal networks, the building of African
States’ capacities to extend their authority throughout
their territories and improve border controls is of
crucial importance.
African States must be supported in establishing
modern security institutions capable of safeguarding
security across their territories and protecting their
citizens. In that context, we commend the efforts made
by the United Nations and Africa’s bilateral partners
to strengthen African capacities, especially in security
sector reform and in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

13-28995

S/PV.6946

In the light of the ever more regional character of
conflicts, it is important for States to come together and
support each other more in the interests of common and
shared stability, overcoming bilateral differences, be
they real or artificial, that impede the establishment of
effective and inclusive cooperation. Such cooperation is
today a necessity for responding to the multidimensional
threats affecting all of the subregions of Africa. The
destabilizing activities of criminal and terrorist
networks have become a real and palpable threat to
the stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
African countries. They require the rapid development
of greater synergy at the bilateral, subregional and
international levels.
Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the affected countries of the region and the
subregion to support State institutions and the various
mechanisms established at the subregional level to
tackle the underlying causes of conflicts is more
essential than ever.
We welcome the ever more integrated approach
taken to peace and security, development and the
humanitarian situations by the Organization, as seen in
the Sahel region.
The vision set out in the 1992 document entitled
“An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111) is highly relevant
for strengthening the preventative dimension of the
action of the United Nations. It is important for the
Organization to continue moving forward with that
vision while seeking the peaceful resolution of disputes,
especially through negotiation, promoting realistic,
pragmatic and lasting approaches and encouraging
parties to find compromises, free of any coercion.
I cannot conclude without paying tribute to the
tireless efforts and personal commitment of the
Secretary-General to preventing conflict in Africa
through his good offices and his personal envoys and
special representatives, as well as for the remarkable
work carried out by the various United Nations
entities on the ground in favour of peace, stability and
development in Africa. I would also like to pay tribute
to the important contribution made by Blue Helmets to
preserving peace, especially in Africa.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to you,
Madam, and the Rwandan presidency for convening
this important meeting. I also extend my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and to

13-28995

Ambassador Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia, who spoke on behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union (AU).
The draft presidential statement that we will adopt
today appropriately stresses the necessity of addressing
the root causes of conflicts in Africa and provides for
useful measures, not only at the national but also the
regional and international levels.
Africa has shown leadership in its effort to prevent
and resolve conflicts in the region. The commitment
of African leaders has borne fruit. The number and
intensity of conflicts in the region have been reduced in
the past decade. However, peace and security challenges
in Africa still constitute the majority of the work of the
Security Council, and the international community must
remain resilient in tackling the root causes. Addressing
the root causes is a broad agenda that encompasses the
political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and governance
areas.
The early prevention of conflicts cannot only
prevent casualties, but also provides an opportunity to
enjoy the fruits of economic development. Sustainable
development should be secured as a top priority, with
a long-term perspective. We recognize the mutually
reinforcing linkage between development and security.
In that sense, it is encouraging that Africa has shown
remarkable economic progress for the past decade. Per
capita real gross domestic product has increased by
30 per cent, and foreign investment has tripled over
the past 10 years. African States and the international
community should make efforts not to lose the current
stream of economic development.
The building of strong and effective national
institutions should be addressed, given the fact that a
large number of new civil wars have occurred in countries
that had already had civil wars. Institution-building
efforts should be carried out to incorporate the
principal of national ownership, the inclusion of diverse
stakeholders, the participation of women, the inclusion
of new, integrated approaches in targeted sectors, and
the strengthening of civilian capacity and cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations.
It is notable that overall governance in Africa has
been enhanced. However, African Sates are encouraged
to share lessons learned in post-conflict process, as the
cycle of conflict takes similar forms in many places.
African States should also meet their primary
responsibility to end impunity with the utmost urgency.
23

S/PV.6946

Ending the culture of impunity is a prerequisite for the
prevention of conflicts. In that regard, as a party to
the Rome Statute, we value the important role of the
International Criminal Court.
Despite that great progress, Africa still faces
challenges when it comes to conflict-prevention
efforts. Challenges include the unique diversity and
complexity of the situations, the diverse stakeholders
involved in the conflict, a lack of political will and
insufficient resources and capacities for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. Those challenges still
hinder the early and effective prevention of conflicts.
Focus should be put on the effective implementation
of the current mechanisms. At the national and local
levels, locally driven solutions tailored to the specific
conditions prevailing should be promoted. Homegrown
conflict-resolution mechanisms rooted in local practice
can fill the gap and meet local needs for justice, peace
and reconciliation. Institutions of national pride and
integrity, such as a forum of elders, can offer a path to
conflict prevention, reconciliation and peacebuilding.
Homegrown solutions can provide the best answers
to conflicts involving diverse ethnic and cultural
backgrounds.
At the regional level, African leadership and
ownership of the region’s peace and security challenges
is imperative. We note and commend the African
peace and security architecture. We also recognize the
constructive initiatives of the regional and subregional
organizations in coming up with creative alternatives in
conflict prevention and resolution.
The concept of a neutral international force, initiated
by the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, has finally borne fruit with the introduction
of an Intervention Brigade within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Effective burden-sharing with
regional and subregional organizations is not only costeffective but also leads to successful results.
The conflict-prevention tools used by the United
Nations Office in West Africa are a good example of
good offices and mediation activities being conducted
in close cooperation with the AU and the Economic
Community of West African States. Yet African States
must show greater commitment and a stronger will in
the context of conflict prevention by providing more
resources to regional and subregional initiatives.

24

At the international level, we note that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the AU has
been growing steadily through the holding of annual
consultations between the AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council. That
is a good indication of the political will of the Security
Council, given that the AU Peace and Security Council
is the only regional organization with which the Security
Council meets annually. It is also a good sign that some
of the recommendations made by the AU Council form
the basis of the Security Council’s deliberations, as was
recognized in resolution 2046 (2012), on the Sudan.
However, the political relations between the two
organs can be improved by building confidence and
securing predictability. In addition, the Security
Council should enhance its communication with
regional and subregional peace and security bodies.
As part of our own efforts to build a stronger
partnership with African States, the Republic of Korea
has been organizing the Korea-Africa Forum with the
AU since 2006. The Seoul Declaration adopted at the
third Forum, hosted last October, deals with peace and
security, trade and investment and development issues,
with a view to deepening the Korea-Africa cooperative
partnership. We are supporting capacity-building in the
areas of security, poverty eradication and economic
growth. We hope that those bilateral efforts will
contribute to addressing the root causes of conflict in
Africa.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
your presence here, Madam President, and commend
Rwanda’s initiative to convene this debate on the
prevention of conflict in Africa.
In 1994, Rwanda experienced an internecine
genocide that resulted in hundreds of thousands of
deaths and that the United Nations and its Security
Council were not able to stop. Therefore today no one
is better placed than your country, Madam President,
to know that in order to prevent a conflict, whatever
its nature, it is crucial to address its root causes, which
over time fuel resentment, stir up hatred and even,
ultimately, lead to violence.
When a conflict looms, the United Nations uses
conflict-prevention tools. The Secretary-General
can use his good offices or appoint special envoys to
conduct mediation. The Dakar and Libreville regional
offices are there to support those efforts. For its part,
the Security Council can send political messages or

13-28995

S/PV.6946

take preventive measures, or even impose sanctions as
necessary.
However, such preventive measures, which are
aimed at alleviating existing tensions in the balance of
power, sometimes come too late and are thus insufficient
to curb antagonisms or stop the crisis from breaking out
or the recurrence of a conflict. All too often, the United
Nations is reduced to dealing only with security and
humanitarian questions and seeking to minimize the
impact of a conflict on the civilian population.
That is why, over and beyond managing the shortterm factors causing conflict in Africa, the United
Nations must continue to work to better anticipate
problems by seeking to deal as soon as possible with the
root causes of conflicts. Those causes are often multiple
and complex. In Mali, for instance, the swift holding
of democratic elections in July will be an important
stage in the process of national reconciliation, but the
country must hold an inclusive dialogue so as to resolve
the long-standing demands of the different segments
of Malian society, which contributed to plunging the
country into chaos.
Conflicts can also be linked to economic and social
issues. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, it will be indispensable, so
as to put an end to the recurring crisis in the region,
to address issues related to the dividing up of mining
resources and arable land. The failure to involve women
in decision-making and transition processes is also
worrisome. We should support the implementation of
mechanisms aimed at ensuring their full participation
in reconciliation, crisis-resolution and electoral
processes.
The absence of the rule of law, police and a justice
system further intensifies those factors and represents,
in and of itself, a structural cause of conflict. In the
absence of credible military or police forces, all too
often it is armed groups that take control of a region
or a State. In Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic, the weakness
of the army and the police is what led to the conflicts
we are seeing today. In Somalia, the strengthening of
Transitional Government forces will be crucial to the
lasting stabilization of the country.
Justice also plays a crucial role in the prevention of
conflict. It is essential because impunity for criminals
always fuels resentment, which leads yesterday’s
victims to want to take justice into their own hands

13-28995

and thereby become the criminals of tomorrow.
Justice is also a permanent reminder that resort to
violence is illegal and that the perpetrators of crimes,
whoever they may be, will be punished. That is why the
functioning of judicial institutions is key. Failing that,
the International Criminal Court (ICC) must be able
to punish the perpetrators of the most serious crimes.
There can be no peace without justice. That is why we
regret the absence of a reference to the ICC, which is an
essential instrument for conflict prevention in Africa,
in the draft presidential statement to be adopted later
by the Council.
The great diversity of the root causes of conflicts
should not represent a challenge to the competence of
the Security Council. Even though economic or social
issues are sometimes the causes of a conflict, the Council
must be able to address them, in close cooperation
with the African Union and subregional African
organizations, in conformity with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The mediation conducted by President Mbeki
between the Sudan and South Sudan, with the support
of the Security Council, and the Secretary-General’s
Framework agreement on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region, supported by
the African Union, shows that the United Nations and
African organizations today have the ability to tackle
together the specific root causes of conflicts.
The actions of the Council can also be based on
the principle of the responsibility to protect, which
is an essential instrument to prevent atrocities. Its
implementation has seen considerable progress since its
consensus-based definition, in 2005. The State has the
primary responsibility to protect its own population,
but if it does not shoulder that responsibility, the
international community has a duty to act resolutely. It
cannot, at the risk of being complicit, stop at a passive
principle of sovereignty and remain inactive in the face
of massacres and mass rapes. In Libya, the Council was
able to act preventively and it can be proud of that fact.
In conclusion, I would like to express our support
for the draft presidential statement that Rwanda has
presented, which we are prepared to adopt.
The President (spoke in French): I now take the
floor in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of my country, Rwanda.
(spoke in English)
I have been honoured to preside over today’s very
important debate on the theme “Prevention of conflicts
25

S/PV.6946

in Africa: addressing the root causes”. Allow me,
first, to express my sincere gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for joining us earlier today. I also welcome the
presence of my colleague, His Excellency Mr. Elliot
Ohin, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of Togo, as
well as His Excellency Mr. Tekeda Elemu, Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations, who
is representing the Chairperson of the African Union
(AU).
The rationale behind the selection of today’s theme
lies in the unfortunate fact that around 70 per cent of the
Council’s agenda relates to conflicts in Africa. Clashes,
whether between countries or peoples or between States
and their citizenry, are not unavoidable. There can be
no issue that the Security Council faces that deserves
greater focus or urgent attention than the prevention
of conflict. As we shift energy and resources from
conflict zone to conflict zone, from crisis to crisis, are
we truly fulfilling our mission if we fail to properly
examine the factors that cause conflicts and crises to
begin with? While each conflict has its unique causes
and consequences, there is also a discernible pattern
from which we can draw and apply lessons. Those
deep-rooted causes include the legacy of colonial rule
for Africa, problems of nationality and identity, a lack
of democracy and the rule of law, corruption and poor
governance, foreign interference, poverty, famine and
disease, and the exclusion of groups based on gender,
ethnicity, religion, region and other criteria. Preventing
conflicts is possible, provided that those elements are
addressed and that leaders and stakeholders, together,
do not shirk their responsibilities.
Collective efforts in advancing peace and
security in Africa have come a long way since the
Organization of African Unity was founded, 50 years
ago. Since 2002, when the African Union succeeded
the Organization of African Unity, Africans across the
continent have demonstrated a growing capacity for
working together in reducing and preventing conflicts.
Of course, there are problems with inconsistent and
poor implementation, and the African Union needs
and has decided to do more and better. And yet, in my
view, there is little doubt that the best initiatives for
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
are emerging from Africa itself, and the United Nations
would do well to embrace those ideas.
Much has been said in this Chamber today on the
root causes of conflict in Africa. I will therefore limit

26

my statement to three key points — first, democracy
and political and economic governance; secondly,
regional and subregional integration; and, thirdly,
justice and reconciliation.
On democracy and political and economic
governance, when the Organization of African Unity
was transformed into the African Union, governance,
democracy and human rights became a centrepiece of
the emergent agenda. Those principles were enshrined
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union and
in the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance. The ethos of democracy and good
governance embedded in the Constitutive Act sits
alongside the guiding principle that peace and security
are vital prerequisites for both. Furthermore, as some
before me have pointed out earlier today, the AU has
adopted processes that have at their core the promotion
of governance as a conflict prevention tool, through
building a more efficient, responsive and accountable
public sector. One of those processes is the African
Peer Review Mechanism, mentioned earlier, which
assesses participating Governments against a set of
agreed principles. It aims to promote and reinforce
high standards of governance by analysing systemic
or structural problems in countries under review
and to provide advice and recommendations before
crises erupt. The African Union Peace and Security
Architecture was another milestone for integration and
conflict prevention in Africa. It has established other
important instruments, including the Panel of the Wise,
the Continental Early Warning System and the African
Standby Force. Should the Security Council not take
careful note of those policy responses? Should it not ask
how can we can adapt such initiatives and apply them
on a global scale?
On regional and subregional integration, democracy
and good governance are not the only tools for conflict
prevention in Africa. Another is regional and subregional
integration. The vision of the African Union is to build
an integrated, prosperous and peaceful continent,
driven by its own citizens and capable of standing as
a dynamic force in the world. We have sought to build
a strong and prosperous African Union with each of
its subregional building blocks being able to deal with
its own conflicts without foreign interference and lift
up the continent and its people. Take, for example,
the recent efforts of such regional groupings as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,

13-28995

S/PV.6946

the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Such targeted regional approaches allow us to address
other issues that fuel conflict in Africa, such as
artificial boundaries and the related issue of nationality
and identity, and the remnants of our colonial past that
act as conflict-enabling forces, as have been identified
by other speakers today.
The collaboration and partnership among the
Security Council, the African Union and its subregional
organizations is of the utmost importance. We welcome
the strengthening of that cooperation over recent years,
including through the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. Of course,
we can do more, particularly in conflict prevention
and resolution, while ensuring that the partnership is
coherent, consistent and based on mutual respect.
Justice and reconciliation represent another
important tool for conflict prevention in Africa. As
the Council may be aware, Rwanda is commemorating
this very month the nineteenth year of the genocide
perpetrated against the Tutsi of our country. For Rwanda,
justice and reconciliation are inextricably linked. After
much trial and error, the Government and the people of
Rwanda have come to embrace a home-grown system of
reconciliatory justice known as Gacaca. Those courts,
which closed their doors in June 2012, handled about
2 million cases in 10 years. Rwanda is in a position to
share its unique experience with post-conflict societies,
where it applies, of course, and as a means to bring
about reconciliation and prevent further conflict.
Meanwhile, as was mentioned by a few speakers earlier
today, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
while establishing useful jurisprudence, particularly in
the area of genocide as a crime and rape as a weapon of
war, has handled only 75 cases in 17 years.
Another
international
tribunal,
sometimes
presented as a mechanism for conflict prevention,
is the International Criminal Court, which was also
mentioned earlier today. If any country in the world
has reason to support a robust system of international
justice, it is Rwanda. However, we do not believe that
the International Criminal Court, as it operates today,
plays a constructive role in preventing conflict; instead
of delivering justice and preventing impunity, in
practice the Court has shown itself subject to political
manipulation from areas outside conflict zones as well

13-28995

as from competing factions within such zones. We
cannot therefore support an international criminal court
that condemns crimes committed by some and not by
others, or that imposes itself on democratic processes
or the will of sovereign peoples. Such a court cannot
facilitate reconciliation, which is a vital precursor to
peace.
Both as a sovereign nation and as an African
member of the Security Council, Rwanda will continue
to uphold the principles of justice and fairness and to
ensure that the independence and sovereignty of the
continent is respected. Once again, I urge the Council
and the international community to focus on the
structural prevention of conflicts and to examine their
underlying political, social and economic causes. We
have no doubt that an enhanced partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations will yield a better
outcome for the prevention of conflict on the continent.
In addition, the personal vision and commitment of the
Secretary-General to Africa’s peace and security will
remain an important ingredient in that regard.
I would like to conclude my remarks where I began.
It is Rwanda’s sincere hope that, through this debate,
and in many future forums, the Security Council
will direct its focus and energies towards preventing
conflicts rather than the mere day-to-day management
of crises once they have erupted.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the draft text of a
statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I wish to thank Council
members sincerely for their valuable contributions to
the draft presidential statement. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that they agree to that statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/4.
It is so decided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

27
