S/PV.9427

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9427th meeting

Thursday, 28 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2023/691)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-28120 (E)
*2328120*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2023/691)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Christophe Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Ms. Anny
Tengamendite Modi, Executive Director and co-founder
of AFIA MAMA, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/691, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Keita, Ms. Modi and Ambassador
Michel Xavier Biang, Permanent Representative of
Gabon, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): First of all, allow me
to express my thanks to the Security Council for this
opportunity to present the report (S/2023/691) of the
2/26

28/09/2023

Secretary-General on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I welcome the presence of the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Francophonie of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Permanent Representative of Rwanda and
Ms. Anny Modi, Executive Director and co-founder of
AFIA MAMA.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9298),
insecurity has continued to permeate the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The situation
remains volatile and still requires continued efforts to
protect civilians. The crisis created by the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) continues to fuel frustration and
anger among the population, as well as the tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda.
In North Kivu, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) has continued to deter attacks by
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) in Beni, Eringeti
and Bwana Sura. In the southern area of the province,
the ceasefire between the Congolese armed forces and
the M-23 has been generally respected, but the fighting between the M-23 and armed groups allied with
the Government has intensified. The M-23 still controls strategic communication points in the territories
of Masisi, Rutshuru and Nyiragongo, and has even reoccupied previously liberated areas, without fulfilling
any of the obligations agreed in the Luanda road map.
The M-23 notably blocked MONUSCO missions
in Rumangabo, Rutshuru territory, intended to prepare
the site identified for its pre-cantonment. I deplore
that obstruction and renew my call on the M-23 to
lay down their weapons and withdraw without delay
from the occupied territories, as well as my call to
the signatory States to the Luanda road map to fully
support the process.
In Ituri, insecurity continues at an alarming
level, fuelled mainly by the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo (CODECO), Zaire and
ADF militias. Djugu and Irumu are the main hotbeds of
insecurity. MONUSCO has repelled numerous attacks
against civilians. The coordination of operations
against armed groups has also been strengthened
with the entry into service in July of the new Joint
Operations and Coordination Centre for MONUSCO
and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (FARDC) in Bunia.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In South Kivu, despite notable progress, pockets of
insecurity persist. The security situation in the province
continues to require physical protection by MONUSCO
for over 2,000 displaced people in Mikenge in Mwenga
territory. Political efforts have also been deployed to
reduce community tensions on the Ruzizi plain, the
Uvira highlands and the Fizi territory.
(spoke in English)
All the security challenges that I have mentioned,
particularly the ones in Ituri and North Kivu, have
continued to fuel a dramatic humanitarian situation
in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As I speak today, over 6 million people
remain displaced in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu.
I commend the extension until the end of the year of the
humanitarian scale-up to assist those populations and
call on donors to continue to support the humanitarian
response plan which remains underfunded. Against
that backdrop and in collaboration with the Congolese
authorities and security forces, MONUSCO has helped
to ensure the safe passage of displaced people and
establish several humanitarian corridors.
Within the humanitarian crisis lies another crisis:
gender-based and sexual violence. More than 10,000
survivors of gender-based violence sought assistance in
North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri in the months of June
and July alone. In addition to those official figures,
there are many other individuals who are unable to
reach treatment centres. In response to the acute risk
of sexual violence in displacement sites, the Mission
increased its joint patrols with the Congolese armed
forces. The Congolese authorities have, for their part,
closed numerous brothels in North Kivu. Those efforts
need to be sustained and intensified to protect women
and girls from conflict-fuelled abuse. Impunity for
those crimes should not be allowed to prevail.
The humanitarian response and security efforts are
critical but the conflicts in eastern Congo also require
concerted political and regional solutions. To that end,
peace processes have continued over the past months,
although with reduced momentum. MONUSCO is
committed to supporting regional political processes,
which offer the only credible solutions to the
current conflicts.
I am encouraged by the visit of Nairobi process
facilitator former President Kenyatta to Goma in early
July. Building on the momentum of the ceasefire between
the FARDC and M-23, the confidence-building measures
3/26

28/09/2023

he recommended to move the Luanda road map forward
should be operationalized and the recommendations of
the third round of political consultations between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Congolese armed groups should be implemented.
Concurrently, the East African Community
regional force mandate has been extended for three
months and the Southern African Development
Community has confirmed its intent to deploy a peace
mission to eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Regional organizations remain mobilized to address
the enduring conflict in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We must encourage regional stakeholders
to actively support the Nairobi and Luanda processes
and ensure their bilateral and other deployments
contribute to enhancing the protection of civilians,
while coordinating their operations with MONUSCO.
(spoke in French)
Regional efforts will be able to achieve their
objectives only if, in parallel, essential reforms of the
Congolese security sector are adopted, financed and
implemented. The Government’s decision to recruit
13,000 police officers in the run-up to the elections
should also enable them to play a leading role in
extending the State’s authority and strengthening the
rule of law. I encourage the Congolese authorities to
accelerate all the security sector reforms, including
the feminization of the security sector, to enable the
Congolese army and police to effectively respond to the
challenges of insecurity in all its forms.
Similarly, the implementation of the Demobilization,
Disarmament, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme is an essential condition for stabilization.
Three operational plans of the Programme have been
adopted for Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. That is
an important step in mobilizing the operational and
financial resources required for its implementation.
I also encourage the Government to ensure that
the Programme remain attractive with a view to
encouraging combatants to lay down their arms.
While the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues to face security challenges in the east, the
country is entering the final stages of preparations
for the general elections in December. High-quality
elections are essential to sustain the country’s
democratic gains and institutional stability and to
strengthen the foundations of lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I note the efforts
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

made by the Congolese authorities and the Independent
National Electoral Commission (CENI) to adhere to the
constitutional time frame. However, the rejection of all
proposals from the political opposition forces and civil
society to resolve the crisis of confidence is worrisome.
In that context, it is also important for the Government
to ensure that democratic spaces be protected, that
freedom of expression and freedom of the press be
guaranteed and that human rights be respected. I note the
significant improvement in the freedom of movement of
opposition leaders throughout the country over the past
two months and the commitment of the authorities to
ensure their security. That stance must be maintained
throughout the process. In that respect, I encourage
all political parties to unwaveringly fight against hate
speech and discrimination within their ranks.
I deplore and condemn the various attacks and
intimidation that hinder women’s participation in the
elections. In that context, I commend the courage of
women candidates, but regret that their candidacies
have increased by only 6 per cent compared with the
2018 legislative elections, i.e. a total of 17 per cent of
candidacies this year, compared with 11 per cent in
2018. The Congolese authorities, CENI, MONUSCO
and United Nations agencies, supported by various
partners, have helped to raise awareness and encourage
those female candidacies. Numerous workshops
aimed at increasing women’s participation in the
political process have been organized by MONUSCO
in Kinshasa, North Kivu, South Kivo and Ituri to
support them.
MONUSCO, together with United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, such as the United Nations
Development Programme and UNESCO, is actively
supporting the Congolese National Police in securing
the elections through training for the prevention of
electoral violence, crowd management and respect for
human rights. We encourage the Congolese authorities
to urgently operationalize the institutional frameworks
that will enable them to effectively and responsibly
manage public order during the electoral period.
MONUSCO remains available to provide logistical
support to CENI in the three provinces in which it
remains deployed, in accordance with its mandate.

28/09/2023

responsible withdrawal from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Regrettably, the Mission continues to be
targeted by misinformation and disinformation, as well
as threats and attacks. I deplore the killing of civilians
by national security forces on 30 August in Goma. I
am hopeful that the trials currently under way will
provide justice to the bereaved families of the victims,
including one police officer, and will shed light on the
circumstances surrounding that tragic event.
As Council members are aware, MONUSCO’s
progressive departure from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has been under way for some time.
During his address to the General Assembly, President
Tshisekedi called for the acceleration of the process to
begin in December 2023. With that request in mind,
I call on the Council to make its position clear with
regard to the recommendations set out in the 2 August
report (S/2023/574) of the Secretary-General on the
future of MONUSCO.
On 15 September, the Congolese authorities
endorsed the revised transition plan for MONUSCO,
which is an important step towards accelerating the
departure of the Mission, while ensuring that the
process is conducted in a gradual and responsible
manner. We will now work jointly with the Congolese
authorities towards the implementation of that plan,
while continuing to deliver on the mandate provided by
the Council.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
all troop- and police-contributing countries and their
personnel, as well as national and international civilian
staff, for their invaluable support in implementing the
MONUSCO mandate.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Biang.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Biang (spoke in French): I have the honour
to deliver this statement in my capacity as Chair of
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I propose to give an overview of the Committee’s
work since my previous briefing to the Council on
30 September 2022 (see S/PV.9142).

I would like to underscore the importance of
ensuring a conducive environment for the effective
implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate and its

Since my previous briefing, the Committee held
two meetings in the remaining period for 2022, and five
meetings since the beginning of 2023. At its meeting on

4/26

23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

9 December 2022, the Committee heard a presentation
by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on its
midterm report (see S/2022/967) and considered the
conclusions and recommendations contained therein.
At its meeting on 22 December 2022, the Committee
considered the report of its Chair on his visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda
from 7 to 18 November. The Committee also held three
informal consultations at the Permanent Mission of
Gabon at the end of 2022.

At the meeting held on 8 September, the Committee
heard a briefing by the Coordinator of the Group of
Experts on its programme of work for the remainder of
its mandate ending on 1 August 2024, in accordance with
resolution 2688 (2023), adopted on 27 June. In addition,
the members of the Committee met with the Head of
the follow-up mechanism for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Petit, within the framework of three
informal consultations held at the Permanent Mission
of Gabon on 17 April, 27 June and 14 September.

On 2 November 2022, delegations were briefed
by the Secretariat ahead of the Chair’s visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda. On 4 November and 7 December 2022, the
members of the Committee met with the Head of the
follow-up mechanism for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Robert Petit. I would like to reaffirm
the Committee’s continued support for the mechanism,
which is assisting the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in their investigations into the
March 2017 murders of two former members of the
Group of Experts, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp,
and the four Congolese nationals who were with them.

The President: I thank Ambassador Biang for
his briefing.

I would now like to say a few words about the
meetings that were held in 2023. At the meeting held
on 6 December 2022 with regional and other interested
States, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts presented
an overview of the main findings and recommendations
contained in the midterm report, after which the
members of the Committee and representatives of States
of the region shared their views of the report. At the
meeting held on 9 May, the Committee heard a briefing
by representatives of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), namely, members of the Joint
Mission Analysis Centre, the Arms Embargo Cell and
the United Nations Mine Action Service, as well as the
Senior Natural Resources Adviser.
At its meeting held on 19 May, the Committee heard
a briefing by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
on its final report (see S/2023/431) and considered the
conclusions and recommendations contained therein.
At its meeting held on 19 July with regional and other
interested States, the Coordinator of the Group of
Experts provided an overview of the main findings and
recommendations contained in the report, after which
the members of the Committee and representatives of
States of the region shared their views on the report.
5/26

In accordance with paragraph 104 of the annex
to presidential note S/2017/507, the Committee issued
seven press releases containing a brief summary of
the informal consultations held on 9 and 22 December
2022 and on 16 February, 9 and 19 May, 19 July and
8 September 2023.

I now give the floor to Ms. Modi.
Ms. Modi (spoke in French): On behalf of Congolese
women, I would like to thank the members of the
Security Council for the opportunity they have given
me to brief them on the situation regarding conflictrelated sexual violence. I would like to welcome the
presence of our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bintou Keita.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
subscribed to a number of international legal
instruments, including resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2250 (2015). My briefing will cover the following
points: the situation concerning conflict-related
sexual violence, the importance of the participation
of women and girls in peacebuilding efforts and a
number recommendations.
With regard to the situation concerning conflictrelated sexual violence, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a country that is exceptionally rich in
human potential and natural resources that are key
to achieving global climate change objectives and
ensuring the future of the energy transition. However,
for almost three decades the country has been affected
by a number of internal armed conflicts, attacks by
armed groups supported by neighbouring countries
and natural disasters that have caused one of the most
serious humanitarian crises in Africa.
Three provinces in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo — Ituri, Nord Kivu and Sud Kivu — face
extreme levels of need owing to the displacement of
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

persons. In every one of those contexts, cases of sexual
violence against women and girls have been reported.
I note that those acts have been committed not only
in areas occupied by armed rebel groups but almost
everywhere, especially in Tongo, Rutshuru territory,
and in the camps in the area of Goma that are sheltering
those who have been displaced owing to conflict.
I would also like to draw the Security Council’s
attention to the intercommunal conflicts in the
provinces of Tanganyika, Tshopo and Mai-Ndombe,
which have led to the displacement of populations and
have therefore created significant humanitarian needs.
Cases of sexual violence have also been reported, but
the humanitarian response mechanism in those areas is
weak and there is not enough holistic care available for
the victims and survivors of sexual violence. Against
the backdrop of those enormous needs, displaced
women and girls are subjected to sexual exploitation,
violence and abuse, which have significant effects
on both their protection and health, including early
or unwanted pregnancies and an increase in sexually
transmitted infections. The Gender-based Violence
sub-cluster reported 35,000 cases of sexual violence
between January and June. In the context of the
resurgence of gender-based violence, including marital
violence, the perpetrators benefit from impunity owing
to the difficulty of access to justice.
I should not conclude this point without noting that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken useful
legislative measures to ensure access to justice and
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence by
enacting a law, creating a national victims’ reparations
fund and recruiting new magistrates. However, in
order to ensure the effectiveness of those gestures of
political goodwill, it is also necessary for facilities to
be established to provide legal and judicial support to
the survivors and victims of conflict-related sexual
violence and for magistrates to be deployed to remote
areas so that they can bring justice closer to the people.
Regarding my second point, on the importance of
involving women and young women in peacebuilding
efforts, as far as women and girls are concerned
the top priority is achieving peace, security and
sustainable solutions. It is essential to strengthen
women’s initiatives to tackle the root causes of conflict
and to strengthen collaboration among humanitarian,
peace and development actors — in other words, to
make that nexus stronger, including by implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Congolese women need their
6/26

28/09/2023

country to be peaceful, and they deserve peace, the
chance to return home and the support they need to
re-establish their livelihoods so they can provide for
themselves. In that regard, I would like to make some
recommendations to the United Nations agencies.
They should support awareness-raising programmes
on positive masculinity for ex-combatants, facilitate
access to water, hygiene and sanitation, support the
construction of additional integrated multifunctional
centres, support apprenticeship programmes for women
and strengthen initiatives for women’s meaningful
participation in the Nairobi and Luanda peace processes.
I call on donors to fund prevention programmes that
involve men and boys in the fight against gender-based
violence in emergency situations, support integrated
programme-based approaches, ensure the effective
leveraging of funding for women’s organizations and
increase support for the humanitarian response in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I call on the members
of the Council to ensure the effective implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008).
I call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure the effectiveness of
its national victims’ reparations fund for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence; urgently strengthen
the management and security of camps for internally
displaced persons; promote women’s participation and
leadership in community-recovery and stabilization
initiatives; pursue its Demobilization, Disarmament,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
aimed at managing armed groups at the local level;
prosecute alleged perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence; step up its national security efforts
to protect civilians in general, and women and girls
in particular, in conflict zones and throughout the
country ahead of the departure of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from the country; guarantee
the availability of medicines in referral hospitals to
ensure the provision of adequate health care, including
access to safe abortion, in accordance with the Maputo
Protocol; and ensure free, democratic and transparent
elections during this tense pre-electoral period, while
respecting freedom of expression, which, along with
the right to a fair trial aimed at achieving high-quality
justice, remains a fundamental constitutional right.
The President: I thank Ms. Modi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Ms. Modi for their briefings. I welcome the presence
here today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda. I would like to make
three points.
First of all, we must collectively meet the
expectations of the Congolese people regarding
the withdrawal of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and demonstrate that we are
up to the challenge. France welcomed the guidelines in
the report on the options for the withdrawal submitted
by the Secretary-General at the beginning of August
(S/2023/574). They are a step in the right direction, as
they outline the parameters for withdrawing gradually
and responsibly, taking into account the reality of the
situation on the ground and the interests of civilians.
France also welcomes the Congolese authorities’ clearly
expressed wish to see the withdrawal begin without
delay. We hope the Council will take full account of
their concrete and realistic demands.
The orderly withdrawal that we are calling for
should be the result of close cooperation between
the Congolese authorities and MONUSCO, under the
auspices of the Council. The Congolese authorities have
a central role to play in the process, at the end of which
they will assume full responsibility for the security of
their people. France is ready to support the Democratic
Republic of Congo and MONUSCO in that effort.
We continue to offer our full support to the Mission,
which must have the capabilities it needs to carry out
its mandate until it withdraws. For that reason, France
will submit a proposal for a presidential statement to
be adopted by Council members in order to prepare for
the upcoming deadlines, and we hope it will be adopted
without delay.
Secondly, those who are fuelling the war and
instability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo must be held accountable. France remains
concerned about the growing tensions there, condemns
the continued presence of the Movement du 23 mars
(M-23) in the areas it has captured in that part of the
country and calls on it to withdraw its troops and take
part in the cantonment process. We are also concerned
7/26

28/09/2023

about Rwanda’s military support for the M-23 and
the continued presence of Rwandan soldiers on the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
condemn that support and presence, which must cease.
Similarly, the support provided by some members of
the Congolese armed forces to armed groups such as
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), as attested to by the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and which we also
condemn, must come to an end. The commitments
made in the context of the Luanda and Nairobi regional
processes must be implemented without delay.
France condemns the many atrocities committed
by the armed groups. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law cannot go unpunished.
Nor can we accept the possibility that the ceasefire that
came into force in March could be jeopardized. That is
why yesterday, together with the United States and the
United Kingdom, we have proposed designating two
military leaders of the M-23 and the FDLR under the
Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions regime.
France also calls for the perpetrators of those crimes
to be brought to justice. The decision by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to examine acts
committed in North Kivu, in response to a request
from the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, sends an important signal in the fight against
impunity. More than ever, violence, whatever its origin,
must be prohibited.
Lastly, France condemns hate speech targeting
certain communities, including the Tutsis, in particular
by institutional actors.
At this crucial time for the country’s future, we call
on all parties to exercise restraint in order to enable
peaceful, inclusive and transparent elections to be held.
France encourages an electoral process that is based
on dialogue among all stakeholders and that meets
the aspirations of the Congolese people. It encourages
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
political and civil society actors to redouble their efforts
to ensure that the elections proceed smoothly and in
a spirit of consensus. France calls on all stakeholders
to promote inclusion and condemn hateful actions and
hate speech. Respect for civil liberties is a decisive
factor in a fair electoral process and a peaceful election.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I welcome to this
meeting the delegation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, led by its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and the delegation of Rwanda. I thank Special
Representative Bintou Keita and Ambassador Michel
Biang for their briefings. I also thank the civil society
briefer, Ms. Anny Modi, for providing important
information on the situation and challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, we first reiterate our call for all
armed groups to lay down their arms and for all external
support for illegal armed groups to cease. Sustainable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
be achieved only when its people are no longer subject
to violence, massacres and forced displacement. That
must be a priority, not only for the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo but for all
its neighbours.
While we welcome the establishment of a ceasefire
between the Government and the Mouvement du 23
mars, we are concerned by the ongoing fighting among
armed groups, notably in North Kivu and Ituri provinces.
We are alarmed by the growing number of displaced
persons and the surge in reports of conflict-related
sexual violence, as noted in the Secretary-General`s
most recent report (S/2023/691). The transition of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Mission’s future withdrawal must take
into consideration that complex background. The
protection of civilians, a central aspect of MONUSCO’s
mandate, must be ensured primarily by the Congolese
Government as the Mission leaves. That task must also
be a priority for regional forces that are acting on the
ground, such as the East African Community (EAC)
regional force, or that might be deployed in the future,
such as the Southern African Development Community
force. In that regard, Brazil reiterates its appreciation
for the briefing provided by the Secretary General of
the EAC on 26 September.
Brazil recognizes that a mission cannot, and should
not, last forever. Nevertheless, MONUSCO’s departure
should be done responsibly, while avoiding the risk of
creating security vacuums and power struggles that
will lead to violence and human rights abuses against
the population. The transition must be well coordinated
with national and local authorities, neighbouring
countries and the regional and other external forces
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The role of the United Nations country team must
be enhanced.
8/26

28/09/2023

The security of United Nations personnel in
the transition process must also be a priority for the
Congolese Government. We condemn acts conducted
against MONUSCO personnel and regret that civilian
lives were lost in the recurrent protests against the
Mission. In addition, we particularly emphasize
the importance of strategic communications in the
Mission’s mandate in order to prevent attacks such
as those mentioned from happening again. I take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the work of
Brazilian personnel who have served in MONUSCO.
With regard to the sanctions regime concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Brazil reiterates its
support for the work carried out by the Panel of Experts
and the workplan for its current mandate. Brazil hopes
that the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which is due to be concluded in December,
will lead to further political stabilization and the
enhancement of the security landscape in the country.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for her efforts and those of her team, and we appreciate
her valuable briefing. I also thank Ambassador Biang
for his comprehensive briefing. We also listened
carefully to the statement delivered by Ms. Anny
Modi. I welcome the participation in this meeting of
Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the representative of Rwanda.
The United Arab Emirates appreciates the
affirmation by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of its commitment to holding
the elections as planned by the end of this year, the
recent publication of the list of candidates by the
National Independent Electoral Commission and the
extension of invitations to regional and international
electoral observers and the relevant United Nations
bodies. We encourage the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), as a key partner in that process,
to continue to provide the necessary support in that
regard, in line with the priorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mission’s mandate.
In the upcoming period, it will be important for
MONUSCO to continue to facilitate inclusive political
participation in the electoral process, including by
promoting women’s full and meaningful participation,
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in order to ensure the effectiveness of those efforts.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/691)
indicates, the workshops organized by MONUSCO in
recent months in Bunia and South Kivu contributed
to an increase in the number of women candidates for
political office. We look forward to the consolidation of
those important gains. We also hope that the Mission
will focus, within its mandated tasks, on promoting
tolerance and peaceful coexistence across communities
and countering hate speech, in line with resolution
2686 (2023), on tolerance and international peace
and security. Such a preventive approach is critical
for bolstering long-term security and stability and
preventing conflicts from escalating.
We remain concerned by insecurity in the eastern
part of the country, given the continued activity of armed
groups. We stress the need for the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23) to respect the ceasefire. We also reiterate
our calls on the M-23 and all other armed groups to
lay down their weapons and cease their hostilities,
which we condemn, and to do so permanently and
unconditionally. We believe that, in the near future,
a comprehensive approach will be needed to address
insecurity in the country and provide protection to
communities. Particular attention must be given to the
situation of women and girls, whose protection must be
ensured. All armed groups must abide by international
humanitarian law and cease all forms of violence
against civilians.
In view of the regional ramifications of the conflict
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
stress that resolving differences and de-escalating
tensions in the region requires an inclusive, Africanled peace process that relies at its core on dialogue and
constructive engagement among local, regional and
international partners. Therefore, we believe that the
current regional mediation efforts are commendable
and deserve support, and we hope that the summits
and meetings recently held in the region will help to
mobilize the momentum needed to consolidate security
and stability. To that end, all those initiatives will
require an integrated approach and efforts, in close
coordination with the Congolese Government, in order
to ensure their success.
With regard to the future of MONUSCO, we
thank the Secretary-General for his recommendations
on the matter, which we look forward to discussing
constructively in the Council in the coming weeks.
With regard to the request of the Government of the
9/26

28/09/2023

Democratic Republic of the Congo to accelerate the
withdrawal of MONUSCO, which was also mentioned
by President Tshisekedi Tshilombo in his address to
the General Assembly last week, we stress the need
to take into account the views of the host State in
our deliberations and to ensure continued dialogue
and communication between the Government and
MONUSCO, while placing the aspirations and
expectations of the Congolese people at the centre of
discussions on the future of MONUSCO.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates urges the
relevant United Nations agencies to continue working
with the national authorities to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. That is particularly critical for children,
nearly 1 million of whom are suffering from acute
malnutrition, besides those children who are displaced
and living in difficult conditions. The closure of more
than 1,000 schools is unacceptable. We must protect the
future of this generation and empower them, because
one day they will lead the country. And we want to
emphasize that addressing all of those challenges in a
sustainable manner requires making tangible progress
on the political and security tracks so that stability and
prosperity can prevail in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and the
Permanent Representative of Gabon, in his capacity
as Chair of the of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for their briefings. We listened carefully to Ms. Modi.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
We note with regret that despite the measures taken
and the maintenance of a ceasefire between Congolese
Government forces and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23), the situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains extremely difficult. We condemn
the criminal activity of the Islamist Allied Democratic
Forces and other illegal armed groups operating in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo, the Résistance pour un état de droit au Burundi,
the Mai-Mai and the Forces démocratiques de libération
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

du Rwanda. We call on them to refrain from violent
action, lay down their arms and participate without
preconditions in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. We are extremely concerned
about the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, with rising numbers of internally displaced
persons and refugees, human rights violations and
the daily suffering of the civilian population. We note
the significant role that United Nations agencies are
playing in alleviating the humanitarian consequences
of the crisis.
We believe that achieving concrete results through
regional leaders’ efforts through the Nairobi and
Luanda processes will be crucial. We note the important
contribution of the East African Community regional
force and welcome the willingness of the Southern
African Development Community to join the settlement
process in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe it is essential to continue combining
complementary efforts and initiatives for regional
assistance. The priority is to achieve a sustainable
and long-term cessation of hostilities and create the
conditions for a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue.
In that regard, it will also be important to continue
working to fully implement the foundational 2013 Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region. We welcome the commitment of the African
Union and the countries of the region to revitalizing the
Framework Agreement. We support the activities of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, aimed at establishing
an intergovernmental dialogue for reducing tensions in
that part of Africa.
It is obvious that it is impossible to achieve longterm normalization in the eastern Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Great Lakes region solely through
military measures. Only political solutions can lead
to a comprehensive cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of genuine conditions for sustainable
stabilization, and we call for substantive measures to
overcome tensions between Kinshasa and Kigali.
We support the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its leadership.
We believe firmly that the Mission’s presence in
the conflict zone continues to be an important
stabilizing factor. In order to coordinate the work of
protecting civilians more effectively, we hope to see
10/26

28/09/2023

greater coordination between the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and MONUSCO,
as well as other regional and national security forces on
the ground. We are concerned about the protests against
the Blue Helmets’ presence, but while we condemn all
forms of violence, we also call for respect for Congolese
citizens’ right to protest peacefully.
We have thoroughly reviewed the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for MONUSCO’s reconfiguration
(S/2023/574) in the light of the work being done jointly
with Kinshasa to revise the plan for the Mission’s
withdrawal from the country. We have also carefully
studied the letter addressed to the members of the
Security Council (S/2023/648, annex), signed by
Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which sets
out the concerns and demands of the Congolese side.
We believe it is essential to take Kinshasa’s views
into account within the framework of the Security
Council’s upcoming negotiations on MONUSCO’s
mandate in December. However, it will be vital to be
guided primarily by rational considerations, taking into
account the evolution of the situation on the ground and
acting gradually and responsibly.
We hope to receive full information as soon as
possible from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorities and the United Nations on the progress of
the investigation into the tragedy of the MONUSCO
helicopter shot down in the east of the country in March
2022. We all remember that eight peacekeepers died in
the crash, including our countryman Alexey Mizyura,
the leader of the Russian military observer team. We hope
the perpetrators will be identified and brought to justice.
In conclusion, I want to welcome the continued
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in preparing for the general elections in
December and to wish it every success in organizing
them. For our part, as a permanent member of the
Security Council, we confirm our readiness to help
resolve the crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo by promoting constructive dialogue between
the States of the region. We are committed to working
in close cooperation with the relevant institutions of the
United Nations system and their representatives.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative Keita for her
briefing. The United States appreciates the sacrifices
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

that she, her team and the entire United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are making every
single day. I also greatly appreciated the briefing by
Ms. Anny Modi, whom we thank for being here with us
today. And I would like to welcome the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, and the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda back to the Council.

But let us be clear. The Mission cannot bring peace
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo on its
own. That is why we are again calling for the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo to
cut ties with the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda, thereby ending a relationship that has long
been of concern to Rwanda. We also call on Rwanda
to end its support for the Movement du 23 mars (M-23)
and to withdraw from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo territory.

We have heard the call by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for MONUSCO to
begin planning its transition out of the country, most
recently through the Foreign Minister’s letter to the
Council (S/2023/648, annex). We appreciate and share
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s commitment
to a responsible, orderly, progressive and successful
withdrawal, while continuing to prioritize the protection
of civilians. However, 24 years of peacekeeping in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo represents an
enormous investment in resources and lives, and we
must build on those investments. I look forward to
hearing more from the Secretariat, MONUSCO and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on how to ensure
the protection of civilians before, during and most
importantly after MONUSCO’s departure.

In addition to condemning Rwanda’s actions
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
last month, the United States imposed sanctions on
six individuals for contributing to the escalation of
conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. And on 15 September the United States listed
Rwanda under the Child Soldiers Prevention Act for
its support to the M-23, which has recruited or used
child soldiers. As a result, certain elements of United
States bilateral security assistance will be prohibited.
We are committed to designating additional individuals
and entities that threaten the peace and security of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we urge other
Council members to join us in that process.

The United States is frankly concerned about the
possibility that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and regional security forces are not prepared to meet
the security requirements of the Congolese people.
The international community must ensure that the
Mission’s withdrawal does not exacerbate an already
perilous humanitarian crisis or put additional lives at
risk. I know that must be a concern of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government as well. We are
worried about the fact that the options outlined in the
Secretary-General’s transition plan (S/2023/574) rely
heavily on the East African Community (EAC) regional
force to backfill the Mission, and we urge the Council
to avoid endorsing greater support by MONUSCO for
the EAC without appropriate safeguards to address
human rights, accountability and command-andcontrol concerns. I repeat our request for detailed
information on the types of support that the Mission
would provide to the regional force were it authorized
to do so. We would also welcome a conversation with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on how MONUSCO can be more effective.
11/26

The region has also stepped up. I appreciate the
important efforts of African regional bodies to work
towards peace in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially through the Nairobi and the Luanda
processes. The next session of the Nairobi process must
be scheduled in order to demonstrate progress towards
a negotiated solution.
I am concerned about the continued reports of sexual
violence against women and girls, as briefed today by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ms. Modi. In fact, I am appalled and ashamed that
such attacks continue to happen, as they have, and we
should all be appalled by what is happening there. We
have an obligation to do everything possible to provide
protection and support to women and girls. We should
support their right to contest elections and their right to
vote in elections without fear.
Finally, free and fair elections are key to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s future stability.
I want to thank MONUSCO for its logistical support,
including transporting electoral materials in Ituri,
North Kivu and South Kivu. We appreciate President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s condemnation of hate speech,
but urge the Government to take more concrete actions
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to protect minority communities from violence. The
United States is also concerned about political repression
as elections approach, including infringements on
civic expression, harassment and violence towards
opposition and civilian society members by security
forces, as well as judicial proceedings involving two
declared presidential candidates. All Congolese people
should be able to cast votes for the candidates of their
choice, free of worry about security and safety. That is
the least that they can expect from their Government.
MONUSCO needs the Council’s support, but
it also needs the support of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Threats and attacks
against MONUSCO are unacceptable. The United
States is committed to an orderly and coordinated
transition of MONUSCO and to assisting the
Government to strengthen key governance, justice and
security institutions.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council (A3).
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her truly
remarkable work at the head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I would also like
to thank His Excellency Ambassador Michel Xavier
Biang, our brother, for his enlightening statement
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I warmly welcome the participation in this meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala
Pen’apala, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I also welcome the presence of the representative
of Rwanda, His Excellency Ambassador Claver Gatete.
Our statement today will focus on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in English)
The A3 is deeply concerned about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at a critical
moment, when the people of the sister country are
preparing for the upcoming general elections.
12/26

28/09/2023

In that connection, on the political front, we
commend the progress made in the preparation for
general elections, including the implementation of the
electoral calendar. We welcome the convening of the
electoral college and the opening of candidacies on
9 September In that context, we encourage the Congolese
authorities to continue to take all necessary measures to
guarantee security, transparency, inclusiveness, respect
for human rights and freedom of expression and opinion
throughout the electoral process. We welcome the start
of the last session of both chambers of Parliament on
15 September 2023, which will notably allow for the
examination of the 2024 budget and the consideration
of the laws on urgent reforms.
On the security front, we condemn in the strongest
terms the cycle of violence and terror perpetuated on
Congolese territory by armed groups, particular the major armed groups — the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Cooperative for Development of the Congo, the Movement du 23 mars and the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. We strongly denounce the continued
abuses against civilian populations and the predation
and plundering of the country’s natural resources.
We invite all partners to provide financial,
material and technical support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme; security sector reform;
and training and capacity-building of the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The A3 commends the invaluable contribution of
MONUSCO and the East African Community in their
efforts to stabilize and protect civilian populations,
as well as the determination of the Southern African
Development Community to contribute to peace efforts
in the country.
We must express our concern over the
anti-MONUSCO and anti-East African Community
Regional Force (EACRF) sentiments and disinformation
and misinformation campaigns, which negatively
impact the implementation of their mandates. The
violence that took place in Goma on 31 August is
unacceptable. We therefore encourage the Congolese
authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure
justice for the families of the victims.
We take note of the Congolese authorities’ request
for the Security Council to accelerate the withdrawal
of MONUSCO troops, starting in December 2023.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

We stress the need for close cooperation between the
Congolese authorities and MONUSCO, as well as with
all other relevant stakeholders, with a view to ensuring a
smooth, orderly, progressive and coordinated withdrawal
that guarantees the protection of civilians and the safety
and security of the personnel of the Mission.

We note that, notwithstanding the measures taken
by the Council and the international community, the
humanitarian situation remains dire. In the east of
the country, there are 6.1 million internally displaced
persons and nearly 4.4 million children aged 9 to 14
who are out of school.

In terms of regional-level engagements, the A3
reiterates its support for a political resolution of the
security crisis affecting the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We reaffirm our full commitment to the
Nairobi and Luanda regional processes, which are
credible African political solutions to end the crisis, and
thus deserve the support of the international community
as a whole.

The humanitarian catastrophe is exacerbated by the
consequences of climate change, which has a palpable
impact on security in Central Africa. In that regard, the
A3 urges all partners in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to mobilize funds for the financing of the 2023
humanitarian response plan.

In that regard, it is urgent to implement the priority
actions contained in the Nairobi and Luanda agreements,
with a view to achieving the cessation of hostilities and
the immediate withdrawal of armed groups from the
occupied areas. Furthermore, we call for the repatriation
of all foreign armed groups. We urge all local armed
groups to join the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization programme.
We welcome the decision to renew the mandate of
the EACRF status-of-forces agreement until 8 December
2023 and welcome the establishment of a working group
to coordinate peace initiatives in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
For 25 years now, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been going through a security crisis that
has claimed the lives of more than 10 million people.
Meetings of the Council have been held for years, but
despite our constant calls, the security and humanitarian
situation for the civilian population, in particular the
plight of women and children, continues to deteriorate.
That was self-evident on the occasion of the Security
Council’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last March, during Mozambique’s presidency of the
Council. Generations are being sacrificed by continuing
incidents of violence and terrorism. Child labour and
rape as a weapon of war are still rampant, posing a threat
to the Great Lakes region and to international peace and
security at large.
We strongly believe that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is endowed with immense natural resources,
including resources that are crucial for the world’s
energy transition. The country must be freed from its
limitations in order to resolve the contradiction between
the extreme wealth of the Congolese soil and subsoil and
the extreme poverty of its population.
13/26

In conclusion, the A3 calls on the international
community to continue supporting the current efforts
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also reaffirm our unwavering support for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita, the Permanent Representative of Gabon,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Ms. Modi for
their briefings today.
I welcome the participation in our meeting of
Deputy Prime Minister Lutundula Apala Pen’apala and
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
The United Kingdom fully supports the work carried
out by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), especially in protecting civilians. We
commend the Mission and Special Representative Keita
for their continued efforts in increasingly challenging
circumstances. We remain extremely concerned about
the fragile situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Regional peace processes should be
respected and all support to armed groups must stop.
We acknowledge the request of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to bring
forward MONUSCO’s withdrawal and welcome
the Government’s commitment to ensuring that the
process is progressive and responsible. We want to see
a handover from MONUSCO to the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There has already
been significant progress in that regard in recent years,
with MONUSCO withdrawing from the Kasais and
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Tanganyika. The lessons learned from those processes
should inform MONUSCO’s withdrawal from other
provinces. In preparation for the further withdrawal
of MONUSCO, we encourage the Mission to continue
transitioning tasks to the Congolese State and, where
appropriate, the United Nations country team and other
international partners.
The United Kingdom is ready to consider further the
consolidation of MONUSCO’s footprint and a reduction
of the troop ceiling during MONUSCO’s mandate
renewal in December, in line with the Government’s
request to accelerate withdrawal. However, we must
also carefully consider the implications of MONUSCO’s
drawdown on the civilian population. The consequences
of a rushed departure would be severe. In addition to
providing extensive support to the Congolese security
forces in operations against armed groups, MONUSCO
currently protects thousands of civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. While the United
Nations and international partners can play a supporting
role, the Government must be willing and able to
assume its responsibilities for civilian protection.
We encourage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to agree on responsibilities
for a responsible, conditions-based drawdown with
MONUSCO. That should include a sustainable plan
for providing security in those areas from which
MONUSCO withdraws. The United Kingdom fully
supports the Nairobi and Luanda peace processes, which
are key to tackling the underlying drivers of conflict.
In conclusion, we look forward to engaging with
all stakeholders on MONUSCO’s future during the
mandate renewal and to ensuring that we uphold
our responsibility as a Council to support peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita and Ambassador Biang for their briefings.
I also listened closely to Ms. Modi’s statement.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is now at a
critical juncture in maintaining security and stability,
advancing the electoral process and improving
governance. The international community and the
14/26

28/09/2023

Security Council should pay attention to its concerns,
strengthen coordination with countries of the region
and provide constructive support. In the light of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/691), I would
like to make three points.
First, although there have been no recent major
hostilities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there have been increasing clashes among armed
groups and attacks on civilians. The situation remains
tense. China urges the Mouvement du 23 mars and other
armed groups to implement the decisions of the Nairobi
and Luanda processes, cease violence as soon as possible
and withdraw from the occupied areas. China supports
the countries concerned in resolving their differences
through dialogue and consultation. It must be noted that
the maintenance of stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is essentially dependent on the
country’s own security capacity-building. The report of
the Secretary-General notes that the army reform plan
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
face challenges, such as funding shortfalls. China calls
on the international community to continue to provide
the necessary financial and technical support.
Secondly, the stability of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo affects the overall security of the
Great Lakes region. Last week, in their statements to
the General Assembly, the leaders of Angola, Burundi,
Kenya and other countries of the region called on the
international community to pay more attention to the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and for
greater mutual trust to maintain common security.
China supports the peacekeeping and security
operations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the East African Community (EAC), the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and Angola,
among other countries and entities, and encourages the
international community to provide support. In June,
the African Union invited representatives of the EAC,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
SADC and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region to a quadripartite summit held in Angola
with a view to promoting greater coordination among
regional organizations. China encourages all parties to
act in the spirit of the summit for greater synergy on the
issue of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We expect Special Envoy Xia Huang and Special
Representative Keita to strengthen communication and
collaboration and support regional mediation efforts, in
line with their respective mandates.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Thirdly, the general elections to be held at the end
of this year will be a milestone in the political and
peace processes of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. China supports the efforts of the Congolese
Government in preparation for the elections. There
has been a recent uptick in political tensions. China
hopes that all parties will bear in mind the fundamental
interests of the country and its people, strengthen
dialogue and resolve differences to ensure the smooth
and peaceful conduct of elections. As this year’s
general elections are by their very nature the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, China
hopes that the international community will respect
the sovereignty and ownership of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and avoid external pressure
and interference.
China supports the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the areas of
the protection of civilians, preparations for the election
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
and hopes that the Mission will strengthen its
communication with the host Government and its
people in order to enhance mutual trust, avert clashes
and security incidents and deliver effectively on
its mandate.
The attention of all parties is focused on future
arrangements for MONUSCO. China has noted President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s address to the General Assembly
in which he elaborated on the Congolese position and
the letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
la Francophonie Lutundula Apala Pen’apala’s to the
Security Council on the matter (S/2023/648, annex).The
Council should promote constructive and responsible
discussions among the Secretariat, MONUSCO,
the Congolese Government and troop- and police
contributing countries. In formulating the mandate and
transitional plans for MONUSCO, it is necessary to
fully heed the views of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and take into account the security situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to make
sound and reasonable arrangements.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, and Ms. Anny
Tengamendite Modi for their briefings. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Gabon for his
statement. I welcome the participation of the Minister
15/26

28/09/2023

for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Permanent Representative of Rwanda in
this meeting.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
decisive crossroads in terms of ensuring lasting peace
and security on its territory. To that end, Switzerland
believes that there are three priority areas for our efforts:
first, guaranteeing a successful transition; secondly,
deepening regional initiatives in favour of peace, and
thirdly, ensuring credible and peaceful elections.
First of all, we heard the Congolese Government’s
request to accelerate the gradual withdrawal of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We take that seriously. It will be necessary to ensure a
responsible, orderly and sustainable withdrawal, while
insisting on the importance of respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights by all parties.
The withdrawal must take place within the
framework of a partnership based on trust between the
Congolese State and the United Nations, including the
Security Council. A hasty departure of peacekeepers
could have harmful consequences for the thousands
of internally displaced persons, in particular women
and girls, as we have heard. That is particularly true
in regions where MONUSCO bases are the only
bulwark, however weak, against violations and abuses
by armed groups.
To ensure a successful transfer of the main
responsibilities of the Mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular the protection of
civilians, the rule of law and the security sector must
be strengthened. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/574) presents MONUSCO’s options for
adaptation. On that basis, we encourage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to step up its cooperation with
the Mission to strengthen the capacities of the armed
forces and the National Police.
Secondly, the region’s role in seeking peaceful
solutions remains central. That is key to ensuring
a political space for easing regional tensions and
addressing insecurity. The support of the East African
Community has helped to deter certain operations by
armed groups such as the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23). In that respect, the Secretary-General’s proposal
for support to be provided by MONUSCO for the efforts
of regional forces could be further explored.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

All regional military efforts must be part of the
political processes aimed at consolidating peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They must
be conducted in accordance with the objectives and
principles of the United Nations and international law.
Switzerland reiterates its support for regional political
and diplomatic initiatives. In that respect, we call on
all players, in particular the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, to honour their commitments,
establish a sincere dialogue and cease their support for
armed groups.
Thirdly, in the run-up to the elections, the Congolese
authorities must redouble their efforts to guarantee an
open, plural civic space. That entails ensuring credible
results and an inclusive and transparent process, as
stated by President Tshisekedi Tshilombo in the General
Assembly last week. We welcome the commitment
of the Independent National Electoral Commission to
register voters. However, we deplore the reports of a
reduction in civic space and the allegations of arbitrary
detentions of journalists, human rights defenders and
members of opposition parties.
Finally, the violence committed during the recent
demonstrations in Goma is unacceptable. We welcome
the measures taken to bring the alleged perpetrators
to justice and encourage the authorities to conduct
credible and transparent investigations.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Switzerland’s
concern about the deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore support increasing the
international humanitarian response and have allocated
additional funds. Switzerland has a long-standing
presence in the country, both in Kinshasa and in
the east. It stands ready to support the transition, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita and Ms. Modi, Executive Director
and co-founder of AFIA MAMA, for their briefings.
I welcome the report from the Chair of Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) and the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
representative of Rwanda.
Last month, we received the report of the SecretaryGeneral on options for the reconfiguration of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
16/26

28/09/2023

the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2023/574) and the United Nations future role in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the report
highlighted, achieving a smooth, responsible and
sustainable transition is our shared goal. Creating
feasible conditions for that requires close and
constructive cooperation among all stakeholders
guided by strong ownership by the host country. The
prioritized benchmarks are the key guideline for our
coordinated efforts.
For furtherance of our collective endeavour, I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, ensuring the protection of civilians is the
fundamental element for any future reconfiguration of
MONUSCO. We are concerned by reports of a significant
increase in the number of human rights violations,
including gender-based violence and casualties, due
to the growing deadliness of attacks by armed groups,
especially in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We commend MONUSCO for its dedication
to providing safe spaces for local people. The recent
extension of the mandate of the East African Community
regional force is a positive development. Building upon
that, ongoing regional initiatives, including the Nairobi
and Luanda processes, should gain renewed momentum.
Support of any kind to armed groups exacerbates an
already worsening regional situation and must be stopped
immediately. To avoid creating a security vacuum,
Government-led security sector reform remains an urgent
task. Japan continues to support the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Government’s efforts to develop community
policing through capacity- and institution-building.
The Mission’s responsible withdrawal must also be
accompanied by the concomitant establishment of an
effective presence of State authorities ensuring the rule
of law.
Our continuous efforts to mitigate ongoing human
security crises are imperative, especially in conflictaffected areas, and we must uphold the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus approach. People in overflowing
internally displaced person camps, especially women
and children, are vulnerable to violations and abuses
of their human rights. In partnership with the United
Nations Population Fund, Japan has been helping with the
prevention and the aftercare of gender-based violence, as
well as with reproductive health, by providing mobile
clinics in the North Kivu region.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, strengthening social cohesion is
fundamental for sustainable stability. We have
been observing preparations for national and local
elections gearing up. Winning people’s confidence and
building unity require free, fair, inclusive, peaceful
and transparent elections. By contrast, reducing civic
space and obstructing legitimate political campaigns
will further divide the population. MONUSCO has
a significant role to play in providing support for
conducting the elections in December.
Japan remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are determined
to continue working together with all stakeholders for
sustainable peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda at this meeting. I thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and Ambassador
Michel Xavier Biang, Permanent Representative of
Gabon, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for their briefings. I am also grateful for the briefing by
Ms. Anny Modi, Executive Director of AFIA MAMA.
Violence continues to exacerbate the humanitarian
crisis that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
enduring. We are saddened by the deaths that the
conflict has claimed, and we reiterate our commitment
to supporting all efforts to build peace in the country.
The support of the international community is key to
meeting the needs of the 26.4 million people living in
acute food insecurity and the 350,000 displaced persons
in the territories of Nyiragongo and Goma. We call for
guaranteeing the security of humanitarian personnel at
all times and ensuring their rapid and unimpeded access
throughout the country. We condemn the kidnapping
of nine humanitarian workers in Kabasha, the Kibirizi
health zone and Gatega, who were released thanks to
the efforts of the security forces.
We urge the Government to continue to deploy the
resources required to support the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
17/26

28/09/2023

and Stabilization Programme. While we respect
the decision of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the expected departure of
MONUSCO, we call for close cooperation between
the Government and the United Nations in enabling a
gradual, responsible transition, one without security
gaps and that ensures respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law before, during and after
the transition. The implementation and completion of
the measures decided under the Luanda and Nairobi
processes are key to the success of the peace process
in the region.
We hope that all the parties concerned will
participate constructively in the fourth round of
consultations of the Nairobi process. All bilateral,
regional and international initiatives in support of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must function
in a coordinated manner to achieve peace, dialogue
and political stability. In that regard, we believe
MONUSCO’s work has been effective, which is why it
has been able to count on our support. We acknowledge
the work of the Government in preparing for the
holding of the elections in December, as well as that
of the Independent National Electoral Commission in
ensuring a free, fair, inclusive and transparent electoral
process that includes the participation of women, all of
them efforts that must be intensified, however. We also
call for allowing for civic space and respect for freedom
of expression, opinion and assembly. We underscore
that protecting human rights defenders, journalists and
members of civil society must be paramount, especially
during the run-up to the elections. The grave violations
of children’s rights and the increase in gender-based
violence must be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. Accountability is vital to peace
processes. We therefore believe that the request of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that the International Criminal Court investigate the
crimes committed in North Kivu is an important step
towards achieving that goal.
Bringing about peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must remain a priority in Security Council
discussions, and we should therefore focus our attention
on discussions concerning the MONUSCO mandate
and transition process.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Keita for her briefing and for the
work that she and her team are doing. I thank Ms. Modi
for her remarks. I am also grateful to the Permanent
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Representative of Gabon in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for his updates.
As we have heard, the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be
a concern. The number of food-insecure people this
year alone is estimated at 25.8 million, and the actual
number is likely to be much higher. The numbers of
the displaced are soaring. Sexual and gender-based
violence continues unabated, and the recruitment
of children persists. While we welcome the systemwide scale-up for the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo activated in June, and the corresponding
operational plan, we note that the humanitarian
response is underfunded vis-à-vis the needs.
This periodic briefing comes at a pivotal juncture,
as we are in the final quarter preceding presidential
elections. It will be crucial to ensure that the electoral
process embodies the principles of freedom, fairness,
transparency and inclusivity. The civic space should
remain unimpeded if it is to shape public discourse.
Beyond the electoral outcome, progress could truly
shape the country’s destiny and instil trust in its
institutions. We are concerned about reports of incidents
of intimidation and violence directed at political
opposition members and civil-society representatives.
We commend President Tshisekedi’s invitation to
non-governmental and international organizations to
observe the electoral process, and Malta trusts that the
Congolese Government will guarantee their safe and
unimpeded participation. In that context, we echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the swift enactment of the
draft law against tribalism, racism and xenophobia.
The Security Council will soon be tasked with
negotiating the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate,
aligning with the ongoing revision of the joint transition
plan, which will pave the way for the Mission’s
eventual withdrawal. Malta welcomes the convergence
towards a withdrawal that aligns with the realities on
the ground and envisions a transition that involves the
transfer of MONUSCO’s core responsibilities to the
Congolese authorities. Guided by those principles, we
support the Secretary-General’s proposal to withdraw
units from South Kivu. We believe that establishing
a well-defined timeline for the process is imperative,
and we are prepared to engage in negotiations to forge
a unified vision. At the same time, we consider an
enhanced mandate to support the training and capacity18/26

28/09/2023

building of the national security forces to be a positive
step. Malta encourages enhanced and structured
coordination between MONUSCO and the East African
Community regional force and stresses the importance
of focusing on the outcomes of the African Union-led
peace support operations’ negotiations.
Malta reiterates its steadfast commitment to
a peaceful resolution to the protracted conflict in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
unequivocally condemn the atrocities committed by all
armed groups and expect all the parties to honour the
decisions and agreements reached under the Nairobi
and Luanda processes. The strengthening of the
judicial system must remain at the heart of multilateral
and governmental endeavours, offering hope to
communities that have been constantly exposed to
heinous crimes and violations. If wielded effectively, it
will also serve as a deterrent to future transgressions.
We welcomed the launch of a prosecutorial investigation
mission to Lala earlier this month and appreciate the
Government’s commitment to holding those responsible
for the violence on 30 August accountable. We express
our condolences to the families of the victims of the
heinous massacre.
In conclusion, we maintain our belief that military
endeavours, no matter how robust, will never suffice to
resolve the conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Genuine political dialogue and concerted
efforts towards compromise must take precedence
in order to pave the way for peace and stability in
the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing and for the work carried out by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as well
as Ambassador Biang for his briefing on the activities of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We welcome the participation
in this meeting of Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala
Pen’apala, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and that of the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda. I would also like to thank Ms. Modi for her
remarks and for sharing with us the suffering of all the
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

voiceless victims and survivors of sexual violence, who
deserve justice and a second chance at a decent life. It
is important that we support the efforts to confront the
dramatic surge in sexual violence targeting displaced
women and girls, including those who live in internally
displaced persons camps.

and in line with the aspirations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Given the elections to be held in
December and the fragile security situation in the east,
the finalization of the plan should guarantee an orderly
withdrawal and, at the same time, an extension of the
authority of the State and its ability to protect civilians.

I will now focus on the political and security
situation, as well as MONUSCO. Albania is encouraged
by the commitment to the electoral calendar and the
preparations for the elections to be held on 20 December,
as well as the efforts to ensure a transparent and inclusive
process for all the parties, including women. We hope
to see that same commitment by the Government to
addressing several concerns and shedding light on
electoral incidents, including the shrinking of the civic
space, as documented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/691).

Finally, I would like to convey Albania’s sincere
condolences to the Congolese authorities and the
Congolese people for the loss of life following the
events of 30 August in Goma. It is the absolute right
of the people to gather peacefully, and the authorities
have an obligation to respond proportionally to acts of
violence. In that vein, we welcome the Government’s
announcement that the incident is under investigation
and a trial has begun, the results of which should be
thorough and impartial.

Turning to the security developments, we all share
the same concerns about the volatile situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We should
have no false impressions: the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo remain a constant terror for civilians.
Moreover, we are cautiously monitoring the holding
of the ceasefire between Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) and the Congolese armed forces. The increased
clashes between the M-23 and armed groups and the
unstable relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda could disrupt the region’s
geopolitical architecture. To prevent that, it is important
for all the parties to commit themselves to the regional
peace processes, namely, by implementing the Nairobi
and Luanda processes.
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have the responsibility to give peace a chance to grow
stronger by ending support for, and cooperation with,
local armed groups. All Congolese and foreign armed
groups must cease their hostilities, and the M-23 must
effectively withdraw from its occupied positions and
join the demobilization and disarmament process, as
agreed in Luanda, while respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Turning now to MONUSCO’s transition, Albania
has taken note of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s request for an accelerated withdrawal of the
Mission. Albania supports the United Nations efforts to
finalize the revised joint transition plan, in cooperation
19/26

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf
of President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Congolese Government, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meeting,
which is devoted exclusively to the security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That action
demonstrates to me the focus of the countries here — and
through them, the Security Council — on a swift and
definitive settlement of the security situation and the
humanitarian issues in my country, and I reiterate our
gratitude for that.
I listened very attentively to the various statements
delivered prior to my own, and in doing so I noted a
significant determination and clear commitment on the
part of the Council to cooperating with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to ensure, as soon as
possible, that the tragic aggression and suffering
endured by my compatriots for 25 years becomes a
memory and is relegated to the archives of history; I
thank the Council for that as well. In my statement, I
will try to answer members’ concerns and, above all,
to help them understand the essence of the approach
of my country’s Government and Head of State, which
is outlined in the letter I transmitted to the Council
(S/2023/648, annex).
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I would first like to say that the focus of this meeting
is on the security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. My President’s Government requested
that I speak here today in order to provide clarification
for everyone and to contribute to the Council’s search
for solutions. I would have preferred to be the last
speaker so that I could address the concerns of all the
other speakers. I therefore would like to be able to
clarify certain points after delivering my statement,
if need be, in order to move the discussion forward
objectively and transparently.
My statement today before the Council will be a
brief reminder of the Democratic Republic of Congo’s
current approach to the grave security crisis that has
raged for a quarter of a century in the eastern part of
the country, specifically in the provinces of Ituri and
North Kivu, which have suffered as a result of the
criminal activities of armed terrorist groups, including
the so-called Movement du 23 mars (M-23), supported
in terms of war materiel and troops by Rwanda, our
country’s aggressor — which is known to the United
Nations and denied by no one.
Indeed, in my letter of 1 September addressed to
the President of the Security Council, I communicated
the vision and proposals of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for an effective and
fruitful partnership — I repeat, a partnership with the
United Nations to restore real and lasting peace and
security throughout our national territory that will
undoubtedly help to restore the broken trust between
the Organization and the Congolese people and restore
the tarnished image of our Organization in the country.
I confirm the contents of the letter and reiterate my
thanks to the Council for considering it in depth, with
what I hope will be the utmost lucidity and objectivity
and in a constructive spirit.
Allow me to refresh the Council’s memory
by pointing out that, in December last year (see
S/PV.9215), I had the privilege of drawing the attention
of members to the fact that the massacres of Congolese
populations, the most barbaric atrocities, the acts of
sexual violence against women, the recruitment of
child soldiers, the massive human rights violations
and the illegal exploitation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s natural resources by armed terrorist
groups were continuing and increasing in the east of
the country, despite the presence there of some 16,000
United Nations troops over the past 25 years and the
billions of dollars spent to restore peace and security.
20/26

28/09/2023

I also alerted the Council to the heightened
tensions that were poisoning relations between the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Congolese people,
especially those living in the territories ravaged by
those armed groups. Those citizens have consistently
criticized the Mission for its demonstrable passivity
and inability to protect them from criminal groups or
to help put an end to the almost perpetual insecurity to
which they have been subjected. In order to prevent the
situation from continuing to deteriorate, give the Nairobi
and Luanda peace processes a chance to succeed and
prevent the worst from happening, at that meeting in
December I not only suggested that the Council clarify
MONUSCO’s mandate but also made it clear that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would prefer to see
MONUSCO imposing and making peace and equipped
with weapons adapted to its current challenges and
issues, including having to deal with a Member State’s
conventional army, the Rwanda Defence Forces, and its
M-23 proxies.
Incidentally, that request overlapped with the
statement made by Secretary-General António Guterres
to the international press, specifically Radio France
International and the France 24 television network. It
acknowledged with great sincerity, it must be said, and
a high sense of responsibility, how impossible it was for
MONUSCO to confront the M-23, who possess heavy
weapons that are more advanced than MONUSCO’s
equipment, and proposed, as did the Secretary-General,
that MONUSCO’s mandate and military equipment be
strengthened in order to enable it to fulfil its mandated
responsibilities of protecting civilian populations
and supporting the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (FARDC).
On the same occasion in December, I reiterated my
Government’s request that the Council firmly condemn
Rwanda’s aggression against our country and severely
punish those who have planned and perpetrated the
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
on our national territory. However, we regret that
in its resolution 2666 (2022) of 20 December 2022,
the Security Council took neither the concerns and
proposals of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo nor the Secretary-General’s
judicious advice into consideration. It simply renewed
MONUSCO’s mandate without any changes, as if
nothing had happened. Clearly, the Security Council’s
rigid attitude — turning a blind eye to the realities
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

on the ground, ignoring the legitimate demands of
the Congolese people and showing its reluctance to
change MONUSCO’s status — has failed to give the
peace process in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo any new momentum. On the contrary, as
might have been expected, the population in North
Kivu has grown more hostile to MONUSCO, which has
left the Mission’s personnel with a fearful and insecure
mindset and sparked the violent incidents of 30 August
in Goma in which 42 Congolese died, following on
from the incidents of June and July 2022 in Goma,
Béni, Butembo and Kasindi, in which 30 Congolese and
five peacekeepers lost their lives.

the possibility of the pre-cantonment of the M-23, as
had been agreed. What some people mistakenly regard
as a lull or a ceasefire is in actual fact merely a sham
cessation of hostilities on the part of the M-23 and
its progenitor, Rwanda, a stalemate that allows them
to consolidate the Rwandan army’s occupation of the
Congolese province of North Kivu and the attempted
partition of our country. Let me say once again, echoing
our Head of State, that the Congolese people, their
President, Félix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, and
his Government can never accept such martyrdom
and infamy, to which they are neither predestined
nor condemned.

As evidenced in the Secretary-General’s latest
report to the Security Council (S/2023/574), dated
2 August, the security situation in North Kivu has
only deteriorated, and the humanitarian tragedy has
grown and has now affected some 5 million displaced
persons. In fact, according to a report I received this
morning, that figure has already reached 6.2 million.
Nor have tensions in the region eased. With their
impunity guaranteed, Rwanda and the M-23 have
stubbornly refused to uphold any of the commitments
they have made to implementing the peace plan
resulting from the Nairobi and Luanda processes,
abiding by the recommendations of the international
community or responding to the repeated appeals of the
Security Council, the African Union, African regional
organizations and bilateral partners to withdraw from
the occupied Congolese territories.

That is why, in order to avoid going round in circles
at a moment when the seriousness of the situation calls
for swift and effective action, our Government has
chosen to speed up the withdrawal of MONUSCO,
a withdrawal that the Security Council decided on
five years ago in resolution 2409 (2018), of 27 March
2018, by moving the start of this gradual — and I do
mean gradual — orderly, responsible and sustainable
withdrawal from the end of 2024 to the end of this year,
2023. And I want to stress that we should not confuse
acceleration with haste. We have already decided on
the withdrawal. The transition plan has already been
adopted by the Security Council. What remains are the
modalities for withdrawal, but I will not come back to
that — the letter I wrote to the Council clearly sets out
the facts. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is proposing a tactical reorganization of
MONUSCO’s withdrawal with the following objectives.

Rwanda is reinforcing its troops in North Kivu right
now. I would also like to inform the Council that not
two hours ago, my colleague the Minister of Defence
informed me — and I just received the message — that
a Rwandan army helicopter landed in Rumangabo
yesterday morning. Rumangabo is in the Congo. The
M-23 refuses to participate in pre-cantonment in the
Rumangabo camp or in the disarmament and cantonment
sites set up in Maniema province before returning to
the Nairobi process and enrolling its members in the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. In short, the process of
resolving the security crisis in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region
is now stalled and completely blocked by the M-23
and Rwanda.
I believe Ms. Keita mentioned the misadventure of
the East African Community and the FARDC, which
wanted to go to Rumangabo and Bunagana to look into
21/26

The first objective is to defuse the ever-increasing
tension between MONUSCO and the civilian
population and to avoid repeating the sad experiences
of a hasty, forced and sometimes violent withdrawal
of United Nations troops. In that respect, the ambition
of the President and Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is for our country to be a model
of a successful and honourable withdrawal of United
Nations troops from an African country.
The second objective is to prevent a repeat of
the dramatic incidents in Goma, Beni, Butembo and
Kasindi, with which we are all familiar.
The third objective is to ensure an honourable
exit for MONUSCO and preserve the achievements
of its work in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUSCO has done a great deal of work — there is
no denying that.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The fourth objective is to restore confidence
between the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations while restoring the
credibility of the United Nations and its tarnished image.
The fifth objective is to experiment with alternative
partnership mechanisms for peace with the United
Nations that are better developed and more effective,
based on the real and current needs and priorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to resolve
the security and humanitarian crises in the country and
in the Great Lakes region.
In that respect, it is essential to recall that the most
urgent security priorities for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo at the moment are putting an end to the
Rwandan aggression by means of the withdrawal of
its troops from North Kivu; the eradication of armed
terrorist groups in the country, including the M-23;
the return of displaced persons to their homes; the
restoration of the authority of the State in the territories
occupied by the M-23; the organization of elections
throughout the country; and the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. In short, our top priority
is to restore peace and security throughout the country.
This is the place to underscore that it is time for
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
to learn the lessons of its interventions in Africa and
to change the paradigm of its peace missions on our
continent. We need to properly think things through,
and under no circumstances can we afford to forego
such reflection. The Council should note that for
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, this is not a question of simply reconfiguring
MONUSCO. We would be making a mistake — or
rather the members of the Council would be making
a mistake — if we were to give the impression that for
any reason, even due to a misunderstanding, we wanted
to move towards a MONUSCO B. That would not be
merely a mistake but a grave error.
In order to achieve the objectives I have mentioned,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo urges the Security Council above all to follow
the logic of the withdrawal that we have already decided
on, through an accelerated but not a hurried withdrawal.
MONUSCO’s withdrawal, in our view, should start no
later than the end of 2023. I would recall that such an
acceleration was also recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report.
22/26

28/09/2023

We also ask the Council to instruct the SecretaryGeneral to begin discussions with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a matter of
urgency within the framework of the Joint Committee
established by resolution 2409 (2018), to which I have
referred, on the following matters, discussion of which
has been lacking in the past five years, and I therefore
call on Ms. Keita to act as a witness in order to move
forward with the withdrawal process.
First — and this is a concrete measure to be
taken — the general staff of the FARDC and the
MONUSCO Force Commander must prepare a plan
for MONUSCO’s disengagement and a timetable
for the gradual and orderly withdrawal of United
Nations troops.
Secondly, practical arrangements must be defined
for the gradual transfer of the activities currently
being carried out by MONUSCO to what I would
call traditional agencies and United Nations funds
and programmes, as well as to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, the gradual reduction of the number of
MONUSCO staff must be discussed.
Fourthly, an operational plan to implement the
withdrawal must be developed.
Fifthly, the tasks to be carried out by MONUSCO
during the transition under the four benchmarks set
out in the revised transition plan — namely security,
the protection of civilians, electoral support and the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme — must be precisely
defined. What is now expected of MONUSCO in
terms of security? In terms of protecting the civilian
population, what are the tasks to be accomplished
during the transition? Electoral support is working
very well, as is the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
These tasks, as I stated in my letter, constitute
essential preparatory activities to give the withdrawal
real substance, to be able to visualize it and above
all to gauge the scope and scale of what needs to be
accomplished. That is especially pertinent as I know
that discussions on the budget will begin at the
United Nations in October, in particular for projects,
programmes and agencies. Therefore, now is the time
to carry out those tasks in order to integrate them into
the withdrawal process.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The reports of the MONUSCO-Democratic
Republic of the Congo Joint Committee on the
fundamental issues I have mentioned must be submitted
to the Government and the Security Council by the end
of October at the latest. I have just explained why we
are making such a proposal. It goes without saying
that MONUSCO’s withdrawal, being gradual, will be
assessed regularly, and that any difficulties that arise
during its implementation will be examined jointly
by the two parties — the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations — with a view to finding
appropriate solutions. Our Government also expects the
Security Council, at a meeting to be held in December,
to consider all the consequences of the new approach to
MONUSCO’s withdrawal in the draft resolution to be
adopted on the Mission’s status.
During the sincere exchanges that my
accompanying delegation and I have had bilaterally
in the past week with the representatives of the five
permanent members, the three African members and
the President of the Council, as well as with delegations
of other States Members of the United Nations, we
have noted with satisfaction that a consensus is
emerging on the substance of MONUSCO’s accelerated
phased withdrawal.
However, two relevant concerns emerged as a
leitmotif in the statements made by our interlocutors,
as they did just now, namely, the protection of civilians
after the departure of MONUSCO and the coordination
of regional initiatives to manage the security crisis
in Ituri and North Kivu. We once again thank all our
partners for their interest in the return of peace and an
end to the war in those two provinces and for their show
of solidarity with the Congolese people.
On behalf of the President and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would
like to reassure everyone that our leaders, who have
a constitutional duty to provide security for all the
inhabitants of our country, are sufficiently aware of
the problems raised and that, in addition, effective
measures have been taken so that, together with the
people themselves, our defence and security forces can
ensure their security. Of course, it goes without saying
that there is no surer way of guaranteeing their security
than putting an end to the war. There is no surer way of
guaranteeing respect for human rights and the stability
of the Congolese institutions — make no mistake — than
putting an end to the war. Everything else is just a stopgap measure. In fact, on closer inspection, it is precisely
23/26

28/09/2023

the protection of the civilian population that is at the
heart of the population’s demand for an accelerated
withdrawal of MONUSCO.
As for the coordination of regional peace initiatives,
it is important to remember that, under the auspices of
the African Union, the Joint Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the East African Community, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Economic Community of Central African States,
held on 27 June 2023 in Luanda, set up a Quadripartite
Summit of the above-mentioned regional communities
to coordinate and harmonize their initiatives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is within that framework that the Chiefs of Staff
of their respective forces and that of the FARDC will
meet next week, on 4 October, in Addis Ababa, to
examine all current initiatives and agree on actions
to be taken to remove all obstacles to the resolution
of the armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Just yesterday, the Heads of State of the
member States of the Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security of the SADC met and agreed on practical
modalities for the deployment of the SADC regional
force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
recent initiative represents a significant step forward.
Be that as it may, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has no intention of breaking with the United
Nations or with other bilateral and multilateral partners
that wish to support internal efforts in the ways agreed
with our Government. It would be unwise and untrue
to erroneously deem MONUSCO’s withdrawal an end
in itself or a panacea for the insecurity and recurring
violence in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Great Lakes region.
Rather, the withdrawal serves to facilitate efforts
to unfreeze of a very laborious and complex peace
process deliberately blocked by Rwanda and its M-23
supporters, who are continuing to defy the Congolese
people and thumb their noses at the community of
nations. This neighbouring country and this armed
terrorist group have transformed North Kivu into a
powder keg, just waiting for a spark to once again set
ablaze this province, which has been martyred for two
and a half decades.
As evidenced by the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report (S/2023/691), which we
have spoken about, the security and humanitarian
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

28/09/2023

situation in the east remains catastrophic. At the
international level, the Secretary-General’s observation
is undoubtedly a concern, first and foremost, for the
Security Council, the central organ of the United
Nations for matters of international peace and security.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo therefore calls
on the Council to shake off its lethargy and assume its
statutory responsibilities.

requirements will be allowed to participate. The Council
should know that, as of today, all the political families
and independents have submitted their application
packages to the Independent National Electoral
Commission (CENI), and the Constitutional Court has
resolved all candidacy disputes. For three days now, the
definitive list of candidates for community, provincial
and national legislative elections is being published.

Indeed, to paraphrase the President of our
Republic, in his address to the General Assembly
during its seventy-eighth session, on 20 September, it
is inadmissible and unjust, in particular, that several
reports by groups of experts mandated by the United
Nations itself to investigate the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, duly submitted to
the Council, have been gathering dust for several years
without being examined; that the people named in
those reports as responsible for, and repeat offenders
in the commission of, serious crimes against humanity,
war crimes and massive human rights violation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remain unpunished,
with the total silence of the Council, as if they were
somehow being encouraged to continue their criminal
acts. There have been massacres in Kishishe, in Rutshuru
territory, and elsewhere, for which no investigation has
been conducted. Those files have been forgotten.

The submission of candidacies for presidential
elections are under way. In addition, we invited the
United Nations to send an electoral observation mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United
Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs visited the country in March and carried out
work with the CENI. Our elections are under way, and
the Council can be reassured on that front.

That is why, on 19 September, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo submitted to
the Republic of Gabon, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the names of the persons and entities listed in
the above-mentioned reports for their inclusion on the
Security Council sanctions list.
Our country hopes that this time the Council will
deign to look into the matter in earnest and follow the
good examples set by the Government of the United
States of America, which sanctioned Rwanda for its
support for the M-23 terrorists, and by France, which
has just sanctioned two leaders of the same group and
criminals from the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda.
With regard to elections, I can confirm the words of my
country’s Head of State, delivered during the seventieth
eighth session of the General Assembly, that they will
indeed be held within the constitutional timeline, on
20 December. Be assured that they will be transparent,
inclusive and free. Everyone who meets the legal
24/26

The United Nations Organization is, above all, the
expression of the desire of the peoples of our planet to
coexist based on a minimum of shared fundamental
values, notably justice, respect for human rights,
mutual respect, solidarity and humanism. The Council
bears a heavy responsibility to ensure that those values
are upheld and to guarantee peace in the world. The
Council has the legal, political and material capacities
to compel all recalcitrant parties to fully implement
the road map resulting from the Nairobi and Luanda
processes, which the Council endorsed, and thus to
stop the dangerous stalemate of the security crisis in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council must act before it is too late. It is time to
speak up and to uphold the law by sanctioning Rwanda’s
documented aggression against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the crimes of the M-23 and
other armed groups on Congolese territory. It is high
time for us to raise our voices and demand that the
M-23 lay down its weapons, go to the cantonment sites
established for that purpose and join the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme. Rwanda should withdraw its troops,
unconditionally, from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and cease its support to the M-23. As far as the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
are concerned, the Congolese Government is making
a simple proposal to the international community. The
members of the FDLR are not Congolese citizens. Why
can the Security Council not create a plan to eliminate
the FDLR? The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
ready to take an active part in implementing that plan.
We are offering the Council a helping hand.
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

For its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has not failed to honour its commitments. We will
never stop fighting to protect our country’s territorial
integrity and independence and ensure the welfare of
our population. That is why our compatriots who were
forcibly displaced in the country as a result of the war
imposed on us by Rwanda and the M-23 will very soon
return home to exercise their legitimate right to elect
their leaders at every level. They can no longer continue
to live like cattle in makeshift displaced-persons camps.
State authority will be restored in the areas occupied by
our aggressors.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize how important
our Head of State and our Government consider good
relations with the United Nations, and how firmly they
believe that only through close collaboration with the
United Nations, in mutual understanding, harmony,
sincerity and with greater political will, will it be
possible to restore lasting peace and security in the
eastern areas of our country and throughout the Great
Lakes region. To that end, I want to assure the Council
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains at
its disposal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for her briefing, and all members for their
valuable contributions.
In the wake of the Luanda and Nairobi mechanisms,
which were reinforced by numerous communiqués
from various summits of Heads of State, the concurrent
withdrawal of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
and the deployment of the East African Community
regional force gave rise to optimism that it would be
possible to finally put an end to the devastating conflict
that has caused immense suffering to the people in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The swift
deployment of the East African Community regional
force and the relatively quick establishment of a ceasefire
have underscored the political determination to address
the regional crisis. Nevertheless, we must acknowledge
that a ceasefire is only one step in the conflictresolution process, contingent on the willingness of all
of the warring parties to pursue a peaceful solution. It is
imperative that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
25/26

28/09/2023

seize the opportunities provided by the ceasefire and
the M-23’s withdrawal and address the root causes and
drivers of the conflict, rather than resorting to using
Rwanda as a scapegoat while the internal failures of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo persist.
Rwanda remains deeply concerned about the
Congolese Government’s ongoing collaboration with
and arming of the genocidal militia known as the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
and indigenous armed groups. Many Council members
have repeatedly brought up the issue of Kinshasa’s
collaboration with and arming of the FDLR, despite
the denials last year by the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, when he said that
there are no members of the FDLR in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He said that last year to the
Security Council (see S/PV.9215), which has actually
imposed sanctions on that genocidal militia, a group
that committed genocide in Rwanda in 1994 and has
been living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
working with the Congolese Government for more than
20 years. And now it is not just a matter of collaboration.
They are fighting alongside the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s army and are also supported by the
Government through its arming of them. I do not see
that anyone can claim any legitimacy when what is at
issue is a group that committed genocide in Rwanda
and is being supported by another country. And then
that country turns around and blames Rwanda. What is
Rwanda supposed to do in that case?
The disruptive behaviour of those negative forces,
in alliance with the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, threatens to reignite hostilities
and undermine any positive regional initiatives. The
Council should therefore urge the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to fulfil its
responsibility to dissociate itself from the FDLR
and ensure its members’ immediate repatriation, as
stipulated in the Luanda and Nairobi mechanisms.
As has been said in the past, the proliferation of
hate speech targeting Rwandophones, along with
killings and the confiscation of property belonging to
Kinyarwanda-speaking communities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, poses a grave threat not only to
Rwanda but to the entire Great Lakes region. That has
continued for several years now with impunity, and the
Council cannot continue to be a mere observer.
Rwanda gains no benefit from an insecure Democratic
Republic of the Congo and would like to reaffirm its
23-28120

S/PV.9427

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

steadfast support for regional mechanisms, especially
the Nairobi and Luanda peace processes. Those who
seek to exploit the conflict for personal political gain are
misguided. In addition, actions by certain external Powers
designed to please the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in pursuit of their own economic
interests, at Rwanda’s expense, are unhelpful and risk
aggravating the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. That is the paramount issue demanding the
Council’s attention.
In conclusion, Rwanda remains deeply concerned
about the plight of refugees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, most of whom have been
sheltered in Rwanda for more than 20 years. We appeal
to the Council to direct its collective efforts to creating
conditions conducive to their safe repatriation.
The President: The Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I will be
brief. I will start with the easiest point. I can see that
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda has not been
not following the situation on the ground as it pertains
to the issue of Rwandan refugees and refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in Rwanda. We can
call the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
right now and he will confirm that in May we held a
meeting with the Rwandan and Congolese delegations,
which I myself chaired, at which we resumed discussions
on the refugee issue. The meeting was convened at the
request of President Tshisekedi. There is a communiqué
that the Ambassador can consult. He will find it on the
Internet, on the official website of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Secondly, since the Ambassador is unaware of it, two
weeks ago the meeting continued in Nairobi because we
had agreed in Geneva that that was what we would do.
The meeting did indeed take place, and everyone agreed
to meet in Goma last week to continue discussions,
particularly on the issue of identification cards. The
Rwandan delegation refused to attend. I do not know if
the Ambassador will deny that. We are at a stalemate.
I asked the representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, whom I met here last week,
if we could propose a compromise either on returning to
Nairobi or going to Addis Ababa. The Ambassador does
not know about that.

26/26

28/09/2023

With regard to the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), I believe that we must
respect the Security Council and the United Nations.
That old refrain is not important. What Rwanda has been
saying is, “I am in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
because the FDLR is there.” However, there is nothing
in international law or the Charter of the United Nations
that obliges a country to behave in that way.
I would like to remind the Ambassador and the
Council, in the context of the Nairobi process, since last
year, all the Heads of State, including His Excellency
the President of the Republic of Rwanda, have agreed
that any Head of State or Head of Government who has
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must initiate discussions with those armed groups so that
they return to their country of origin. And if they refuse,
at that time, the East African Community regional force
shall use, what one might call, coercive means so that
those groups return to their countries. That is what is
called the Nairobi process. We have been in discussions
with our compatriots, even with the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23). Members of the M-23 were at the meeting,
but at the instigation of Rwanda, they did not want to
continue. As of today — I ask that the Ambassador of
Rwanda respond — has that recommendation of the
Nairobi process been implemented by the Rwandan
Government? Nothing has been done. We always come
back to genocide, but as I said last time, we do not know
about matters of genocide.
We stand by that. I would like the Council to
consider, at another time perhaps, the proposal that
the Democratic Republic of the Council is making that
a mechanism be put in place — by either the African
Union, the East African Community or the Security
Council — so that we can go into the field and dislodge
the notorious FDLR. We are waiting to see what happens
next, so we will not come back to this. This does not
justify the landing yesterday of a Rwandan army
helicopter carrying soldiers on Congolese territory. I do
not think the Ambassador is informed. We must always
try to get the real information to be constructive in a
high-level debate such as this.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

23-28120
